ARTICLE 1. GENERAL DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF INTERPRETATION
1.1. Scope. The provisions of this article apply to all of these bylaws unless a definition or other
rule of interpretation is specifically provided or clearly implied.
1.2. Definitions. For the purposes of these bylaws:
a. “Board” means a multiple-member board, commission, committee or sub-committee
however created, elected, appointed or otherwise constituted. (Amended 2011)
b. “Officer” means the senior departmental staff employee appointed by a board named in
these bylaws. A person employed primarily for secretarial duties is not an "officer". The
Treasurer and Collector of Taxes, Town Counsel, the Inspectors named in Article 23 and
the Sealer of Weights and Measures are also officers.
c. “Official” means the Moderator and the Town Clerk.
d. “Resident” means a person who occupies an established place of abode in the Town as
his or her principal residence with no present intention of definite and early removal.
1.3. Gender and Number. The use of the masculine gender is not intended to be restrictive in any
sense; words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine gender. The singular and plural
forms of words shall be deemed interchangeable wherever appropriate.
1.4. Statutory References. All references to the General Laws contained in these bylaws are
references to the General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and are intended to include any
amendments or revisions to the chapters and sections cited or to the corresponding chapters and sections
under any rearrangement of the General Laws enacted subsequent to the adoption of these bylaws, as well as
any new statutory provisions directly related to the chapters and sections cited.
1.5. Conflict with Statutes. If any provision of these bylaws and a statute address the same issue, a
reasonable effort shall be made to interpret the two provisions harmoniously. If this is not practicable, the
statute shall govern and the bylaw shall be followed as closely as is practicable.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
ARTICLE 2
OPEN MEETINGS
(Revised and Amended 2011)
2.1 Intent of Articles 2, 2A and 3. This Article, and the following Articles 2A and 3, are intended to
fairly summarize the Open Meeting Law for the Town’s convenience, but reviewing the law itself, G.L. c.
30A, Sections 18-25, and asking the advice of Town Counsel on any particular point, are encouraged.
2.2 Meetings to be open to the public. Except for meetings duly convened in executive session, all
meetings of a board shall be open to the public in accordance with the Open Meeting Law.
2.3 Notice. Except in an emergency, in addition to any notice otherwise required by law, a board
shall post notice of every meeting at least 48 hours prior to such meeting, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and
legal holidays. In an emergency, a board shall post notice as soon as reasonably possible prior to such
meeting. Notice shall be printed in a legible, easily understandable format and shall contain the date, time
and place of such meeting and a listing of topics that the chair reasonably anticipates will be discussed at the
meeting.
2.4 Notice to be filed and posted. Except as the Attorney General may otherwise provide, notice shall
be filed with the town clerk and posted in a manner conspicuously visible to the public at all hours in or on
Town Hall. In addition to posting by the Town Clerk, the agenda for each meeting shall be posted on the
Town’s website. (Amended ATM 2018.)
2.5 (Reserved for Future Provisions). (Amended ATM 2018.)
2.6 Recording the Meeting. After notifying the chair, any person may make a video or audio
recording of a meeting or may transmit the meeting through any medium, subject to reasonable requirements
of the chair as to the number, placement and operation of equipment used so as not to interfere with the
conduct of the meeting. At the beginning of the meeting the chair shall inform other attendees of any such
recordings.
2.7 Addressing the Meeting. No person shall address a meeting without permission of the chair, and
all persons shall, at the request of the chair, be silent. No person shall disrupt the proceedings of a meeting.
If, after clear warning from the chair, a person continues to disrupt the proceedings, the chair may order the
person to withdraw from the meeting and if the person does not withdraw, the chair may authorize a
constable or other officer to remove the person from the meeting.
2.8 Board members to acknowledge receipt of a copy of the Open Meeting Law. Within 2 weeks of
qualification for office, all persons serving on a board shall certify, on a form prescribed by the attorney
general, the receipt of a copy of the open meeting law, regulations promulgated thereunder and a copy of the
educational materials prepared by the attorney general explaining the open meeting law and its application.
Unless otherwise directed or approved by the attorney general, the town clerk shall obtain such certification
from each person upon entering service and shall retain it subject to the applicable records retention
schedule. The certification shall be evidence that the member of a board has read and understands the
requirements of the open meeting law and the consequences of violating it.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
ARTICLE 2A.
MEETINGS IN EXECUTIVE SESSION
(New Section 2011)
2A.1 The purposes for which an Executive Session may be convened. A board may meet in
executive session only for the following purposes:
(1) To discuss the reputation, character, physical condition or mental health, rather than professional
competence, of an individual, or to discuss the discipline or dismissal of, or complaints or charges
brought against, a public officer, employee, staff member or individual. The individual to be
discussed in such executive session shall be notified in writing by the board at least 48 hours prior to
the proposed executive session; provided, however, that notification may be waived upon written
agreement of the parties. A board shall hold an open session if the individual involved requests that
the session be open. If an executive session is held, such individual shall have the following rights:
i. to be present at such executive session during deliberations which involve that individual;
ii. to have counsel or a representative of his own choosing present and attending for the
purpose of advising the individual and not for the purpose of active participation in the
executive session;
iii. to speak on his own behalf; and
iv. to cause an independent record to be created of said executive session by audio-recording
or transcription, at the individual’s expense.
The rights of an individual set forth in this paragraph are in addition to the rights that he may have
from any other source, including, but not limited to, rights under any laws or collective bargaining
agreements and the exercise or non-exercise of the individual rights under this section shall not be
construed as a waiver of any rights of the individual.
(2) To conduct strategy sessions in preparation for negotiations with nonunion personnel or to
conduct collective bargaining sessions or contract negotiations with nonunion personnel;
(3) To discuss strategy with respect to collective bargaining or litigation if an open meeting may
have a detrimental effect on the bargaining or litigating position of the board and the chair so
declares;
(4) To discuss the deployment of security personnel or devices, or strategies with respect thereto;
(5) To investigate charges of criminal misconduct or to consider the filing of criminal complaints;
(6) To consider the purchase, exchange, lease or value of real property if the chair declares that an
open meeting may have a detrimental effect on the negotiating position of the board;
(7) To comply with, or act under the authority of, any general or special law or federal grant-in-aid
requirements;
(8) To consider or interview applicants for employment or appointment by a preliminary screening
committee if the chair declares that an open meeting will have a detrimental effect in obtaining
qualified applicants; provided, however, that this clause shall not apply to any meeting, including
meetings of a preliminary screening committee, to consider and interview applicants who have
passed a prior preliminary screening;
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
(9) To meet or confer with a duly qualified mediator, with respect to any litigation or decision on any
public business within its jurisdiction involving another party, group or entity, provided that:
(i) any decision to participate in mediation shall be made in an open session and the parties,
issues involved and purpose of the mediation shall be disclosed; and
(ii) no action shall be taken by any board with respect to those issues which are the subject
of the mediation without deliberation and approval for such action at an open session;
(10) To discuss trade secrets or confidential, competitively-sensitive or other proprietary information
provided in the course of activities conducted by the municipal light plant, provided disclosure will
adversely affect its ability to conduct business in relation to other entities making, selling or
distributing electric power and energy.
2A.2 Procedure for going into and coming out of Executive Session. A board may meet in executive
session for 1 or more of the purposes enumerated above provided that:
(1) the body has first convened in an open session;
(2) a majority of members of the body have voted to go into executive session and the vote of each
member is recorded by roll call and entered into the minutes;
(3) before the executive session, the chair shall state the purpose for the executive session, stating all
subjects that may be revealed without compromising the purpose for which the executive session
was called;
(4) the chair shall publicly announce whether the open session will reconvene at the conclusion of
the executive session; and
(5) accurate records of the executive session shall be maintained as required.
ARTICLE 3.
MINUTES
(Amended 2011)
3.1 Minutes to be kept; content of minutes: A board shall create and maintain accurate minutes of all
meetings, including executive sessions, setting forth the date, time and place, the members present or absent, a
summary of the discussions on each subject, a list of documents and other exhibits used at the meeting, the
decisions made and the actions taken at each meeting, including the record of all votes.
3.2 Secret ballot forbidden; votes at executive session to be by roll call: No vote taken at an open
session shall be by secret ballot. Any vote taken at an executive session shall be recorded by roll call and
entered into the minutes.
3.3 Minutes to be created, approved in a timely manner and posted on the Town website: Minutes of
all open sessions shall be created, approved and posted on the Town website in a timely manner. The minutes
of an open session, if they exist and whether approved or in draft form, shall be made available upon request
by any person within 10 days.
3.4 Documents and other things to be part of the official records: Documents and other exhibits, such
as photographs, recordings or maps, used by the body at an open or executive session shall, along with the
minutes, be part of the official record of the session.
3.5 Minutes as public records: The minutes of any open session, the notes, recordings or other
materials used in the preparation of such minutes and all documents and exhibits used at the session, shall be
public records in their entirety and not exempt from disclosure. Notwithstanding this paragraph, the following
materials shall be exempt from disclosure to the public as personnel information: (1) materials used in a
performance evaluation of an individual bearing on his professional competence, provided they were not
created by the members of the body for the purposes of the evaluation; and (2) materials used in deliberations
about employment or appointment of individuals, including applications and supporting materials; provided,
however, that any resume submitted by an applicant shall not be exempt.
3.6 Minutes of Executive Session: The minutes of any duly convened executive session, the notes,
recordings or other materials used in the preparation of such minutes and all documents and exhibits used at
the session, may be withheld from disclosure to the public in their entirety as long as publication may defeat
the lawful purposes of the executive session, but no longer.
3.7 Declassifying Executive Session Minutes: When the purpose for which a valid executive session
was held has been served, the minutes, preparatory materials and documents and exhibits of the session shall
be disclosed unless the attorney-client privilege or 1 or more of the applicable exemptions apply to withhold
these records, or any portion thereof, from disclosure.
3.8 For purposes of this Article, if an executive session is held then the minutes, preparatory materials
and documents and exhibits used at the session may be withheld from disclosure to the public in their entirety,
unless and until such time as a litigating, negotiating or bargaining position is no longer jeopardized by such
disclosure, at which time they shall be disclosed unless the attorney-client privilege or 1 or more of the
applicable exemptions apply to withhold these records, or any portion thereof, from disclosure.
3.9 Executive session minutes to be reviewed at reasonable intervals and at least annually:
(a) The board, or its chair or designee, shall, at reasonable intervals, review the minutes of executive
sessions to determine if continued non-disclosure is warranted. Such determination shall be
announced at the body’s next meeting and such announcement shall be included in the minutes of that
meeting.
(b) Upon request by any person to inspect or copy the minutes of an executive session or any portion
thereof, the board shall respond to the request within 10 days, following receipt and shall release any
such minutes not covered by an exemption, provided, however, that if the board has not performed a
review pursuant to the above paragraph, the board shall perform the review and release the nonexempt
minutes, or any portion thereof, not later than the board’s next meeting or 30 days, whichever
first occurs. A board shall not assess a fee for the time spent in its review.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
ARTICLE 4.
ANNUAL REPORTS
(Amended to delete section 4.6, ATM 2018.)
4.1. Annual Reports Required. The following shall prepare and submit annual reports:
a. each board,
b. Chief of Police,
c. Chief Engineer of the Fire Department,
d. Inspectors listed in Article 23,
e. Sealer of Weights and Measures,
f. Department of Financial Services,
g. Town Clerk, and
h. Town Counsel.
4.2. Contents. An annual report shall include a summary statement of receipts and disbursements
for the preceding fiscal year, a statement of the significant activities of the board, officer or official during
the preceding fiscal year, and a discussion of any significant issues which the Town may face within the next
several years within the jurisdiction of the board, officer or official.
4.3. Filing. All annual reports, except those portions which require the completion of the annual
audit, shall be filed with the Selectmen no later than September 1. Those portions of reports which require
the completion of the annual audit shall be filed with the Selectmen as soon after the receipt of the audit as
possible and no later than a date determined by the Selectmen.
4.4. Annual Town Report. The Selectmen shall prepare an Annual Town Report and shall have
said report printed in such quantities as in their opinion shall satisfy the usual and customary demand for
such report, which will be made available to the public at the Town Hall. The report shall be available not
later than the third Monday in December of each year. The Annual Report shall contain the annual reports
for the last completed fiscal year and other matters required by law. The Selectmen may add such additional
information as they find advisable to make the Annual Town Report an accurate and useful report to the
residents of the Town.
4.5. Annual Reports of Subcommittees. Subcommittees, study committees, and other similar
committees may file their annual reports with the board or body to which they are responsible no later than
August 15. A board receiving such a report and the Selectmen may agree to include such a report in the
Annual Town Report.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
ARTICLE 5.
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
5.1. Policies and Procedures. "Policies and procedures" include only policies and procedures
regarding services provided to the public.
5.2. Copies of Policies and Procedures. Each Board, the Department of Financial Services, the
Town Clerk, and the persons named in Article 23 shall make available electronic copies of any of their
written policies and procedures to the public upon request. To the extent permitted by the General Laws,
reasonable fees may be charged for the cost of reproduction if paper copies are requested. (Amended ATM
2018.)
5.3. Public Participation. Each board shall establish a written procedure which allows members of
the public to comment orally at a public meeting or a public hearing of the board on policies (and),
procedures and agenda items being discussed or considered for adoption, amendment, or repeal by the board.
5.4. Books of Policies and Procedures. Each Board, the Department of Financial Services, the
Town Clerk, and the persons named in Article 23 are encouraged to put their policies and procedures into
written form, to keep their policies and procedures in a usefully organized and up-to-date book, and to make
the book available to the public during regular business hours. Boards which do not have offices shall keep
their books of policies and procedures in the office of the Town Clerk.
5.5. Naming of Public Assets. It is the policy of the Town of Wellesley to reserve the naming or
renaming of public assets for circumstances that will best serve the interests of the town and ensure a worthy
and enduring legacy for the town’s physical spaces. (Section added ATM 2008, Article 26)
a. No Town assets shall be named or renamed except in accordance with this bylaw.
b. Assets that are considered to be major physical assets of the Town of Wellesley, such as buildings,
recreational facilities, parks, water bodies, and conservation land shall be named only after the board
with jurisdiction over the asset shall approve a name; and Town Meeting, by majority vote, shall
concur in such naming.
c. All other Town assets that are portions of a larger whole, such as: interior spaces of buildings;
features within parks, conservation land, and recreational areas; driveways or parking lots; or
furniture or other small fixtures of any description shall be named by the Board having jurisdiction
over the asset pursuant to a policy adopted under section (g) herein.
d. The naming of town assets shall be considered with the following categories in mind:
i. Historic Events, People, and Places. The Town may preserve and honor the history
of the Town, State, or Country; prominent historical figures; and local landmarks,
neighborhoods, or prominent geographical locations.
ii. Outstanding Individuals. The Town may acknowledge individuals who have
contributed in a significant way to the public life and well-being of the Town.
iii. Major Gifts. The Town may acknowledge certain major gifts ( as defined in each
Board’s policy) to the Town by individuals, organizations or corporations by naming
a public asset in connection with such a gift.
e. The board with jurisdiction over an asset to be named shall consider whether a naming agreement, or
other documentation, is appropriate in each situation.
f. In situations where no naming agreement or documentation exists, names shall not be changed
without consideration of the historical significance of the name, impact on the individual or
organization previously named and the costs associated with such renaming.
g. No board shall name any public asset unless the board shall have adopted a naming policy. All
policies on the naming of public assets shall be consistent with the intent of this bylaw. Any such
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
policy or amendment thereto shall be adopted only after at least one public hearing. All such policies
shall be on file with the Town Clerk and posted on the town website.
5.6. Acceptance of Gifts. (New Section ATM 2009, Art. 36) The purpose of this section is to
authorize the acceptance of Gifts for any public purpose, and to specify policies and procedures for doing so.
a. Town Boards authorized to accept Gifts (money, tangible property, real estate) It is the
Town’s policy to respect the authority in Town boards and committees to accept gifts as provided by statute.
This includes, but may not necessarily be limited to the following Town boards which are authorized to
accept gifts of money, tangible property and/or real estate to the extent hereinafter set forth.
i. The Board of Selectmen is authorized to accept gifts of money and tangible property
on behalf of the Town (G.L. c.44 §§53A, 53A1/2).
ii. The School Committee is authorized to accept gifts of money for educational
purposes. (G.L. c. 44, §53A, and c.71, Section 37A), and of tangible property as a matter of town
policy.
iii. The Board of Trustees of the Wellesley Free Library is authorized to accept gifts of
money for library purposes (G.L. c.78 § 7, 11) and for purposes of library construction or
renovations (G.L. c.78 §19K), and of tangible property as a matter of town policy.
iv. The Natural Resources Commission is authorized to accept gifts of money and
tangible property for conservation and parkland purposes, subject to the approval of the Board of
Selectmen (G.L. c.40, §8C)
v. Gifts of real estate, or interests in real estate, may only be accepted by Town
Meeting on the recommendation of the Board of Selectmen.
b. Protocol for accepting gifts.
i. Any town board accepting, recommending the acceptance of, or declining a gift
shall adopt a written policy consistent with this bylaw. Any such policy or amendment thereto shall
be adopted only after at least one public hearing. All such policies shall be on file with the Town
Clerk and posted on the Town website.
ii. All Town boards and officers not specifically authorized hereinabove to accept a gift
on behalf of the Town shall refer the proffered gift to the Board of Selectmen if it recommends that
the gift be accepted. (The Town recognizes that G.L. c.44, §53A provides that a Town officer or
department may accept a gift of money, but the statute also stipulates any expenditure of such a gift
must be approved by the Board of Selectmen. Therefore, it is Town policy to require the acceptance
be voted by the Board of Selectmen at the outset of the gift). Any Town board not hereinabove
provided for, believing it is authorized to accept gifts, may ask the advice of the Board of Selectmen
and/or Town Counsel.
iii. The donee board shall have the discretion to approve or decline any proposed gift,
whether restricted or not, subject to the provisions of this section. In the event a board declines a gift
that decision shall be dispositive of the matter. (Amended ATM 2018.)
In considering a gift, boards should make the following determinations:
1. Whether the gift is appropriate to the mission and needs of the Town and the particular board;
2. Whether the gift is unrestricted or, if restricted, given in reasonably broad and flexible terms to
maximize usefulness;
3. Whether the gift is irrevocable;
4. Whether the gift imposes undue financial burden on the Town;
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
5. Whether the long-term impacts of the gift, particularly where there could be significant future or
ongoing operations and maintenance or capital costs associated with the gift have been
accounted for;
6. Whether the terms of the gift permit the Town to apply the gift to related purposes in the event
the designated purpose is fully funded or is no longer practical, necessary or able to be
performed.
In the event a board has reason to believe a gift could cause or result in an appearance of
impropriety, the board shall consult with the Town Counsel prior to accepting the gift.
Restricted gifts shall be assigned to a project or existing account consistent with the donor’s desired
use, as long as such restriction(s) do not conflict with Town by-laws or state or federal law, in which case the
Town shall ask that the restriction(s) be removed or decline the gift.
c. Grants. Any Town department is authorized to apply for grants, and to accept grant funds,
provided the board or committee of such Town department has authorized the filing of grant application, or
in the case of no application having been required, has authorized acceptance of the grant funds.
d. Accounting. All funds received by any board shall be deposited with the Treasurer.
The Town of Wellesley Financial Services Department is responsible for providing for the financial
administration of any gift to the town. If necessary, Financial Services shall track the proposed use of any
such gift and shall maintain separate records of accounts showing receipts and disbursements.
Interest, if any, generated by a gift shall accrue to the Town’s general fund unless expressly provided
otherwise by the terms of the gift.
The donee board shall be responsible for acknowledgement of gifts and shall provide receipts as
needed for IRS purposes.
e. Reporting. All donee boards shall prepare an annual report of such gifts including amounts,
purposes and such other details as required by the Finance Director. These reports shall include both
restricted and unrestricted funds. Reports on gifts shall be filed with the Finance Director, and included in
the Town’s Annual Report. The report shall cover gifts received in the prior fiscal year and shall be
submitted in time to be included in the annual report.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
ARTICLE 6. GENERAL PROVISIONS
(Amended ATM 2018.)
6.1. Scope. The provisions of this article apply to all boards unless a specific provision of law
otherwise provides.
6.2. Orientation. Each board should adopt policies and procedures providing for the full orientation
of new members to their duties, to the jurisdiction and authority of the board, to the present activities and
considerations of the board, and to such other matters as are appropriate. It shall be the responsibility of the
chair of the board to carry out these policies and procedures. When a new board is established, these
provisions do not apply to the orientation of the initial members.
6.3. Staff Performance. Each board is responsible for the faithful and competent performance of
duties by persons employed or appointed by it. The Town Clerk shall have the same responsibility with
regard to persons the Town Clerk employs.
6.4. Engineering. Unless expressly authorized by statute, a vote of Town Meeting, or vote of the
Board of Public Works, no board, officer, or official (except the Permanent Building Committee) shall incur
expense for engineering services of the kind provided by the Department of Public Works.
6.5. Advisory Committees. Any board, by vote of its members, may establish advisory committees.
When such a committee is established, the appointing board shall give to the Town Clerk and the Selectmen
written notice of the creation of the committee and the names and addresses of its members. The appointing
board shall give similar notice of the names and addresses of all subsequent persons appointed to the
committee. Advisory committee members may assist and advise the appointing board, but shall not vote or
otherwise participate as full members of the board.
6.6. Committee Life. Any committee established under Section 6.5 or established by Town
Meeting shall terminate one year from the date on which it was established, unless the creating body
annually continues it or fixes a definite termination date no more than three years from the date of its
establishment.
6.7. Initial Meeting. For a committee created by Town Meeting, the Moderator shall designate one
member to call the initial meeting. For committees created by a board, the creating board shall designate the
member to call the initial meeting.
6.8. Organization, Policies, and Procedures. Each board shall elect a chair, vice-chair, and
secretary, inform the Town Clerk of those elected, and shall adopt policies and procedures governing the
conduct of its affairs. These policies and procedures shall not conflict with the provisions of these bylaws or
any other provision of law.
6.8A. Adjudicatory Hearing – Absent Member. A member of any town board holding an adjudicatory
hearing, shall not be disqualified from voting in the matter solely due to the member’s absence from no more
than a single session of the hearing at which testimony or other evidence is received. Before any such vote, the
member shall certify in writing that the member examined all evidence received at the missed session, which
evidence shall include an audio or audio-visual recording of the missed session or a transcript thereof. The
written certification shall be part of the record of the hearing. Nothing herein shall change, replace, negate or
otherwise supersede applicable quorum requirements. (Section added ATM 2007, Article 31)
6.9. Quorum. No board shall take any action, except to set another meeting or to adjourn, unless a
quorum of its members is present. A majority of the members of the board shall constitute a quorum.
6.10. Majority Vote. An affirmative vote of a majority of those present shall be required for board
action.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
6.11 Reserved for future use (2011)
6.12. Public Information. In accordance with Chapter 66, Section 10 of the General Laws, every
board and every person having custody of any public records (as defined in Chapter 4, Section 7 of the
General Laws) shall make available copies of such records, including reports, data, background documents,
and any material prepared for its use in accordance with Chapter 4 of the General Laws. If such records and
materials are kept in machine-readable form, copies thereof in machine-readable form shall also be made
available. Reasonable fees may be charged for the costs of search and reproduction.
6.13. Public Comments. Each board shall establish a procedure which allows members of the
public to comment to the board at each open meeting on matters within the jurisdiction of the board. The
procedure shall require that any person who has a personal or financial interest in any matter before the board
shall disclose such interest either before, during or immediately after commenting on the matter to the board
with the timing of the disclosure to be at the choice of such person.
6.14. Staggered Terms. The terms of all board members shall be arranged so that as equal a number
of terms as possible shall expire each year.
6.15. Requests for Appropriations. Each board and official shall submit requests for appropriations
in accordance with the provisions of Sections 11.11. - 11.13. Budgets are subject to review by the
Department of Financial Services in the manner described in Section 24.1(e).
6.16. Capital Budgets. At least 90 days before the Annual Town Meeting, each board shall submit
to the Selectmen estimates of the amounts proposed and anticipated by the board for capital projects
annually for a period of five years. An explanatory statement shall accompany each estimate and provide
such additional information about the proposed or anticipated capital project as may be requested by the
Selectmen. (Amended ATM 2004, Article 30)
6.17. Conflict of Interest. No officer, official, member of a board, or paid employee of the Town,
or agent of any such person shall:
a. sell materials or supplies to the Town without the permission of the Selectmen expressed
in a vote which shall appear on the records of the Selectmen with the reasons therefor;
b. receive any compensation or commission for work done for the Town, except for official
salary and fees allowed by law, without the permission of the Selectmen expressed in a
vote which shall appear on the Selectmen's records with the reasons therefor
c. use his or her official position, influence, or vote in any manner so as to obtain for
himself or herself in his or her private capacity or otherwise, either directly or indirectly,
any commission, discount, bonus, present, advantage, or profit whatever;
d. engage in any conduct prohibited by Chapter 268A of the General Laws, the
Commonwealth's conflict of interest statute.
6.18. Bonding. Any officer, official, or paid employee required by statute or the Selectmen to be
bonded shall be bonded in accordance with statute or in amounts determined by the Selectmen.
6.19. Design Review. Before any board, officer or official can construct, install, alter or remove
any structure or portion thereof, work of art, ornament or decoration placed or to be placed on any public
way, on Town lands other than cemeteries, or on or in Town buildings or make payments on account of any
such work, the work shall be reviewed by the Design Review Board in accordance with the provisions of
Section 46.3. of these Bylaws.
ARTICLE 7. VACANCY
7.1. Vacancy. A vacancy occurs when an official or board member:
a. resigns;
b. ceases to be a resident of the Town, if required to be a resident or registered voter;
c. dies;
d. is barred by law from serving in the position; or
e. no longer has the qualifications statute or these bylaws required for the position.
7.2. Vacancy in Board of Selectmen. A vacancy in the Board of Selectmen shall be governed by the
provisions of Chapter 41, Section 10 of the General Laws, which provides for a special election under certain
conditions.
7.3. Vacancy in Other Elected Positions. A vacancy in an elected board other than the Board of
Selectmen shall be filled by appointment in accordance with Chapter 41, Section 11 of the General Laws, or
by election in accordance with Chapter 41, Section 10. A vacancy in the office of Town Clerk shall be filled
in accordance with Chapter 41, Section 14 of the General Laws.
7.4. Vacancy in Appointed Positions. A vacancy in any appointed board or office shall be filled by
appointment in the same manner as the original appointment was made, except as otherwise specifically
provided by law.
ARTICLE 8. TOWN MEETING
Part I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
8.1. Definitions. For the purposes of this article,
a. the term "Annual Town Election" refers to the annual election of Town board
members and officials;
b. the term "Annual Town Meeting" refers to the meeting of Town Meeting Members
required by the General Laws to be held in the month of February, March, April or
May; and
c. the term "Special Town Meeting" refers to all other meetings of Town Meeting
Members.
Part II. TOWN ELECTIONS
8.2. Date for Annual Town Election. The annual Town Election shall be held on the first
Tuesday in March of each year. In any year in which presidential primaries are to be held, the date of the
Annual Town Election shall be held on a date to be announced by the Selectmen. The announcement
shall be made not later than December 31st of the year preceding the year in which such primary elections
are to be held.
8.3 Notice of Elections. At least 35 days before the date of any Town Election, the Selectmen
shall give notice of their intention to call such Election by notifying the Town Clerk. The Selectmen shall
also, as soon as practicable, place a notice of the Election in a newspaper generally circulated in the Town
and publish the notice on the Town’s website. At least seven days before a Regular Election and 14 days
before a Special Election they shall post copies of the warrant in not less than two conspicuous places in
the Town including but not limited to the Town Hall and the Police Station. The warrant shall also be
made available on the Town’s website. (Amended ATM 2008, approved by Attorney General July, 8,
2008, effective October 20, 2008. Amended ATM 2019, approved by Attorney General May 7, 2019,
effective May 9, 2019 pending 90 day waiting period.)
8.4. Special Election. The following procedure shall apply in the event that a vacancy occurs in
the full number of Town Meeting Members of any precinct whether arising from a tie vote among those
who received the highest vote as defeated candidates at the last preceding Annual Town Election or for
any other cause which requires an election by the other Members of the precinct. Whenever such vacancy
occurs, the Town Clerk shall promptly notify the Members of the precinct that a vacancy in the full
number of Members of the precinct has occurred and that a special meeting of said Members will be
called no earlier than fourteen days from the date of such notification for the purpose of filling said
vacancy. The Town Clerk shall include in such notification a copy of Chapter 202, Sections 2, 8 and 8A
of the Acts of 1932 as amended, and the time, place and date of the special meeting.
In the event such election is held for any reason other than a tie vote among candidates who
received the highest vote as defeated candidates, the Town Clerk shall in said notification also inform the
Members that they may file nominations for said vacancy with the Town Clerk up to seven days before
the meeting and that any registered voter in the precinct may be so nominated. Following expiration of
the said seven day period, the Town Clerk shall then notify the Members of the precinct of the
nominations that have been filed.
At the meeting a majority of the Members from such precinct shall constitute a quorum. The
Town Clerk shall preside, conducting the meeting in two parts. In the first part, the candidates among
whom there is a tie vote or the nominees, if the election is held for a reason other than a tie vote, may
address the meeting and answer any questions. In the second part, said candidates or nominees shall
leave the meeting and the Members shall vote by ballot. A majority of the votes cast shall be required for
a choice. If no candidate or nominee receives a majority of the votes cast on the first ballot or any
succeeding ballot, then there shall be a run-off vote between the two candidates or nominees who
received the highest number of votes cast on the preceding ballot. The Town Clerk shall count the
ballots, make a certificate of the choice for the records and notify the person so chosen.
8.5. Termination, Resignation. Any elected Member shall cease to be an elected Member upon
becoming a "Town Meeting Member ex officio" and shall cease to be a Member upon moving from the
Town. A Member may resign by filing a written resignation with the Town Clerk; the resignation shall
take effect on the date of filing. A Member who moves from the precinct from which the Member was
elected to another precinct may serve only until the next Annual Town Election.
Part III. TOWN MEETINGS
8.6. Date of Annual Town Meeting. The Annual Town Meeting shall commence no earlier
than the last Monday in March and no later than the last day of May. The Selectmen shall fix the time
and place for the Meeting. (Amended ATM 2004)
8.7. Membership. There shall be 240 Town Meeting Members, exclusive of Town Meeting
Members ex officiis, elected from the residents of the Town, or such lesser number as may be required by
Chapter 202, Section 2 of the Acts of 1932 as amended.
8.8. Town Meeting Members, Ex Officiis. The Moderator, Town Clerk and Town Counsel shall
be "Town Meeting Members, ex officiis" and shall be non-voting Members of the Meeting.
8.9. Duties. The Town Meeting shall be the legislative body of the Town. It shall meet,
deliberate, act, and vote in the exercise of the corporate powers of the Town.
8.10. Notice of Town Meeting. Notice of each Town Meeting, whether Annual or Special, shall
be given by the Selectmen by publishing a copy of the notice in a newspaper generally circulated in the
Town at least seven days before the date on which the Annual Town Meeting, and at least 14 days before
the date on which a Special Town Meeting, is to commence. Said notice shall state the time and place of
the meeting and that the full text of the warrant shall be published on the Town’s website and be available
from the Selectmen’s office. Additionally, the Selectmen shall post attested copies of the warrant for that
Meeting in no less than two conspicuous places in the Town including but not limited to the Town Hall
and the Police Station and shall make the warrant available on the Town’s website. (Amended ATM 2008,
approved by Attorney General July, 8, 2008, effective October 20, 2008. Amended STM May 2019,
approved by Attorney General June 5, 2019, effective June 6, 2019 pending 90 day waiting period.)
8.11. Calling Special Meeting. The Selectmen shall call a Special Town Meeting upon request
in writing of 200 registered voters. The meeting shall commence not later than 45 days after receipt of
such request, in accordance with Chapter 39, Section 10 of the General Laws. The Selectmen may also
call a Special Town Meeting on their own initiative.
8.12. Warrant Articles. The Selectmen shall insert in the warrant all subjects requested of them
in writing by:
a. any board,
b. any official,
c. ten or more registered voters, for an Annual Town Meeting, and
d. 100 or more registered voters, for a Special Town Meeting. The Selectmen may
also insert subjects on their own initiative, and
e. those persons or boards authorized by Chapter 40A, Section 5 of the General Laws
to initiate adoption of or changes in Zoning Bylaws.
8.13. Motions. The Selectmen shall include, in the notice given under Section 8.10. a date by
which motions to be offered to the Town Meeting must be submitted to the Selectmen. The Selectmen
shall forward copies of motions to the Advisory Committee, Town Counsel, and any other board, officer
or official they deem appropriate.
No motion or amendment thereof shall be voted on by Town Meeting unless the exact form of the
motion or amendment being voted on shall have been distributed generally to Town Meeting Members or
at the time of the vote the exact form is projected on a screen at Town Meeting. This paragraph shall not
apply to procedural motions and amendments thereof.
Nothing herein shall preclude a sponsor or other person who has filed a copy of a draft of a
motion with the Selectmen from making any change therein prior to or at the Town Meeting, compel the
sponsor or other person to make any motion whatsoever under such article, or prevent any person other
than a sponsor from making a motion at Town Meeting even though a copy thereof was not previously
filed with the Selectmen.
Motions for the acquisition and improvement of land, buildings, or other physical assets valued
over $5,000, excluding replacement of similar equipment, whether by purchase, gift or otherwise, shall be
accompanied by financial estimates showing the impact of annual maintenance costs thereto.
After the initial call to order of any Annual or Special Town Meeting, if a proponent informs the
Moderator of an intention to present any amendment or substitute motion or resolution, such proponent
shall thereafter post a notice of same at the place provided therefor, along with a text of what is being
proposed. Such notice shall be posted as soon as practicable and in advance of when action is to be taken
on the article to which it relates.
8.14. Compensation. No Town Meeting Member shall receive compensation for serving as
such.
8.15. Quorum. A quorum shall be a majority of the voting Members, but a lesser number may
adjourn the meeting to another time.
8.16. Persons Authorized to Address Meeting. All residents of the Town, whether or not Town
Meeting Members or registered voters, may address a Meeting. Non-residents may address the Meeting
with the approval of the Moderator or a majority of the Meeting.
8.17. Conflict of Interest. A Member who has a personal or financial interest in any matter
before the Meeting may speak or vote thereon, but if the Member does speak, the Member shall disclose
such interest. Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall not affect the validity of any
action taken by the Meeting.
8.18. Motions by Members. Motions may be made only by a Member of the Meeting. All
motions other than procedural motions must be in writing signed by the sponsoring Member. No seconds
are needed for any motion.
8.19. Secret Ballots. There shall be no secret ballots or other secret votes at Town Meeting.
8.20. Vote Questioned at Meeting. If a vote declared by the Moderator is immediately
questioned by seven or more Members, the Moderator shall verify it by taking a standing vote.
8.21. (A) Vote By Ballot: Upon a motion supported by not less than 20 members made prior to
a vote on any question (whether required by law to be a counted vote or not), the vote shall be taken by
ballot in such form as will in the opinion of the Moderator indicate how individual Town Meeting
Members have voted on a question. The results of such vote shall be announced in terms of the numbers
of aye, nay or abstain votes cast. The Town Clerk shall, within a reasonable time after the session has
been adjourned compile a list of members voting on the question, which list shall disclose how each
member voted. Said list, together with the original ballots, shall be open to public inspection so that the
public shall be able to determine the way in which each Town Meeting Member voted on the question,
and shall be preserved for at least 3 years.
(B) Declaring the Vote: If a law or a bylaw requires a two-thirds vote for action by the
Meeting, the Moderator is authorized pursuant to G.L. c. 39, §15 to declare the vote without taking a
count, subject to Bylaws 8.20, 8.21(A) and 8.22; and if more than a two-thirds vote is required the
Moderator may first determine whether the vote is unanimous, and if it is not, the vote shall be counted
either by means of a standing vote or by a roll call, or by ballot as provided in said bylaws.”;
8.22. Roll Call Votes. Upon motion supported by not less than 60 Members made prior to a
counted vote on any question, there shall be a roll call of Members. The Town Clerk shall record the vote
of each Member "Aye", "Nay", "Abstain", or "Not Present" as the case may be. Abstentions shall not be
included in the tally.
8.23. Reconsideration. No action taken at any session of a Town Meeting shall be reconsidered
at any subsequent session, unless notice of intention to move for reconsideration shall have been given at
the session at which such action was taken. If action taken at the final session is to be reconsidered,
debate and a vote on a motion for reconsideration may occur at the same session only after all articles
have been acted upon unless, in the Moderator's discretion, debate and a vote on the motion at an earlier
point in the session would expedite the conduct of the session. Any vote which requires more than a
simple majority for passage shall require a 3/5ths vote in order to be reconsidered by the Town Meeting.
8.24. Park Land. No action at any Town Meeting authorizing the sale, grant, lease, license,
abandonment or use for any other purpose of land acquired for park purposes shall be valid unless it shall
be approved by a two-thirds vote.
8.25. Electronic Voting. Notwithstanding any provision of these bylaws to the contrary, subject
to the availability of a system to enable electronic voting by Town Meeting Members using handheld mobile
devices, the Moderator may count the vote, or conduct a roll call vote, on any matter before the Town
Meeting by the use of such system. (ATM 2019, approved by Attorney General May 7, 2019, effective May
9, 2019 pending 90 day waiting period..)
ARTICLE 9. MODERATOR
9.1. Election. The Town shall have an elected Moderator who is a registered voter in the Town.
9.2. Term. The term of office shall be one year.
9.3. Vacancy. When the office of Moderator is vacant because of one of the conditions described in
Section 7.1. it shall be filled by Town Meeting Members at a Town Meeting held for the purpose of filling the
vacancy. When the office of Moderator at a Town Meeting is vacant for any reason, the Town Meeting
Members shall elect a Moderator Pro Tempore. A Town Meeting Member may be elected as Moderator Pro
Tempore. The Town Clerk shall preside at these elections.
9.4. Presiding at Meetings. The Moderator shall preside and regulate the proceedings at any Town
Meeting, and shall decide all questions of order. The Moderator shall make a public declaration of all votes.
9.5. Assistance at Meetings. The Moderator may seek assistance in the conduct of Town Meetings,
including the counting of votes.
9.6. Distribution of Material. The Moderator may establish reasonable procedures for the
distribution of material at Town Meetings.
9.7. Appointment of Committees. The Moderator shall appoint the members of the following
committees:
a. Advisory Committee;
b. Permanent Building Committee;
c. Human Resources Board (Renamed ATM 2000)
d. Audit Committee;
and shall appoint the members of other committees as authorized by Town Meeting.
9.8. General Provisions. The Moderator shall also be governed by the applicable provisions of
Articles 2 through 7 of these bylaws and other provisions of these bylaws applicable generally to boards,
except as the Moderator is specifically directed by law or a provision of these bylaws to act otherwise.
ARTICLE 10. REFERENDUM
10.1. Procedure. The Town shall have a referendum procedure for contesting certain votes taken at
Town Meeting. The procedure is set forth in Chapter 202, Section 9 of the Acts of 1932 as amended. (See
the appendix.)
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
ARTICLE 11. ADVISORY COMMITTEE
11.1. Membership. The Town shall have an Advisory Committee consisting of 15 residents
appointed by the Moderator. No member of the Committee shall be a board member, officer, official or paid
employee of the Town, except that a Town Meeting Member may be a member of the Committee.
11.2. Term. The term of office shall be three years commencing on July 1. (Amended ATM 2003)
No member of the Committee shall serve more than six consecutive years. (Amended ATM 2004, Art 30)
11.3. General Duties. The Committee shall consider all matters included within the articles of any
warrant for a Town Meeting, and shall, after due consideration, publish a written report of its
recommendations or comments on each article. The Committee may also consider and make reports or
recommendations on other matters, including without limitation referenda questions, which in the
Committee's judgment affect the interests of the Town. In making any written or oral recommendations as to
matters which are not included among, or which differ from, those made in its written report the Committee
shall announce to the Town Meeting its numerical vote thereon.
11.4. Investigatory and Review Powers. The Committee at any time shall have authority to
investigate or review the books, accounts, records and management of any board, official or department of
the Town for any purpose deemed necessary or advisable by the Advisory Committee. The books, accounts
and records of all boards, officials and departments of the Town shall be open to inspection by the
Committee and any person employed by it. In connection with the performance of its duties or exercise of its
powers, the Committee shall also have authority to interview board members, officers, officials and paid
employees of the Town. The Committee may employ such expert assistance and other assistance as the
Committee may deem advisable in carrying out its investigatory powers provided in this section. Counsel
may be engaged only in accordance with Section 25.5. (Amended ATM 2018.)
11.5. Staff. The Committee shall appoint such staff as it deems necessary.
11.6. Reserve Fund. The Committee shall request appropriations for the Reserve Fund at the
Annual Town Meeting and shall have the authority to vote the transfer of monies from the Fund.
11.7. Public Hearing. The Committee shall hold a public hearing, unless impracticable, on the
articles in the warrant prior to any Town Meeting.
11.8. Report. A copy of the report of the Committee shall be mailed or delivered to each Town
Meeting Member and Town Department at least seven days before the commencement of any Town
Meeting. A minority may present a separate report which shall be included in the report of the Committee.
The report shall set forth the numerical vote of the Advisory Committee on each recommendation. The report
shall be available on the Town’s website, and available for pick-up at the Town Clerk’s Office, and at the
Wellesley Free Library. The Selectmen’s Office shall also mail a copy of the report to any resident who
requests one. Further, the Advisory Committee shall mail a letter from the Advisory Chair to each dwelling
in the Town at least seven days before the commencement of any Town Meeting. The Chair’s letter will
contain an overview of the then current status of the budget, including any anticipated overrides, information
on capital projects that will require bonding, and significant factors for future budgets. The letter will also
contain a summary of other significant matters coming before Town Meeting as deemed appropriate by the
Chair. The letter will indicate when and where copies of the Advisory Report will be available. (Section
replaced ATM 2008, Article 31)
11.9. General Provisions. The Committee shall also be governed by Articles 2 through 7 of these
bylaws and other provisions of these bylaws applicable generally to all boards, except as it is specifically
directed by law or a provision of these bylaws to act otherwise.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
11.10. Definition. “Annual appropriation” means the general appropriation requested each year by
any board, official or officer for those amounts necessary for the proper administration of their respective
offices or departments for the ensuing fiscal year, including those amounts necessary for capital
improvements.
11.11. Requests for Annual Appropriations. Any board, official or officer intending to request an
annual appropriation at the Annual Town Meeting shall furnish to the Committee detailed estimates, with
appropriate explanations, of the amounts necessary for the proper administration of their respective offices or
departments for the ensuing fiscal year at least 90 days before the commencement of the Annual Town
Meeting. The Advisory Committee may authorize a late filing of such information. The request shall also
include estimates of amounts necessary for capital improvements. There shall also be included estimates of
all probable items of income which may be received by the requesting board, official or officer during the
ensuing fiscal year in connection with the administration of their departments or offices.
11.12. Notice of Request for Capital Projects. The information required to be submitted to the
Permanent Building Committee in accordance with Section 14.6. shall be submitted at the same time to the
Advisory Committee.
11.13. Notice of Request for Other Appropriations. For any appropriation other than those
involving collective bargaining or covered by Sections 11.11. and 11.12. the requesting board, official or
officer shall file written notice thereof, including the amount to be requested and its purpose, with the
Advisory Committee and the Board of Selectmen at least 14 days before the session of the Town Meeting at
which such appropriation will be acted upon. In the event of emergency requiring immediate consideration,
this provision may be waived by the Town Meeting but only upon the advice of the Advisory Committee that
it has duly considered the request.
11.14. Request for Town-Wide Financial Reports. The Advisory Committee shall request that the
Board of Selectmen present to them, at a meeting of the Advisory Committee to be held prior to the date of
the Advisory Committee’s Public Hearing on the Warrant for the Annual Town Meeting, both (i) the Five
Year Capital Budget Program for the Town as required by Section 19.5.2.e., and (ii) the Town-Wide
Financial Plan as required by Section 19.16.2.e.” (New Section ATM 2004)
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
ARTICLE 12. SUSTAINABLE ENERGY COMMITTEE
(Established ATM 2010, Article 33. Amended ATM 2018.)
12.1 Membership. The Town shall have a Sustainable Energy Committee consisting of 7
members. The Board of Selectmen, the Municipal Light Board and the School Committee each shall appoint
one member. These members may be a board member, officer, official or paid employee and may be a nonresident
of the Town. The Board of Selectmen shall also appoint the remaining four members from residents
active in the Town’s volunteer sustainable energy initiatives or others who bring relevant expertise, such as
knowledge about sustainable energy practices, marketing, or community engagement.
12.2 Term. The term of office shall be three years commencing on July 1. Members may be
reappointed at the end of their term.
12.3 General Duties. The Committee shall propose sustainable energy goals, to reduce Town
greenhouse gas emissions from the municipal, residential, commercial, industrial and institutional sectors, to
Town Meeting. The Committee shall prepare a multiyear action plan to achieve the Town sustainable energy
goals and shall revise it as needed. The Committee shall work with municipal departments, businesses,
institutions, and civic and volunteer organizations to initiate and carry out actions to achieve these goals and
shall coordinate municipal activity with initiatives of these other organizations. The Committee shall
prepare an annual Town-wide emissions inventory and develop an annual action plan that includes
significant planned initiatives by both municipal and community organizations. (Amended ATM 2018.)
12.4 Staff. The Committee shall appoint a sustainable energy coordinator and such other staff as
it deems necessary.
12.5 Annual Report. The Committee shall report to Annual Town Meeting on (a) the actions of
the prior year, (b) emissions trends and performance as compared to the Town goals, (c) any proposed
revisions to the multiyear Sustainable Energy Action Plan, and (d) recommended action plans for the coming
year.
12.6. Budget. The Committee shall prepare an annual budget which will be subject to approval by
the Selectmen. The Selectmen are responsible for presenting the budget to the Advisory Committee and for
presenting the motion for the budget appropriation to Town Meeting.
12.7 General Provisions. The Committee shall also be governed by Articles 2 through 7 of these
bylaws and other provisions of these bylaws applicable generally to all boards, except as it is specifically
directed by law or a provision of these bylaws to act otherwise.
Provided, each appointing authority shall have thirty days after the above bylaw becoming effective to make
their appointments, which shall be as follows:
a. The three members to be appointed by the Board of Selectmen, the Municipal Light Board and
School Committee shall be for an initial term of three years, and thereafter for a term of three
years.
b. The terms of the community members to be appointed by the Board of Selectmen shall be two
for an initial term of two years, and two for an initial term of one year, and thereafter each for a
term of three years.
ARTICLE 13. AUDIT COMMITTEE
13.1. Membership. The Town shall have an Audit Committee consisting of five residents having
financial expertise to be appointed by the Moderator. No member of the Committee shall be a board member,
officer, official or paid employee of the Town, except that a Town Meeting Member may be a member of the
Committee. Provided, that the foregoing power of appointment shall be subject to the members in office
serving to the completion of their present terms.
13.2. Term. The term of office shall be two years commencing on April 1. No member shall serve
more than two full consecutive terms.
13.3. Audits. The Committee shall annually appoint an independent certified public accountant or a
firm of such accountants to make an audit of the financial statements of the Town, including all its
departments. The examination shall conform with generally accepted auditing standards. Such audits shall be
made annually as of the close of the fiscal year, and may also be made at such other times as the Committee,
with the approval of the Selectmen, may direct.
13.4. General Duties. The Committee shall define the scope of the auditors' assignments and review
their findings and recommendations with the appropriate boards and departments. It may submit any reports
it deems advisable to the Town or to any board, officer or official.
13.5. Audit Reports. The Committee shall receive all reports of the auditors. It shall give any board,
officer or official which is audited a copy of that portion of the audit report relating to that board, officer or
official. It shall also file a copy of each audit report with the Town Clerk within 120 days after the close of
the fiscal year and the copy shall be a public record.
13.6. Annual Report. In addition to the requirements of Article 4. the Committee's annual report
shall include copies of summary balance sheets and summary statements of receipts and expenditures of the
accounts of the Town for the preceding fiscal year, together with such other financial statements and
recommendations as the Committee may deem appropriate.
13.7. General Provisions. The Committee shall also be governed by Articles 2 through 7 of these
bylaws and other provisions of these bylaws applicable generally to all boards, except as it is specifically
directed by law or a provision of these bylaws to act otherwise.
ARTICLE 14.
PERMANENT BUILDING COMMITTEE
(REVISED ATM 2017)
14.1. Definitions. For the purposes of this article:
a. “Project” means the design and/or construction of a building or structure as described in M.G.L. c 149 §§
44A through 44H and c.149A.
A Project is not:
- a public works as described in M.G.L. c. 30 § 39M;
- a substation or other structure or any of the service equipment thereof of the Municipal Light Plant
(project does include buildings of said plant);
- any building of the Housing Authority; or
- routine maintenance and upkeep of a building or other structure and its service equipment which are
performed on a regular basis.
b. “Project Goals” means the general objectives and particular needs to be met through the construction of the
project.
c. “Design” is the schematic design, the design development, and the preparation of construction documents (or
equivalent documents) developed from the project goals established by the proposing entity.
d. “Construction” includes all steps necessary to implement or complete a project. Construction does not
include: Design, as that term is defined above, or the acquisition of funds.
e. “Entity” means the Town department, board or committee proposing a project.
14.2. Membership. There shall be a Permanent Building Committee (the “Committee”) consisting of five
residents appointed by the Moderator, and one or more Temporary Members, as may be appointed pursuant to
Section 14.4. Appointments shall be made so that the Committee includes an attorney, an architect, an engineer,
and an individual who is primarily engaged in the construction business. No such member shall be an officer,
official, or paid employee of the Town, or a member of any board, except that a Town Meeting Member may
be a member of the Committee.
14.3. Term. The term of office shall be three years commencing on July 1.
14.4. Temporary Member. The Committee may appoint, as a temporary additional member or members, one
or more individuals who are members or representatives of the entity for which a project is being designed or
constructed. A temporary member shall not have a right to vote, and may participate in the activities of the
Committee only with respect to the particular project of that entity and only for the period during which the
Committee is exercising its functions with respect to such project.
In the case of a School project, the School Committee shall appoint one of its members, or its designee,
hereinafter referred to as the School Committee member, to be a temporary additional member of the Permanent
Building Committee. The School Committee member shall have the right to vote and to participate fully in the
activities of the Committee with respect to all School projects.
14.5. General Duties. The Committee shall be responsible for:
a. Financial estimates;
b. The design of every project estimated to cost more than $500,000; and
c. The construction of those projects for which funds are appropriated to the Committee.
The Committee shall work to achieve the project goals of the proposing entity.
14.6. Financial Requirements and Notification. Any entity that intends to propose a project to Town Meeting
shall provide information regarding the project goals and the financial requirements of the project to the
Committee at least 120 days in advance of the Town Meeting at which funding of any kind for the project will
be requested. This information shall be simultaneously submitted to the Advisory Committee in accordance
with Section 11.12. The Committee shall determine whether the sums requested are reasonable with respect to
the financial requirements of the project and shall report to Town Meeting thereon.
14.7. Appropriations. The funds for the design and construction of a project shall be appropriated to and
expended under the direction of the entity that will supervise the construction of the project in accordance with
Section 14.8.
14.8. Supervision of Project Construction. The Committee and the proposing entity shall administer the
construction of a project as follows:
a. The Committee shall supervise the construction of all projects estimated to cost more than
$500,000, unless the Committee and the entity proposing the project agree that the proposing
entity shall supervise construction.
b. The proposing entity shall supervise the construction of all projects estimated to cost less than
$500,000, unless the Committee and the entity proposing the project agree that the Committee
shall supervise construction.
14.9. Project Feasibility Studies. Any entity undertaking a project feasibility study shall inform the Committee
of the study.
14.10. Design Review Board. Upon appropriation of design funds, the Committee, or the supervising entity if
not the Committee, shall notify the Design Review Board of the project and the project shall not proceed except
in compliance with Section 46.3.
14.11. Records. All record drawings and specifications shall be retained in accordance with Massachusetts
General Laws.
14.12. Policies and Procedures. The Committee shall adopt, and make available to all boards, officers, and
officials, policies and procedures implementing the provisions of this Article. They shall cover at least the
following subjects:
a. The information to be submitted under this bylaw; and
b. The criteria the Committee will use in reviewing project designs.
14.13. General Provisions. The Committee shall also be governed by Articles 2 through 7 of these bylaws and
other provisions of these bylaws applicable generally to all boards, except as it is specifically directed by law
or a provision of these bylaws to act otherwise.
(Approved by Attorney General August 7, 2017; published August 15, 2017.
Effective date August 15, 2017)
ARTICLE 15.
(Reserved for Future Provisions)
ARTICLE 16. CELEBRATIONS COMMITTEE
16.1. Membership. The Town shall have a Celebrations Committee consisting of 12 residents
appointed by the Selectmen. Two members of the Committee shall be members of the Wellesley Veterans'
Council.
16.2. Term. The term of office shall be three years commencing on November 1st.
16.3. Duties. The Committee shall plan and carry out a proper observance of the annual Town
Veterans' Celebration and such other events as the Selectmen may designate.
16.4. Budget. The Committee shall prepare an annual budget. The budget is subject to approval by
the Selectmen. The Selectmen are responsible for presenting the budget to the Advisory Committee and for
presenting the motion for the budget appropriation to Town Meeting.
16.5. General Provisions. The Committee shall also be governed by Articles 2 through 7 of these
bylaws and other provisions of these bylaws applicable generally to all boards, except as it is specifically
directed by law or a provision of these bylaws to act otherwise.
ARTICLE 17. HISTORICAL COMMISSION
17.1. Membership. The Town shall have an Historical Commission consisting of seven residents
appointed by the Selectmen. (Amended ATM 2006, Article 38)
17.2. Term. The term of office shall be three years commencing on July 1.
17.3. General Duties. The Commission shall have the powers and duties of historical commissions
under Chapter 40, Section 8D of the General Laws. These include the preservation, protection and
development of the historic assets of the Town. It shall conduct researches for places of historic value and
shall seek to coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar purposes, and may advertise,
prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts, plans, and pamphlets which it deems necessary for its work.
17.4. Budget. The Commission shall prepare an annual budget. The budget is subject to approval
by the Selectmen. The Selectmen are responsible for presenting the budget to the Advisory Committee and
for presenting the motion for the budget appropriation to Town Meeting.
17.5. General Provisions. The Commission shall also be governed by Articles 2 through 7 of these
bylaws and other provisions of these bylaws applicable generally to all boards, except as it is specifically
directed by law or a provision of these bylaws to act otherwise.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
ARTICLE 18. HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION
18.1. Membership. The Town shall have an Historic District Commission consisting of seven
residents of the Town, appointed by the Board of Selectmen, one of whom shall be a member of the
Wellesley Historical Society, one of whom shall be a member of the American Institute of Architects, one of
whom shall be a member of a Board of Realtors and one of whom shall be a resident or property owner in the
Historic District. The Selectmen need not appoint as regular members of the Historic District Commission
one person from each of said categories of persons if such specially qualified persons are not available.
18.2. Term. Regular members will each serve a term of three years. When the Historic District
Commission is first established, the Selectmen shall at first appoint three members who will serve for a term
of three years, two members who will serve for a term of two years, and two members who will serve for a
term of one year.
18.3. General Duties. The Commission shall have all powers and duties of Historic District
Commissions in accordance with the Historic District Acts, Chapter 40C of the General Laws, as amended.
No building or structure within an historic district shall be constructed or altered in any way that
affects exterior architectural features unless the Commission shall first have issued a certificate of
appropriateness, a certificate of non-applicability, or a certificate of hardship, with respect to such
construction or alteration in accordance with Section XIVD. Historic District of the Zoning Bylaws.
(Amended ATM 2018.)
18.4. Regulations. The Commission shall be governed in its activities by the specific regulations
contained within Section XIVD, Historic Districts of the Zoning Bylaws.
18.5. General Provisions. The Commission shall also be governed by Articles 2 through 7 of these
bylaws and other provisions of these bylaws applicable generally to all boards, except as it is specifically
directed by law or a provision of these bylaws to act otherwise.
ARTICLE 18A. COMMUNITY PRESERVATION COMMITTEE
(Established STM 4/23/2002 7:30)
18A.1. Establishment: The Town shall have a Community Preservation Committee, consisting of
nine members who are residents of the Town.
18A.2. Appointment Authority/Terms: The composition of the Committee, the appointment
authority and the term of office shall be as follows:
a. One member of the Natural Resources Commission as designated by said Commission
for a term of three years.
b. One member of the Historical Commission as designated by said Commission for a term
of three years.
c. One member of the Housing Authority as designated by said Authority for a term of three
years.
d. One member of the Planning Board as designated by said Board for a term of three years.
e. One member of the Recreation Commission as designated by said Commission for a term
of three years.
f. Four members appointed by the Moderator for a term of three years.
18A.3. Duties: The Committee shall carry out its duties consistent with the provisions of Chapter
44B of the General Laws and it shall:
a. Study the needs, possibilities and resources of the Town regarding community preservation
at least annually. The committee shall consult with existing municipal boards, including
but not limited to those boards required to be consulted by Chapter 44B of the General
Laws, or persons acting in those capacities or performing like duties, in conducting such
studies. As part of its study, the Committee shall hold one or more public informational
hearings regarding community preservation needs, possibilities and resources, notice of
which shall be posted publicly and published for each of two weeks preceding each hearing
in a newspaper of general circulation in the town
b. Make recommendations to the Town Meeting at least annually for the acquisition, creation
and preservation of open space, the acquisition and preservation of historic resources, the
acquisition, creation and preservation of land for recreational use, the creation, preservation
and support of community housing, and rehabilitation or restoration of such open space,
historic resources, land for recreational use and community housing that is acquired or
created as provided in this section. With respect to community housing, the Committee
shall recommend, wherever possible, the reuse of existing buildings or construction of new
buildings on previously developed sites. Recommendations to the Town Meeting shall
include their anticipated costs.
c. Recommend, at least annually, either that Town Meeting appropriate, or set aside for later
spending, not less than 10% of the revenues made available that year from the Community
Preservation Fund in each of the following areas: (i) open space (not including land for
recreational use), (ii) historic resources; and (iii) community housing.
d. Include in its recommendation to the Town Meeting, whenever applicable, a
recommendation to set aside for later spending funds for specific purposes that are
consistent with community preservation but for which sufficient revenues are not then
available in the Community Preservation Fund to accomplish that specific purpose or to
set aside for later spending funds for general purposes that are consistent with community
preservation.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
ARTICLE 19. BOARD OF SELECTMEN
PART I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
19.1. Membership. The Town shall have an elected Board of Selectmen consisting of five
registered voters of the Town.
19.2. Term. The term of office shall be three years.
PART II. GENERAL DUTIES
19.3. Powers. The Selectmen shall be the chief executive board of the Town and oversee all
matters affecting the interest and welfare of the Town. They shall exercise the power and authority vested in
the Town not specifically delegated by law to any other board or office.
19.4. War Memorial Scholarship Fund Trustees. The Selectmen shall be ex officiis the War
Memorial Scholarship Fund Trustees, who shall manage said fund in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 229 of the Acts of 1951, as amended and as the same shall be amended from time to time hereafter.
The Town Treasurer shall be the custodian of all funds and securities thereof. The Selectmen shall include in
the Annual Report a financial report of said fund, showing the total amount thereof, investments, receipts and
their sources and disbursements and their purposes.
19.5 Capital Budgeting and Investments.
19.5.1. “Capital Project” Defined. For the purposes of this section, a "Capital Project" means:
a. A project, estimated to cost in excess of $100,000, for the construction, reconstruction,
replacement, major repair or renovation, extension or other improvement of a public
building, highway, sidewalk, storm drain, sewerage installation, incinerator, bridge,
playground, park or like public works, including any work done by any public utility
operated by the Town or for a facility, structure, or utility appurtenant to any of them; or
b. A purchase of land, equipment, buildings or structures, estimated to cost in excess of
$100,000; or
c. The preparation of plans, specifications or working drawings (estimated to cost in excess
of $10,000) for any project described in subsections (a.) and (b.)
19.5.2. Report of Capital Projects. (Section revised and amended ATM 2004) The Board of
Selectmen shall annually coordinate the preparation and maintenance of the Town’s Long-Range
Capital Budget Program as follows:
a. The Selectmen shall work with other boards in coordinating the timing of proposed and
anticipated capital projects, taking into account the relative need for and cost of such
projects, the effect the expenditures might have on the financial position of the Town,
and alternative methods of financing.
b. On the basis of the information submitted by each board pursuant to the provisions of
Section 6.16. as may be modified with the consent of such board, the Selectmen shall
compile and present to the Annual Town Meeting a Five Year Capital Budget Program
for the Town identifying proposed and anticipated capital projects and their timing. The
Program shall show expected use of borrowing for such projects, any expected so-called
Proposition 2½ debt exclusion overrides in connection with such borrowing, and the
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
impact of such borrowing on the Town’s outstanding debt and its real estate property tax
rates in upcoming years.
c. The Selectmen shall recommend to any Annual or Special Town Meeting a method of
financing for each capital project proposed to be submitted for approval at such Town
Meeting. The Selectmen’s recommendation shall state, for each proposed project, the
proposed use of borrowing for the project, whether any so-called Proposition 2½ debt
exclusion override is proposed in connection with such borrowing, and the impact of
such borrowing on the Town’s outstanding debt and its real estate property tax rates in
upcoming years.
d. The Selectmen shall prepare the Five Year Capital Budget Program sufficiently in
advance of the Annual Town Meeting to permit the publication of the Program in the
Reports to the Annual Town Meeting, pursuant to Section 11.8. of the Bylaws, together
with any comments of the Advisory Committee on the Program. Before any
appropriation article is considered, the Selectmen shall deliver an oral report to the
Annual Town Meeting on the substance of the Program; the oral report may include
recommendations or comments as the Selectmen deem appropriate. Any board may
provide an oral report at the Annual Town Meeting on aspects of proposed or anticipated
capital projects that relate to their areas of jurisdiction. Following the oral report on the
Program, there shall be an opportunity for comments from the Advisory Committee and
from Town Meeting Members.
e. At the request of the Advisory Committee pursuant to Section 11.14., the Selectmen
shall make a presentation to the Advisory Committee of the Five Year Capital Budget
Program. The Selectmen may supplement their written presentation to the Advisory
Committee with such recommendations or comments as they deem appropriate. The
Selectmen may subsequently update or amend the Program before it is published in the
Reports to the Annual Town Meeting or presented at the Annual Town Meeting.
f. All Town boards and officers shall fully cooperate and participate, at the request of the
Selectmen, in preparing and maintaining the Five Year Capital Budget Program and in
presenting aspects of proposed or anticipated capital projects that relate to their areas of
jurisdiction.”
19.5.3. Investment of Town Funds. The Selectmen, after consultation with the Executive Director
of General Government Services, shall set guidelines and criteria for the Department of Financial Services
for the investment of any and all types of Town funds, including trust funds, and shall establish adequate
procedures for the reporting of investments of Town funds.
19.6. General Duties. The Selectmen shall have all of the powers and duties of boards of selectmen
under the General Laws.
19.7. Appointments. (Amended ATM 2018.) The Selectmen shall appoint qualified persons to those
positions which by law the board fills by appointment. Those positions include but are not limited to:
1. Executive Director of 13. Constable
General Government Services 14. Emergency Management Director
2. Fire Chief 15. Inspector of Wires
3. Police Chief 16. Inspector of Gas and Plumbing
4. Town Counsel 17. Building Inspector
5. Zoning Board of Appeals 18. Council on Aging
(including associate 19. Youth Commission
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
members) 20. Keeper of the Lockup
6. Historical Commission 21. Special Police
7. Celebrations Committee 22. Animal Control Officer
8. Registrars of Voters (3 of 4) 23. Historic District Commission
9. Election Officers 24. Cable Television Committee
10. Veterans' Grave Officer 25. Wellesley Media Corporation
11. Sealer of Weights and Measures (three members)
12. Public Weighers 26. Municipal Light Board
(two members)
27. Sustainable Energy Committee (four members)
28. Retirement Board (one member)
29. Veterans Advisory Board
19.8. Communication and Cooperation. The Selectmen shall encourage and facilitate close
communication and cooperation among all boards, officers and officials.
19.9. Investigations. The Selectmen shall exercise the authority granted by Chapter 41, Section
23B of the General Laws to investigate the conduct and operation of any Town department and publish a
report upon completion of such investigation.
19.10. Appearance Before Other Bodies. The Selectmen may appear personally, by counsel or by a
designee before any committee of the General Court or before any other person or body to protect the
interests of the Town. They are not authorized by this section to commit the Town to any course of action.
19.11. Legal Actions and Settlements. The Selectmen shall have full authority as agents of the
Town, acting upon the advice of counsel, to institute, prosecute, defend and compromise any and all claims,
actions, and proceedings on behalf of or against the Town and in which the interests of the Town are or may
be involved. However, this authority shall not restrict the Collector of Taxes in the exercise of the powers
for the collection of taxes and accounts due the Town conferred upon the Collector of Taxes by the General
Laws. No settlement shall be made by a payment of more than $5000 without authority from the Town
Meeting. (Amended ATM 2018.)
19.12. Actions of Town Meeting. The Selectmen shall oversee the implementation of the actions of
Town Meeting.
19.13. Enforcement of Bylaws and Regulations. The Selectmen shall be responsible for the
enforcement of all bylaws and regulations of the Town.
19.14. Review of Bylaws and Government. The Selectmen shall periodically review the bylaws and
the structure and functioning of Town government and make appropriate recommendations to the Town.
19.15. Budgets and Administration. Except as otherwise provided in or required by Chapter 164 of
the General Laws, the Selectmen shall supervise those boards appointed by them and those departments
responsible to them and shall recommend and present to the Advisory Committee and to the Town Meeting
budgets for all those departments.
19.16. Town-Wide Financial Planning and Budgeting. (Section revised ATM 2004)
19.16.1. Definitions. For the purposes of this article, a “Town-Wide Financial Plan” means a
sequenced combination of forecasts of the Town’s operating budget (i) for the current fiscal year, (ii)
for the next following fiscal year and (iii) for one or more fiscal years beyond the next following
fiscal year. Forecasts shall be in the format commonly called “sources and uses of funds”. The
words “sequenced combination” are intended to require that the three component parts of the TownWellesley
Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
Wide Financial Plan build upon one another in an orderly, reasonable manner. A “deficit balance” in
a forecast means that the total uses of funds in the forecast exceed the total sources of funds in the
forecast.
19.16.2. Report of Town-Wide Financial Plan. The Board of Selectmen shall annually
coordinate the preparation and maintenance of the Town’s Town-Wide Financial Plan as follows:
a. The Selectmen shall work with other boards in coordinating the preparation of a Town-wide
budget for the next following fiscal year, taking into account (i) the Town’s ability to
generate the real estate property taxes assumed in the Plan and to fund any deficit balance in
the Plan; (ii) the relative need for and level of the various expenditures proposed to be made
by the Town; and (iii) alternatives to any of the various sources and uses of funds in the
Plan.
b. The Selectmen shall compile and present to the Annual Town Meeting a Town-Wide
Financial Plan for the Town. In this Plan, the forecast for the next following fiscal year shall
be constructed by using (i) the information submitted by each board pursuant to the
provisions of Sections 6.15. and 11.11. as may be modified with the consent of such board,
and (ii) estimates and assumptions acceptable to the Selectmen for all other line items. The
Selectmen shall identify significant estimates and assumptions used in constructing the
Town-Wide Financial Plan, including assumptions as to receipt of real estate property tax
revenue.
c. For any future fiscal year in a Town-Wide Financial Plan, the Selectmen shall estimate the
property tax rate that would generate real estate property taxes equal to the sum of (a) the
real estate property taxes assumed as a source of funds in the forecast for the fiscal year and
(b) any deficit balance in the forecast for that fiscal year. In so doing, the Selectmen may
use reasonable assumptions as to growth in the valuation of properties in the Town.
d. The Selectmen shall prepare the Town-Wide Financial Plan sufficiently in advance of the
Annual Town Meeting to permit the publication of the Plan in the Reports to the Annual
Town Meeting, pursuant to Section 11.8. of the Bylaws, together with any comments of the
Advisory Committee on the Plan. Before any appropriation article is considered, the
Selectmen shall deliver an oral report to the Annual Town Meeting on the substance of the
Plan; the oral report may include recommendations or comments as the Selectmen deem
appropriate. Any board may provide an oral report at the Annual Town Meeting on aspects
of the Plan that relate to their areas of jurisdiction. Following the oral report on the Plan,
there shall be an opportunity for comments from the Advisory Committee and from Town
Meeting Members.
e. At the request of the Advisory Committee pursuant to Section 11.14., the Selectmen shall
make a presentation to the Advisory Committee of the Town-Wide Financial Plan. The
Selectmen may supplement their written presentation to the Advisory Committee with such
recommendations or comments as they deem appropriate. The Selectmen may subsequently
update or amend the Plan before it is published in the Reports to the Annual Town Meeting
or presented at the Annual Town Meeting.
f. All Town boards and officers shall fully cooperate and participate, at the request of the
Selectmen, in preparing and maintaining the Town-Wide Financial Plan and in presenting
aspects of the Plan that relate to their areas of jurisdiction.”
19.17. Weekly Warrant. The Selectmen shall approve all bills before payment by the Treasurer.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
19.18. System for Citizen Inquiries. The Selectmen shall establish a system to be administered by
the Executive Director of General Government Services to take effective and efficient action on citizen
complaints and requests for service.
19.19. Licensing Board. The Selectmen shall serve as the licensing board for the Town under those
statutes granting licensing powers to boards of selectmen.
In granting of licenses for the sale of wines and malt beverages not to be drunk on the premises as
authorized by c. 14 of the Acts of 2014 and as approved by the voters, the Selectmen shall limit such licenses
to food stores and specialty food stores, said terms to be defined by the Selectmen in regulations adopted by
the Selectmen after a public hearing. (Amended ATM 2014)
19.20. House Numbers. The Selectmen may at any time in their discretion, and shall within ten
days from the receipt of a request from the owner of any building, designate the numbers to be affixed to or
painted on the building. The owner of each building so designated shall comply within ten days after
receiving notice thereof.
19.21. Municipal Charges Lien. No municipal charges lien to secure reimbursement to the
Town for its expenses incurred, properly chargeable to the property owner, in correcting any
particular encroachment onto town-owned land, authorized by G.L. c. 40, Section 58 and vote of the
2012 Annual Town Meeting on April 2, 2012, acting under Article 30 of the Warrant for said
meeting, shall be imposed without the Selectmen’s approval following the giving of due notice to
the person to be charged and an opportunity to be heard. (New section ATM 2012)
19.22. General Provisions. The Board shall also be governed by Articles 2 through 7 of these
bylaws and other provisions of these bylaws applicable generally to all boards, except as it is specifically
directed by law or a provision of these bylaws to act otherwise.
PART III. PROFESSIONAL STAFF (Amended ATM 2005)
19.31. Executive Director of General Government Services. (Section revised STM 2005, Article 7)
The Town shall have an Executive Director of General Government Services (“Executive Director”) who
shall be appointed by the Selectmen and who shall act for and with the authority of the Selectmen. The
Selectmen may elect to enter into a contract with the Executive Director pursuant to G.L. c. 41, §108 N.
The Executive Director shall be the Chief Operating Officer of the Town, whose principal duties
shall include but not be limited to:
a. Implementing the Town’s policies and procedures as promulgated by the Selectmen as the
Town’s Chief Executive Board.
b. Overseeing and being responsible to the Selectmen in their responsibilities for the Town’s
finances, including without limitation the annual Town-Wide Financial Plan and Five Year
Capital Budget program required under these bylaws, and the investment of Town funds.
c. Overseeing the development and enforcement of internal controls, using best municipal
finance and general accounting practices as appropriate.
d. Overseeing and being responsible for maintenance and quality control of all buildings and
other structural assets under the Selectmen’s jurisdiction and, upon request, of such assets
under the jurisdiction of other boards and committees.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
e. Overseeing and being responsible for all other operating facets under the jurisdiction of
the Selectmen, and as established by these bylaws, applicable special acts, and other duties
as the Selectmen may from time to time specify.
f. Coordinating the activities of Town departments and arranging meetings between Town
department heads in order to deal with common problems and allow an interchange of ideas
and information and to lead the Town’s strategic planning.
g. Overseeing the Town’s network and information systems.
The Executive Director shall be the Town’s Chief Procurement Officer, who may delegate the powers and
duties of such position as provided by law.
19.32. Executive Director, Term. The term of office shall be three years commencing on July 1.
19.33. Staff. The Executive Director shall appoint the Finance Director, the Facilities Management
Director (2012) and the IT Director, such appointments to be subject to the approval of the Selectmen
(hereinafter referred to as “principal staff”) and such other staff as the Executive Director shall deem
appropriate and for which funding has been provided. The Executive Director shall exercise general
supervision over all town departments for which the Selectmen are the appointing or employing authority.
(Amended ATM 2018.)
19.34 Principal Staff, Term. The appointments of all principal staff shall be for
a period not to exceed three years.
PART IV. DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES (Amended STM 2005, Article 7)
19.41. Department. The Town shall have a Department of Financial Services headed by the Finance
Director who shall be the Town’s Chief Financial Officer.
19.42. Finance Director. (Amended ATM 2018.) The Executive Director may elect to enter into a
contract with the Finance Director pursuant to G. L. c. 41, § 108 N, subject to the Selectmen’s approval. The
Finance Director shall be the Town Accountant and shall have, except as expressly provided by these
bylaws, the powers and duties vested by law in comptrollers and town accountants. Among the duties and
responsibilities of the Finance Director shall be the following:
a. Coordinating and administrating Town financial services and activities, including providing
support as needed to the Advisory Committee and other Town boards and committees.
b. Serving as a member of the Retirement Board ex officio.
c. Assisting in the development of budgets and reviewing all budgets for format, completeness,
and accuracy before submission to the Advisory Committee.
d. Assisting the Executive Director in preparing and supervising purchasing and inventory control
procedures.
e. Administering the disposal of Town property.
f. Maintaining Town accounting records and financial statements.
g. Paying all Town obligations, after securing required approvals.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
h. Monitoring all expenditures of Town funds.
i. Timely reporting to the Selectmen and to other appropriate boards of actual or foreseeable
incurring of obligations or expenditures of funds in excess of budgeted appropriations.
j. Maintaining payroll and other financial records relating to all Town personnel.
k. Sending to each board, at regular intervals, a statement of the funds expended during the
preceding month and a statement of the balances remaining under appropriated budgets.
19.43. Treasurer and Collector of Taxes. (Amended ATM 2018.) The Town shall have a Town
Treasurer and Collector of Taxes (“Treasurer/Collector”), who shall be appointed by the Finance Director,
for a three-year term commencing on July 1, subject to the approval of the Executive Director. The
Treasurer/Collector shall have, except as otherwise expressly provided by these bylaws, the powers and
duties vested by law in Town treasurers and collectors of taxes. Among the duties and responsibilities of the
Treasurer/Collector shall be the following:
a. Collection of taxes and other funds due the Town, including the receipt of payments made on
utility bills prepared and sent by the Municipal Light Plant;
b. Initiation, with the assistance of the Executive Director and with the approval of the Selectmen,
of legal action to collect overdue funds payable to the Town;
c. Delivery of copies of any notice required by General Laws, Chapter 60, of intent to take land for
the Town for nonpayment of taxes and of subsequent action relating to such taking and copies
of any court order of judgment with respect to the validity or invalidity of the title in any parcel
of land so taken, to the Selectmen, Planning Board, Board of Public Works, Natural Resources
Commission, Housing Authority, Recreation Commission, School Committee and any other
board that may request such notice, or their successors; and
d. Investment of Town funds in accordance with the guidelines and criteria set by the Board of
Selectmen for the investment of any and all types of Town funds as provided in Article 19.5.3.
Investment of Town Funds.
e. Inform all licensing authorities and assist in the collection of unpaid taxes, fees, assessments,
betterments, and other municipal charges in accordance with the following procedure:
(I) The Tax Collector shall annually furnish to each department, board, commission
or division, hereinafter referred to as the Licensing Authority, that issues licenses or
permits including renewals and transfers, a list of any person, corporation, or
business enterprise, hereinafter referred to as The Party, that has neglected or
refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments, or other municipal
charges for not less than a twelve month period, and that such party has not filed in
good faith a pending application for an abatement of such tax or a pending petition
before the appellate tax board.
(II) The Licensing Authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license or permit,
including renewals and transfers of any party whose name appears on said list
furnished to the Licensing Authority from the Tax Collector; provided, however,
that written notice is given to the party and the Tax Collector, as required by
applicable provisions of law, and the party is given a hearing, to be held not earlier
than fourteen days after said notice. Said list shall be prima facie evidence for
denial, revocation or suspension of said license or permit to any party. The Tax
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
Collector shall have the right to intervene in any hearing conducted with respect to
such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any findings made by the Licensing
Authority with respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension shall be made
only for the purpose of such proceeding and shall not be relevant to or introduced in
any other proceeding at law, except for any appeal from such license denial,
revocation or suspension. Any license or permit denied, suspended or revoked under
this section shall not be reissued or renewed until the Licensing Authority receives a
certificate issued by the Tax Collector that the party is in good standing with respect
to any and all local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges,
payable to the Town as the date of issuance of said certificate.
(III) Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement,
thereby allowing the Licensing Authority to issue a certificate indicating said
limitations to the license or permit and the validity of said license shall be
conditioned upon the satisfactory compliance with said agreement. Failure to
comply with said agreement shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of
said license or permit; provided, however, that the holder be given notice and a
hearing as required by applicable provisions of law.
(IV) The Board of Selectmen, may waive such denial, suspension or revocation if it
finds there is no direct or indirect business interest by the property owner, its officers
or stockholders, if any, or members of his immediate family, as defined in Section
one of Chapter two hundred and sixty-eight in the business or activity conducted in
or on said property.
This section shall not apply to the following licenses and permits: (The references
hereinafter set forth being to the General Laws): Open Burning (Section thirteen of Chapter
forty-eight); Bicycle Permits (Section eleven A of Chapter eighty-five); Sales of Articles for
Charitable Purposes (Section thirty-three of Chapter one hundred and one); Children Work
Permits (Section sixty-nine of Chapter one hundred and forty-nine); Clubs and Associations
Dispensing Food or Beverage Licenses (Section twenty-one E of Chapter one hundred and
forty); Dog Licenses (Section one hundred and thirty-seven of Chapter one hundred and
forty); Fishing, Hunting, Trapping License (Section twelve of Chapter one hundred and
thirty-one); Marriage Licenses (Section twenty-eight of Chapter two hundred and seven) and
Theatrical Events, Public Exhibition Permits (Section one hundred and eighty-one of
Chapter one hundred and forty).
19.44. Purchasing Guidelines. The Executive Director, in cooperation with the Superintendent of
Schools, the Director of Public Works and any other Town Officers selected by the Executive Director, shall
adopt policies and procedures governing the process by which each board or department of the Town
purchases or leases any item or service. The policies and procedures shall, among other things:
a. Implement the several General Laws governing procurements by all Town departments, by
providing internal procedures and guidelines for all Town procurements including, without
limitation, those procurements governed by General Laws, Chapter 30B, the Uniform
Procurement Act, and such other governing authority, when deemed by the Executive
Director to be helpful to the procuring departments and to the Department of Financial
Services;
b. Ensure compliance with the 3-year limitation in procurement contracts governed by the
Uniform Procurement Act, except to the extent a longer term has been authorized by Town
Meeting pursuant to General Laws, Chapter 30B, Section 12 (B), in the following respects:
TYPE OF CONTRACT LIMIT ON DURATION
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
1. Communication, (Equipment 5 Years
and/or servicing thereof)
2. Trash removal from municipal 5 Years
buildings
3. Transportation of school children 5 Years
4. Food services beverages 5 Years (New ATM 2002)
c. Facilitate cooperation among all Town boards and departments to ensure that, to the extent
possible, all Town boards and departments jointly purchase materials and supplies used by
more than one board and department;
d. Encourage bidding for serial purchasing of major items, as defined by the Director, by
requiring that each board or department prepare annually a schedule of the anticipated
quantity of major items to be purchased and the anticipated timing for writing specifications,
advertising for bid, awarding contracts, and receiving the merchandise.
19.45. Inventory Records and Controls. The Executive Director shall adopt policies and procedures
by which all boards and departments maintain inventory records of all Town supplies, materials, and
equipment and the procedures to be used for maintaining inventory controls.
19.46. Payment of Town Funds. The Executive Director shall adopt policies and procedures
governing the disbursement of Town funds. These policies and procedures shall, among other things, require
that payment for purchases shall be processed in the following manner:
a. No money shall be paid from the treasury of the Town without a warrant or order prepared
by the Town Accountant and signed by a majority of the Selectmen.
b. The Town Accountant shall have custody of all vouchers which have been entered on
warrants for payment and approved by the Selectmen. These vouchers shall be available for
inspection during regular business hours.
c. Whenever the account of any appropriation, other than an appropriation for a special purpose
(such as a construction contract), for which the work has not been completed shows an
unexpended balance at the end of the fiscal year, such balance (except in the case of the
Municipal Light Plant) shall revert to the treasury of the Town as unappropriated funds; and
d. No work, the payment for which is in any part to be contributed voluntarily by private
individuals, firms or corporations shall be performed by the officer, official, department, or
board of the Town having charge thereof, until a sufficient sum has been deposited with the
Town Treasurer to cover such voluntary contributions.
19.47. Disposal of Town Property. The Executive Director shall adopt policies and procedures
governing the disposal of surplus and obsolete Town property. "Disposal" includes any method by which the
officer, official, board, or department responsible for the property terminates or substantially reduces its right
to control the property. The policies and procedures shall, among other things:
a. Implement the General Laws governing the disposal to a third party of a tangible supply no
longer useful to the Town but having re-sale or salvage value (General Laws, Chapter 30B,
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
Section 15) and the rental, conveyance or other disposition of real property (General Laws,
Chapter 30B, Section 16).
b. Establish internal procedures to ensure that no tangible or real property of the Town shall be
disposed of to a third party without first ascertaining that it is not in the Town's interest to
retain and/or transfer the property to another Town department.
c. Provide that no property belonging to the Municipal Light Plant having a value in excess of
$30,000, no other tangible Town property having a value in excess of $10,000, and no real
property shall be disposed of without Town Meeting approval.
d. Provide that each board, officer, official, and department shall annually view its property for
obsolescence and report thereon to the Executive Director and shall promptly take steps for
all surplus and obsolete property.
19.48. Evasion. No action shall be taken to increase or decrease, by combination or division or
in any other way, the value of any item, service, or piece of property so as to avoid the effects of policies and
procedures adopted by the Executive Director under Sections 19.44. and 19.47.
19.49. Annual Report. In addition to the requirements of Article 4, the Executive Director's annual
report shall satisfy the requirements of Chapter 41, Section 61 of the General Laws and shall include
financial statements showing the financial condition of the Town at the close of the last completed fiscal
year, the results of operations in the fiscal year last completed (in the usual accounting format but of limited
length and complexity), and a summary statement of (i) all investments made by the Town during the last
completed fiscal year, including the rates of return, (ii) all borrowings, including amounts, rates of interest,
and names of lenders from whom the money was borrowed and (iii) a list of insurance policies showing the
property covered, the amount of each policy, the premiums, the names of the insurers, and the agents through
whom the policies were purchased. The Executive Director's report need not repeat information contained in
the annual report of the Audit Committee.
PART V. TOWN MEETING DUTIES
19.51. Town Meeting. The Selectmen are responsible for calling all Town Meetings and shall take
such actions as are required by law or by Article 8 of these bylaws relative to Town Meeting.
19.52. Closing of Warrant. The Selectmen shall, by notice to each board and by notice in a
newspaper generally circulated in the Town, specify the date when the warrant for any Town Meeting shall
close.
19.53. Copies of Warrant. The Selectmen, after drawing a warrant for a Town Meeting, shall
transmit as soon as possible a copy of the same to each member of the Advisory Committee and to each
Town Meeting Member.
19.54. Copies of Motions. The Selectmen shall distribute copies of all draft motions received by
them to the Moderator, Advisory Committee, Town Counsel, and to any board which in its opinion is likely
to have an interest in the motion, so that they may communicate with the author of the motion as far in
advance of the meeting as possible. Copies of such drafts shall also be available for public inspection at the
Selectmen's office and at the Wellesley Free Library.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
ARTICLE 20.
(Reserved for Future Provisions) (Deleted ATM 2018.)
ARTICLE 20A. WELLESLEY MEDIA CORPORATION
(Wellesley Cable Access Board established ATM 1984:15)
(Replaced by Wellesley Cable Access Board, Inc., (aka WCAB) STM 1994:9)
(Amended Board to Corporation and other revisions ATM 1999:24)
20A.1. Purposes: An independent non-profit corporation, called the Wellesley Media Corporation,
organized under Chapter 180 of Massachusetts General Laws (hereinafter referred to as the “Access
Corporation”), shall be established for the purpose of encouraging, and assisting in increasing, local
programming to be viewed over the cable television system(s) in the Town of Wellesley, as more explicitly
delineated as follows:
a. To provide a source of funding to assist in the development of local access
programming in the Town;
b. To develop and promote access programming for the Town;
c. To work with and assist local organizations in the Town in developing access
programming ideas;
d. To work with and assist the Wellesley Public Schools in Developing and producing
local access programming;
e. To provide new equipment to facilitate access production(s) in the Town;
f. To work and assist in the development of a tape library of local access programming in
the Town; and
g. To generally work and assist in the development of resources to further the goal of
producing local access programming in the Town;
20A.2. Number of Directors/Term of Office: The Board of Directors of the Access Corporation shall
consist of seven (7) Directors. The Directors shall be appointed and serve three year terms, except for the
initial appointments, when three (3) Directors who shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen, will be
appointed as follows: one (1) Director for a two year term; and two (2) Directors for a three year term; the
three Directors shall constitute the Board of Directors until the remaining four (4) Directors are appointed by
the Corporation’s Directors, as follows; two (2) Directors for a one year term; one (1) Director for a two year
term; and one (1) Director for a three year term. The remaining four (4) Directors shall be appointed no later
than 90 days from the appointment of the initial three (3) directors.
20A.3. Promotion of Local Programming: The Access Corporation shall work to, among other
things, promote the use of studio facilities in the Town for the production of local programming to be shown
on the cable television system(s) in the Town. To this end, the Access Corporation shall work with, among
other groups, the School Department, cable television licensees in the Town, the Board of Selectmen and
civic groups in the Town.
20A.4. Revenues: All revenues to the Access Corporation, including revenues in the Cable Access
Fund, shall be administered by the Board of Directors of the Access Corporation in the furtherance of the
Purposes in Section 20-A above.
20A.5. Policies and Procedures: The Board of Directors of the Access Corporation shall adopt
written policies and procedures to encourage the production of local programming in the Town. The Board
of Directors shall also adopt written policies and procedures outlining the procedures for the Access
Corporation’s conduct of its business and other affairs. All such written procedures shall be made available
to the public.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
20A.6. Annual Report: The Access Corporation shall provide an Annual Report to such authorities
as are appropriate and/or required pursuant to Chapter 180 of the Massachusetts General Laws, with a copy
sent directly to the Board of Selectmen. Said Annual Report shall be a public document.
ARTICLE 21. POLICE DEPARTMENT
21.1. Establishment of the Department. The Town shall have a Police Department established by the
Selectmen. It shall act under the supervision of the Chief of Police.
21.2. Responsibilities of Selectmen. The Selectmen shall:
a. appoint a Chief of Police and such police officers as they deem necessary;
b. have overall responsibility for the Police Department; and
c. establish suitable policies and procedures governing the Police Department and the police
officers, including standards for record keeping.
21.3. Responsibilities of the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall provide to the Town
appropriate police and related services as determined by the Selectmen, supervise all police officers, and be
responsible for all Town property used by the Department.
21.4. General Provisions. The Department shall also be governed by the applicable provisions of
Articles 2 through 7 of these bylaws and other provisions of these bylaws applicable generally to all boards,
except as it is specifically directed by law or a provision of these bylaws to act otherwise.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
ARTICLE 22. FIRE DEPARTMENT
22.1. Establishment of the Department. The Town shall have a Fire Department established by the
Selectmen. It shall act under the supervision of the Chief Engineer of the Fire Department.
22.2. Responsibilities of the Selectmen. The Selectmen shall:
a. appoint the Chief Engineer and such other Fire Engineers and employees as they deem
necessary;
b. have overall responsibility for the Fire Department; and
c. establish suitable policies and procedures governing the Fire Department and the
employees thereof, including standards for record keeping.
22.3. Responsibilities of the Chief Engineer. The Chief Engineer shall provide to the Town
appropriate firefighting and other services as determined by the Selectmen, supervise all fire engineers and
other employees, and be responsible for all fire stations and equipment. (Amended ATM 2018.)
22.4. Pumping Water from Private Buildings. Subject always to the availability of fire protection
services as the Chief Fire Engineer shall determine, the Fire Department is authorized, in an emergency, to
pump water from private buildings; provided, that the property owner shall be charged the following fees for
such service rendered to the same building if, in the opinion of the Chief Fire Engineer, the water condition
could have been avoided by the installation of a sump pump or some other action of the property owner:
First Call No/Charge
Second Call (made by the same property
owner and due to the same cause) $l00.00
Third and subsequent calls (made by the same
property owner and due to the same cause) $200.00
22.5. General Provisions. The Department shall also be governed by the applicable provisions of
Articles 2 through 7 of these bylaws and other provisions of these bylaws applicable generally to all boards,
except as it is specifically directed by law or a provision of these bylaws to act otherwise.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
ARTICLE 23. INSPECTORS
23.1. Appointment. (Amended ATM 2018.) The Selectmen shall appoint the:
a. Inspector of Wires;
b. Inspector of Gas and Plumbing;
c. Inspector of Buildings; and
d. Sealer of Weights and Measures.
23.2. Term. The term of office shall be one year commencing on July 1, except as otherwise
provided by law.
23.3. Inspector of Wires. The Inspector of Wires shall perform the duties prescribed for inspectors
of wires in Towns under the General Laws and the Electric Code of the Commonwealth.
23.4. Inspector of Gas. The Inspector of Gas shall perform the duties prescribed for Town
inspectors of gas piping and gas appliances in buildings under Chapter 143 of the General Laws and the Fuel
and Gas Code of the Commonwealth.
23.5. Inspector of Buildings. The Inspector of Buildings shall perform the inspection and zoning
enforcement duties prescribed for inspectors of buildings of Towns under Chapter 143 of the General Laws,
Article XXIII of the Town Zoning Bylaws, and the Building Code of the Commonwealth. The Inspector of
Buildings shall also enforce the Stretch Energy Code, so called, as appearing in 780 CMR Appendix
115.AA, or any amendments thereto. (Amended ATM 2011)
23.6. Sealer of Weights and Measures. The Sealer of Weights and Measures shall perform the
duties prescribed for sealers of weights and measures of Towns under the General Laws.
23.7. Inspector of Plumbing. The Inspector of Plumbing shall perform the duties prescribed for
inspectors of plumbing of Towns under Chapter 142 of the General Laws and the Plumbing Code of the
Commonwealth.
23.8. General Provisions. The Inspectors and the Sealer of Weights and Measures shall also be
governed by the applicable provisions of Articles 2 through 7 of these bylaws and other provisions of these
bylaws applicable generally to all boards, except as is specifically directed by law or a provision of these
bylaws to act otherwise.
23.9. Requirements for Wiring. Every corporation or person proposing to place wires designed to
carry a current of electricity for light, heat or power purposes shall give notice thereof to the Inspector of
Wires before commencing any work. This notice shall be on an application furnished by the Inspector of
Wires and shall indicate the general character of the proposed installation, and the number, rating and kind of
current consuming devices to be connected. Upon receipt of such a notice and payment of the proper fee, a
permit for the commencement of the work as described shall be issued by the Inspector of Wires if all legal
requirements have been observed. No work, except of an emergency nature, shall commence until a valid
permit has been issued.
No conduit, either within or connecting two buildings, or any wiring within or between two
buildings to be used in connection with the distribution of current for light, heat, or power, shall be covered
over until approved by the Inspector of Wires, and such approval posted in a conspicuous place on or within
the building so wired.
No person engaged in the practice of electrical wiring for hire shall install wires designed to carry a
current of electricity for heat, light or power in the Town unless that person has exhibited and registered a
license or certificate at the office of the Inspector of Buildings.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
Whoever violates any provision of this section shall, in cases not otherwise provided for, forfeit and
pay for each offense a fine not exceeding $50.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
ARTICLE 24.
FACILITIES MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT
(New Section ATM 2012. Amended ATM 2018.)
24.1. Facilities Management Department. The Town shall have a Facilities Management Department.
24.2. General Duties. The Facilities Management Department shall be responsible for the
maintenance, custodial services and capital planning for all Town-owned buildings including school
buildings pursuant to G.L. c. 71, §68, and library buildings and all other buildings, except those buildings or
portions thereof under the jurisdiction of the Municipal Light Plant, or occupied by the Water, and Sewer
Departments).
24.3. Director of Facilities Management. The Facilities Management Department shall be headed by
a Director of Facilities Management, who shall be appointed by the Executive Director with the Selectmen’s
approval and who, subject to the Executive Director’s approval, shall appoint such staff as are deemed
necessary to fulfill the Department’s duties.
24.4. Budget. The Facilities Management Director shall prepare an annual budget which will be
subject to approval by the Selectmen. The Selectmen shall be responsible for presenting the budget to the
Advisory Committee and for presenting the motion for the budget appropriation to Town Meeting.
24.5. Annual Report. The Director of Facilities Management shall report annually to the Executive
Director, in whatever manner and form the Executive Director finds would be helpful, on the status of all
Town-owned buildings under the Director’s supervision as of the end of the fiscal year, building by building,
including the work performed during the year, together with recommendations for future action, and the
expected costs to maintain said buildings to the appropriate standard.
ARTICLE 25. TOWN COUNSEL
25.1. Office and Qualifications. The Town shall have a Town Counsel who shall be an attorney
admitted to practice in the Commonwealth. Town Counsel need not be a resident of the Town or maintain a
law office in the Town.
25.2. Term. The Town Counsel shall be appointed annually by the Selectmen for a yearly term to
commence on July 1. The Selectmen shall have the power to remove Town Counsel whenever in their
judgment the interests of the Town so require. In case of a vacancy in the office, the Selectmen shall fill the
same by a new appointment.
25.3. Responsibility. Town Counsel shall be responsible for the performance of all legal services to
the Town.
25.4. Duties. It shall be the duty of Town Counsel:
a. to examine, or cause to be examined, all titles to property in which the Town may be
interested;
b. to draw, supervise the drawing, or review all deeds, obligations, contracts, bonds, leases,
conveyances, agreements and other legal instruments, of whatever nature, which may be
required by any bylaw, vote or action of the Town, or by any board or official, or to which
the Town or its agent may be a party, and which by law, usage or agreement the Town is
obligated to draw;
c. to draw, or supervise and approve, all votes for the laying out, discontinuance, change or
improvement of streets or ways, for the taking of lands for any municipal purpose whatever,
for the assessment of betterments, and all other forms of assessment;
d. to commence and prosecute all actions and other legal proceedings and suits by or on behalf
of the Town or any board or official, upon vote duly taken by such board or written
direction of such official and after the Selectmen have been notified of and approved such
vote; except that approval by the Selectmen shall not be required if Town Counsel deems
the situation to be of an emergency nature or in those instances when such board or official
is vested by statute with the authority to commence and prosecute legal proceedings;
e. to defend all actions and suits brought against the Town in any Court or other tribunal in this
Commonwealth or elsewhere;
f. to appear as counsel, when directed by the Selectmen, in any other action, suit, or
prosecution which may involve the rights and interests of the Town:
g. to defend all persons elected or appointed to any board and all officers and officials of the
Town in suits or prosecutions against them for any official action, or for the performance of
any official duty, when any right, privilege, act or direction of the Town may be brought
into question;
h. to defend, subject to the approval of the Selectmen, all employees of the Town in suits or
prosecutions against such employees for acts within the scope of their authority as agents of
the Town, unless such suits or prosecutions are brought by the Town or on its behalf;
i. to appear as Counsel before the Legislature of the Commonwealth or any committee thereof,
whenever the Selectmen determine that the interests or welfare of the Town may be directly
or indirectly concerned, or when requested to do so by a vote of the Town;
j. to consult with, advise or attend meetings of any board, officer or official, either upon the
request of the Chair thereof or the officer or official involved, or when in the Selectmen's
opinion any matter before such board, officer or official has significant legal implications to
the Town, and in either instance to furnish a legal opinion upon any subject respecting the
official duties of the board, officer or official;
k. to prepare, when requested, any article for the Warrant for any Town Meeting and to review
all articles and motions for form and legal sufficiency.
l. to make a monthly report to the Selectmen on all actions taken during the preceding month
and to other Town boards, officers and officials on legal matters which occurred during the
preceding month and specifically relate to such board, officer or official; and
m. to make an annual report of the work done during the preceding year and the status of all
business and litigation pending at the close of that year.
25.5. Special Counsel. Unless expressly authorized by statute, a vote of Town Meeting, or vote of the
Selectmen, no board, officer or official of the Town shall engage, whether or not for remuneration, any
attorney, other than Town Counsel, with regard to its or his official duties, or any Town business, or the
business of any of the departments thereof. The Selectmen may, whenever they deem necessary, employ
special counsel to assist or act in place of Town Counsel.
ARTICLE 26. TOWN CLERK
26.1. Office. The Town shall have an elected Town Clerk who shall be a registered voter of the
Town.
26.2. Term of Office. The term of office shall be three years.
26.3. Duties. The Town Clerk shall:
a. Have the powers and duties of Town Clerks under Chapter 41 and other provisions of the
General Laws;
b. Perform those duties given to the Town Clerk by these bylaws, the Town Zoning Bylaws
and Chapter 202 of the Acts of 1932 as amended;
c. Furnish all boards, officers and officials with a copy of all Town Meeting votes affecting
them and furnish all board members at the time they take their oath with copies of the
current bylaws, Chapter 202 of the Acts of 1932, as amended, and the Open Meeting
Law;
d. Cause the reports (other than annual reports) of all boards, officials and officers
presented to the Town to be entered in full in a suitably indexed book, which shall be
known as the Book of Reports, such reports being numbered for each year in order of
their presentation, with marginal references to the dates of the meetings to which they
were respectively presented, and cause to be entered upon the record of each Town
Meeting only such portions of such reports as may be necessary for the understanding of
the action taken by the Town in each instance, together with the number of such report as
entered in the Book of Reports;
e. Notify, as soon as practicable, each person elected or appointed to a board or office of
such election or appointment;
f. Cause to be printed in suitable booklet form for limited distribution a copy of the record
of the entire proceedings of the Town Meeting, said record to be printed in such quantity
as the Town Clerk estimates is necessary to satisfy the usual demand; and
g. Furnish the Selectmen for publication in the Annual Town Report a copy of the motions
presented and the action taken thereon under all articles in the warrants for every Town
Meeting held the preceding fiscal year.
h. Conduct an annual census. (New Section ATM 2005, Article 37)
26.4. Notice to Town Meeting Members. Not later than 60 days before the Town election at
which a Town Meeting Member's term will expire, the Town Clerk shall notify the member of the
provisions of Chapter 202, Section 5 of the Acts of 1932, regarding candidacy for re-election.
26.5. List of Board Members. The Town Clerk is responsible for maintaining a list of current
members of all boards and their current addresses.
26.6. General Provisions. The Town Clerk shall also be governed by the applicable provisions of
Articles 2 through 7 of these bylaws and other provisions of these bylaws applicable generally to boards,
except as the Town Clerk is specifically directed by law or a provision of these bylaws to act otherwise.
26.7. Fees. The fees of the Town Clerk shall be as follows: (Amended ATM 2019, approved by
Attorney General May 7, 2019, effective May 9, 2019 pending 90 day waiting period.)
Item Fee
Marriage Certificates $10.00
Death Certificates $10.00
Birth Certificates $10.00
Marriage Intentions $30.00
Business Certificates (D/B/A) $60.00
Voter Identification $8.00
For Filing and Indexing Assignment for the
Benefit of Creditors $25.00
For Entering Amendment of a Record of the Birth of a Child
Born Out of Wedlock Subsequently Legitimized $20.00
For Correcting Errors in a Record of Birth $20.00
For Entering Delayed Record of Birth $30.00
For Registration of a Home Birth $50.00
For Filing by a Person Conducting Business Under Any Title Other
Than His Real Name a Statement of Change of His Residence, or of
His Discontinuance, or Change of Location of Such Business $30.00
For Furnishing Certified Copy of Certificate of Person Conducting
Business Under Any Title Other Than His Real Name or a Statement
by Such Person of His Discontinuance, Retirement or
Withdrawal from Such Business $ 5.00
For Recording the Name and Address, the Date and Number of the
Certificate Issued to a Person Registered for the Practice of
Podiatry in the Commonwealth $50.00
For Correcting Errors in a Record of Death $20.00
For Entering Certificate of Marriage Filed by
Persons Married Out of the Commonwealth $10.00
For Correcting Errors in a Record of Marriage $20.00
For Recording Power of Attorney $20.00
For Recording Certificate of Registration Granted to a Person
Engaged in the Practice of Optometry, or
Issuing a Certified Copy Thereof $50.00
For Recording the Name of the Owner of a Certificate of
Registration as a Physician or Osteopath in the Commonwealth $50.00
For Recording Order Granting Locations of Poles,
Piers, Abutments or Conduits, Alterations or
Transfers Thereof, and Increase in Number of Wires
and Cable Attachments Under the Provisions of
SEC. 22 of Chapter 166 of the General Laws $50.00
&25.00
Additional for Streets
For Examining Records or Papers Relating to Birth, Marriage or
Deaths Upon the Application of any Person, the Actual Expense
Thereof, but Not Less Than $10.00
For Copying any Manuscript or Record Pertaining
to a Birth, Marriage or Death $5.00
Per Page
For Receiving and Filing a Complete Inventory of $10.00
All Items to be Included in a “Close-Out” Sale 1st Page
$ 2.00
Each Additional
For Filing a Copy of Written Instrument or Declaration
of Trust by Trustees of an Association or Trust,
or any Amendment Thereof As Provided by Sec 2
Chapter 182 of the General Laws $20.00
Publications:
- Residence Book or CD $15.00
- Zoning Bylaw Book $20.00
- Town Bylaw Book $15.00
- Large Maps $10.00
- Small Maps $ 5.00
ARTICLE 27. BOARD OF REGISTRARS OF VOTERS
27.1. Membership. The Town shall have a Board of Registrars of Voters consisting of the Town
Clerk ex officio and three other registered voters of the Town appointed by the Selectmen in the manner
prescribed by Section 15 of Chapter 51 of the General Laws.
27.2. Term. The term of office for registrars other than the Town Clerk shall be three years
commencing on April 1.
27.3. General Duties. The Board shall have the powers and duties of boards of registrars of voters
under Chapter 51 of the General Laws. These include the registration of voters.
27.4. Budget. The Board shall prepare an annual budget which shall be submitted by the Board in
accordance with Sections 6.15. and 6.16.
27.5. Annual Report. The Town Clerk shall submit the annual report of the Board required by Article
4.
27.6. General Provisions. The Board shall also be governed by Articles 2 through 7 of these bylaws
and other provisions of these bylaws applicable generally to all boards, except as it is specifically directed by
law or a provision of these bylaws to act otherwise.
ARTICLE 28. MUNICIPAL LIGHT BOARD
28.1. Membership. The Town shall have a Municipal Light Board consisting of five residents, three
of whom shall be the members of the Board of Public Works and two of whom shall be appointed by the
Board of Selectmen. In making their appointments, the Selectmen shall seek to better assure that members of
the Board have a mix of skills and experience helpful to the governance of the Municipal Light Plant,
including, but not limited to, backgrounds in relevant technology, business, management, law and/or
accounting.
28.2. Term. The term of office shall be three years.
28.3. General Duties. Under relevant special acts and Chapter 164 of the Massachusetts General
Laws, the Board shall have the powers and duties of Municipal Light Commissioners. The Board shall meet
no less frequently than monthly for the purpose of reviewing Municipal Light Plant operations and financial
performance.
28.4. Manager of the Municipal Light Plant. The Board shall appoint the Manager of the Municipal
Light Plant, who shall have the powers and duties of managers of Municipal Light Plants as set forth in
Chapter 164 s.56, of the General Laws. The Manager of the Municipal Light Plant shall have charge of the
operation of the plant and distribution of electricity, the purchase of supplies, the employment of attorneys
and agents, the provision of service, and the keeping of accounts.
28.5. Reports. In addition to the requirements of Article 4, the Board shall report quarterly to the
Board of Selectmen, said reports to include an analysis of actual financial results compared to budget, an
explanation of significant variances from plan and a management discussion of operations of the Light Plant.
The Board shall report annually to Town Meeting, said report to include not only a summary of its quarterly
financial reports to the Selectmen for the year, but also a detailed management discussion of its progress in
achieving increases in productivity, of the control of operating costs, of its performance relative to
comparable municipal light plants in other communities and of its coordination with other boards and
departments of the Town. The Board shall also include in its annual report to Town Meeting a discussion of
its long range plans and of its progress against them.
28.6 Policies. The Board shall publish its mission statement and its policies and shall seek the advice
of the citizen owners and ratepayers of the Municipal Light Plant through public hearings and through their
representatives at Town Meeting and on the Board of Selectmen before making any changes thereto.
28.7 General Provisions. The Board shall also be governed by Articles 2 through 7 of these Bylaws
and other provisions of these Bylaws applicable generally to all Boards, except as it is specifically directed by
law or a provision of these Bylaws to act otherwise.
ARTICLE 29. BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS
29.1. Membership. The Town shall have an elected Board of Public Works consisting of three
residents.
29.2. Term. The term of office shall be three years.
29.3. General Duties. Under relevant special acts and Chapter 41, Sections 69C through 69F, the
Board shall have the powers and duties of road commissioners, surveyors of highways, superintendent of
streets, water commissioners, and sewer commissioners. The Board shall also:
a. Establish policies for reduction, reuse, recycling, collection and disposal of garbage and
solid waste, including regulations governing the use of the Recycling and Disposal
Facility, said regulations also to establish such fines and other penalties for infractions of
said regulations as the Board of Public Works shall deem appropriate, not to exceed
however, $200 (two hundred dollars) for any offense, each violation to constitute a
separate offense. Regulations providing for fines or other penalties shall be implemented
only after a public hearing and shall be subject to the procedure governing non-criminal
disposition as set forth in Article 52 of these Bylaws.
b. provide engineering services for the Town;
c. provide maintenance or other related services for those Town departments requesting
such maintenance or service;
d. carry out maintenance, tasks and work affecting natural resources in accordance with
general policies established by the Natural Resources Commission pursuant to Section
43.4.c., except when the public safety and welfare requires the Department instead to
perform other maintenance, tasks or work on a temporary basis;
e. establish rules and regulations to effectively prohibit pollutants and non-storm water
discharges from entering the Town’s storm water collection system, said regulations also
to establish such fines and other penalties for infractions of said regulations as the Board
of Public Works shall deem appropriate, not to exceed however, $200 (two hundred
dollars) for any offense, each violation to constitute a separate offense. Regulations
providing for fines or other penalties shall be implemented only after a public hearing and
shall be subject to the procedure governing non-criminal disposition as set forth in Article
52 of these Bylaws. (Section added ATM 2004, Art. 29)
f. serve as the Board designated by the Town to issue permits for the excavation of trenches
on privately owned land and on public ways within the Town. Said Board shall establish
rules and regulations to effectively regulate the same, said regulations also to establish such
fines and other penalties for infractions of said regulations as the Board of Public Works
shall deem appropriate, not to exceed, however, $200 (two hundred dollars) for any
offense, each violation to constitute a separate offense. Regulations providing for fines or
other penalties shall be implemented only after a public hearing and shall be subject to the
procedure governing non-criminal disposition as set forth in Article 52 of these Bylaws.
(Section added, ATM 2009, Art 37)
29.4. Director of Public Works. The Board shall appoint a Director of Public Works who shall:
a. have the qualifications prescribed in the General Laws;
b. hold office subject to the will of the Board;
c. exercise and perform, under the supervision of the Board, such of the powers and duties
of the Board as it may delegate to the Director.
29.5. Utilities. The water and sewer facilities shall be under the charge and control of the Board,
subject to applicable statutes. The Board shall fix rates and charges for these services, and enact policies and
procedures in connection with the operation, extensions, and services of those facilities.
29.6. Town Engineer. The Board shall appoint the Town Engineer who shall:
a. have the qualifications prescribed in the General Laws;
b. be in charge of the engineering work provided by the Department, subject to the direction
and control of the Director.
29.7. Budgets. The Board shall present to the Advisory Committee separate budgets for the several
divisions under its control.
29.8. Annual Report. In addition to the requirements of Article 4, the Board's annual report shall
include:
a. all engineering work and all work done on the public ways, the water and sewer plants,
and collection and disposal of garbage and solid waste;
b. all work done at the request of the Natural Resources Commission;
c. all work done at the request of other Town departments;
d. a review of the condition of the waterworks and sewerage plants; and
e. a review of the condition of other facilities under the Board's control.
29.9. General Provisions. The Board shall also be governed by Articles 2 through 7 of these Bylaws
and other provisions of these Bylaws applicable generally to all boards, except as it is specifically directed by
law or a provision of these Bylaws to act otherwise.
29.10. Temporary Minor Repairs to Private Ways. The Town may make temporary minor repairs to
private ways which have been opened to public use for two years or more and provided that such repairs are
required by public necessity as shall be determined solely by the Board of Public Works. Such repairs shall
be made only if petitioned for by the majority of the abutters, except in the case of special emergency
involving the health or safety of people or their property as determined by said Board in its sole discretion.
Cash deposits or payments shall not be required and betterment charges shall not be assessed for said repairs.
The extent and type of repairs shall be determined by the Board of Public Works and shall only include the
filling in of holes or depressions with material to be the same as, or similar to, those materials existing on
such ways; but shall not include drainage. The Town shall not incur any liability whatsoever on account of
action or inaction resulting pursuant to this Bylaw.
ARTICLE 30. HUMAN RESOURCES BOARD (Renamed ATM 2000)
30.1. Membership. The Town shall have a Human Resources Board consisting of five residents
appointed by the Moderator. No member shall be a member of another board, or an officer, official or paid
employee of the Town, except that a Town Meeting Member may be a member of the Board. At least two
members shall have either education or experience in personnel management or labor relations.
30.2. Term. The term of office shall be three years commencing on July 1.
30.3. Administer Plans. The Board shall administer the Classification and Salary Plans, and shall
establish policies and procedures, consistent with those Plans, as it deems necessary for the administration
thereof.
30.4. Human Resources Director. The Board shall appoint a Human Resources Director and such
staff as it deems necessary.
30.5. Review Work. The Board shall, as necessary and appropriate and consistent with good human
resources practices, review the work of all positions subject to the Classification Plan. Such reviews shall be
so scheduled as to respond to requests by department heads or upon the Board’s initiative when it becomes
aware of circumstances that indicate that a review is appropriate. As a result of such review, the Board may
tentatively add a new position to the Classification Plan or reclassify an existing position to a different group
subject to the subsequent ratification of its action by a formal amendment of the Classification Plan at the next
annual or special Town Meeting. (Amended ATM 2010 Art 6, m 1)
30.6. Review Salary Plan. The Board shall, from time to time, review the Salary Plan. It shall keep
informed as to pay rates and policies outside the service of the Town, and shall recommend to the Town any
action which it deems desirable to maintain a fair and equitable pay level.
30.7. Variances in Salary Plan. Upon recommendation of an officer supported by evidence in writing
of special reasons and exceptional circumstances satisfactory to the Board, the Board may authorize an
entrance rate higher than the minimum rate for a position, and such other variances in the Salary Plan as it
may deem necessary for the proper functioning of the services of the Town.
30.8. Recruitment. The Board shall recruit applicants for positions in the Classification Plan.
30.9. Records. The Board shall maintain such records as are necessary to comply with fair
employment practice laws and the rules of appropriate regulatory agencies, and maintain personnel records of
all employees in the Classification Plan, including therein such information as it deems desirable.
30.10. Personnel Policies Nonunion Employees. The Board shall recommend personnel policies and
procedures to all boards, officers and officials relating to their employees, and shall establish subject to
approval by Town Meeting and administer such procedures and policies for all Town employees not covered
by collective bargaining agreements.
30.11. Compliance Advice. The Board shall advise all boards, officers and officials as to compliance
with applicable fair employment practice laws and other applicable state and federal laws and regulations.
30.12. Collective Bargaining Agent. The Board shall act as the collective bargaining agent for the
School Committee when so directed by that Committee, or for any other board when so directed by the
Selectmen.
30.13. Civil Service Law. Nothing in this article, or in the Salary Plan, shall be construed to conflict
with Chapter 31 of the General Laws.
30.14. Requests for Information. All boards, officers, officials and employees thereof shall furnish
such information to the Human Resources Board as it shall request in the performance of its duties.
30.15. General Provisions. The Board shall also be governed by Articles 2 through 7 of these bylaws
and other provisions of these bylaws applicable generally to all boards, except as it is specifically directed by
law or a provision of these bylaws to act otherwise.
ARTICLE 31. CLASSIFICATION AND SALARY PLANS
31.1. Classification Plan. The positions of all officers and employees in the service of the Town
(whether full time, part time, seasonal, casual, special, Civil Service, or others) other than those positions
filled by popular election and those under the direction and control of the School Committee, are hereby
classified by titles in the groups listed in Schedule A entitled "Job Classification by Groups" which follows
this article and is made a part hereof. (See Appendix)
31.2. New or Changed Positions. Whenever a new position is established that is not included in a
collective bargaining unit, or the duties of an existing position not included in a collective bargaining unit are
so changed that in effect a new position is created, upon presentation of substantiating data satisfactory to the
Human Resources Board, the Board shall allocate such new or changed position to its appropriate group. The
allocation of new or changed positions included in collective bargaining units shall be subject to negotiations
as required by Chapter 150E of the Massachusetts General Laws. (Amended ATM 2010 Art 6)
31.3. Titles of Positions. No person shall be appointed, employed or paid as an employee in any
position subject to the provisions of the Classification Plan under any title other than those of the
Classification Plan or under any title other than that of the job the duties of which are actually performed.
The job title in the Plan shall be the official title for all purposes having to do with the position and shall be
used to designate the position in all payrolls, budget estimates and official reports, and in every other
connection involving personnel and fiscal processes.
31.4. Reclassification of Employees. No employee may be reclassified to a job in another group,
either higher or lower, until the Human Resources Board shall have determined such reclassification will be
consistent with the Classification and Salary Plans. There shall be only one reclassification in any twelvemonth
period for any employee except in unusual circumstances.
31.5. Job Descriptions. The Human Resources Board shall maintain written job descriptions of the
jobs, or positions, in the Classification Plan, describing the essential characteristics, requirements and general
duties of the jobs. The descriptions shall not be interpreted as complete or limiting definitions of any job, and
employees shall continue in the future, as in the past, to perform any duties assigned by department heads,
supervisors, or other administrative authority.
31.6. Salary Plan. A Salary Plan is to be established by vote of the Town Meeting to provide
minimum and maximum salaries, or single rate salaries, for the groups and positions in the Classification
Plan. The salary range, or rate, of a group shall be the salary range, or rate, for all positions classified in the
group.
31.7. Amendment to Plans. The Classification and Salary Plans may be amended by a majority vote
of Town Meeting. (Amended ATM 2001) No amendment of either plan shall be made until it has been
presented by signed petition to the Human Resources Board and acted upon by the Board. Upon receipt of
such a petition, the Board, after giving the petitioners, the heads of the departments and employees affected at
least three days' written notice, shall hold a hearing of the parties interested to consider the proposed
amendment. If the Human Resources Board shall fail to act on an amendment so presented within fifteen
days after the hearing thereon, the Board shall be deemed to have disapproved the amendment. The petition
may then be presented to the Town Meeting, if so desired. The Board may, of its own motion, after a similar
hearing of the parties interested, propose an amendment to either Plan.
ARTICLE 33. COUNCIL ON AGING
33.1. Membership. The Town shall have a Council on Aging consisting of eleven residents appointed
by the Selectmen.
33.2. Term. The term of office shall be three years commencing on July 1.
33.3. General Duties. The Council shall have the powers and duties of councils on aging under
Section 8B of Chapter 40 of the General Laws. These include:
a. coordinating and implementing programs designed to meet the needs of the aging in
coordination with programs of the Massachusetts Department of Elder Affairs; and
b. maintaining communication with those boards and organizations who may have an
interest in the aging.
33.4. Director of Senior Services. The Council shall appoint a Director of Senior Services and such
staff as it deems necessary.
33.5. Budget. The Council shall prepare an annual budget. The budget is subject to approval by the
Selectmen. The Selectmen are responsible for presenting the budget to the Advisory Committee and for
presenting the motion for the budget appropriation to Town Meeting.
33.6. Annual Report. In addition to the requirements of Article 4, the Council shall send a copy of its
annual report to the Massachusetts Department of Elder Affairs.
33.7. General Provisions. The Council shall also be governed by Articles 2 through 7 of these
bylaws and other provisions of these bylaws applicable generally to all boards, except as it is specifically
directed by law or a provision of these bylaws to act otherwise.
ARTICLE 34. BOARD OF HEALTH
34.1. Membership. The Town shall have an elected Board of Health consisting of three registered
voters of the Town.
34.2. Term. The term of office shall be three years.
34.3. General Duties. The Board shall have the duties and powers of boards of health under the
General Laws, particularly Chapter 111. These include protecting and preserving the health and well-being of
the public.
34.4. Director. The Board shall appoint a Director of Public Health and other personnel as it deems
necessary.
34.5. Regulations. All regulations made by the Board under Chapter 111 of the General Laws shall
be published once in a newspaper generally circulated in the Town. Such publication shall be notice to all
persons.
34.5A. Clean Indoor Air in Food Service Establishments.
Section I Definitions
a. Smoking shall mean the lighting of, or having possession of any lighted cigarette, cigar,
pipe or other tobacco product.
b. Food Service Establishment shall mean any establishment which is required by State Law
to be licensed by the Board of Health in accordance with the provisions of the State
Sanitary Code, Article X "Minimum Sanitation Standards for Food Service
Establishments", in order to prepare and serve food to the general public.
c. Nonsmoking area means that area in the dining area of a food service establishment
where smoking by employer or patron is prohibited.
d. Smoking areas mean all other areas of food service establishments except where smoking
is prohibited by sanitation or fire safety codes or regulations.
Section II Regulated Conduct
a. No person shall smoke in any establishment required to be licensed as a Food Service
Establishment except in specifically designated smoking areas.
b. Smoking areas may be designated by proprietors or other persons in charge of the above
establishment, except in places in which smoking is prohibited by the Chief Fire Engineer
or by other law or regulation. Designated smoking areas shall comprise no more than
75% of the establishment. Where smoking areas are designated existing physical barriers
and/or ventilation systems shall be used to minimize the effects of smoke on persons in
adjacent nonsmoking areas.
c. In the case of establishments consisting of a single room the requirement of this bylaw
shall be considered met, if one side of the room is reserved and posted as a nonsmoking
area, and provided that no less than 25% of the seating capacity is designated as a
nonsmoking area.
Section III Exemptions
a. Establishments with a seating capacity of less than 40 persons are exempt from this
bylaw.
b. In cases where an entire establishment or room in an establishment is taken over for a
private function, this bylaw shall not apply.
c. Establishments that have voluntarily provided a designated nonsmoking area as requested
by the Board of Health shall be exempt from this bylaw for as long as their voluntary
system is maintained.
Section IV Implementation and Enforcement
a. The proprietor or other person in charge of a restaurant shall make reasonable efforts to
prevent smoking in the nonsmoking area by:
1. posting appropriate signs;
2. arranging seating so that existing physical barriers and ventilation systems minimize
the effects of smoking in a smoking area upon patrons in an adjacent nonsmoking
area;
3. directing patrons seated in nonsmoking areas to refrain from smoking; and
4. any other means which may be appropriate.
b. The Wellesley Board of Health may adopt rules and regulations to help effectuate the
purpose of this bylaw.
c. Any person who smokes in a nonsmoking area after notice from the person in charge that
such conduct violates this bylaw shall be subject to a fine of not less than ten (10) dollars
or more than thirty (30) dollars.
d. The Wellesley Board of Health or any person aggrieved by the willful failure of the
proprietor or other person in charge of a restaurant to comply with any provision of the
bylaw may seek injunctive or other relief to enforce the provisions of this bylaw in a
court of competent jurisdiction.
e. Nothing in this bylaw shall make lawful smoking in any area which smoking is or
hereafter be prohibited by law.
Section V Severability
a. If any provision of this bylaw is declared invalid or unenforceable the other provisions
shall not be effected thereby.
34.5B. Clean Indoor Air in Public Buildings.
Section I Definitions
a. Public Buildings as used in this bylaw shall mean every public building owned and
controlled by the Town of Wellesley.
b. Smoking shall mean the lighting of any cigar, cigarette, pipe or other tobacco product.
Section II Regulated Conduct
a. There shall be no smoking in any public building. This prohibition shall extend to all
enclosed structures owned or operated by the Town.
Section III Implementation and Enforcement
a. Any person who smokes in a nonsmoking area after notice from the person in charge that
such conduct violates this bylaw shall be subject to a fine of not less than ten (10) dollars
or more than thirty (30) dollars.
b. The Wellesley Board of Health or any person aggrieved by the willful failure of the
proprietor or other person in charge of a work place to comply with any provision of the
bylaw may seek injunctive or other relief to enforce the provisions of this bylaw in a
court of competent jurisdiction.
c. Nothing in this bylaw shall make lawful smoking in any area in which smoking is or may
hereafter be prohibited by law.
Section IV Severability
a. If any provision of this bylaw is declared invalid or unenforceable the other provisions
shall not be effected thereby.
34.5C. Single-Use Plastic Check-Out Bag Reduction. (New Section ATM 2016- subject to attorney general
review)
Section I Findings and Purpose
Plastic check-out bags have a significant impact on the marine and terrestrial environment, including but not
limited to: 1) harming marine and terrestrial animals through ingestion and entanglement; 2) polluting and
degrading the terrestrial and marine environments; 3) clogging storm drainage systems; 4) creating a burden
for solid waste disposal and recycling facilities; 5) requiring the use of non-renewable fossil-fuel in their
composition. Studies have shown that even alternative “compostable” or “biodegradable” bags require very
specific and controlled conditions in order to biodegrade, and have potentially negative environmental effects
similar to conventional plastic bags. Such bags should therefore be subject to the same restrictions as
conventional plastic check-out bags.
The purpose of this Bylaw is to protect the Town’s unique natural beauty and irreplaceable natural resources
by reducing the number of single-use plastic check-out bags that are distributed in the Town of Wellesley and
to promote the use of reusable bags.
Section II Definitions
The following words shall, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, have the following meanings:
a. “Check-out bag” shall mean a bag provided by a store to a customer at the point of sale. Check-out bags
shall not include bags, whether plastic or not, in which loose produce or products are placed by the consumer
to deliver such items to the point of sale or check out area of the store.
b. “Department” shall mean the Wellesley Health Department.
c. “Health Agent” shall mean the Health Agent for the Wellesley Board of Health or his/her designee.
d. “Recyclable paper bag” shall mean a paper bag that is 100% recyclable and contains at least 40% postconsumer
recycled content, and displays in a visible manner on the outside of the bag (1) the word
“recyclable” or a symbol identifying the bag as recyclable and (2) a label identifying the bag as being made
from post-consumer recycled content and the percentage of post-consumer recycled content in the bag.
e. “Reusable Check-out bag” shall mean a sewn bag with stitched handles that is specifically designed for
multiple reuse and that (1) can carry 25 pounds over a distance of 300 feet; (2) is machine washable; and, (3)
is either (a) made of natural fibers (such as cotton or linen); or (b) made of durable, non-toxic plastic other
than polyethylene or polyvinyl chloride that is generally considered a food-grade material that is more than 4
mils thick.
f. “Retail Establishment” shall mean any business facility that sells goods directly to the consumer whether
for or not for profit, including, but not limited to, retail stores, restaurants, pharmacies, convenience and
grocery stores, liquor stores, seasonal and temporary businesses.
g. “Thin-Film, Single-Use Plastic Check-Out Bags” shall mean those bags typically with handles,
constructed of high-density polyethylene (HDPE), low density polyethylene (LDPE), linear low density
polyethylene (LLDPE), polyvinyl chloride (PVC), polyethylene terephthalate (PET), or polypropylene (other
than woven and non-woven polypropylene fabric), if said film is less than 4.0 mils in thickness.
Section III Regulated Conduct
a. No Retail Establishment in the Town of Wellesley shall provide Thin-Film, Single-Use Plastic
Check-Out Bags to customers.
b. If a Retail Establishment provides or sells Check-Out Bags to customers, the bags must be one of the
following:
1. Recyclable paper bag; or
2. Reusable Check-Out bag.
Section IV Exemption: Thin-film plastic bags typically without handles which are used to contain dry
cleaning, newspapers, produce, meat, bulk foods, wet items, and other similar merchandise are not prohibited
under this bylaw.
Section V Enforcement
a. The Board of Health and its Health Agent shall have the authority to administer and enforce this
bylaw.
b. For the first violation, the enforcing authority, upon a determination that a violation has occurred,
shall issue a written warning notice to the establishment specifying the violation.
c. The following penalties shall apply:
1. A fine of $50 shall apply for the first violation following the issuance of a written warning
notice.
2. A fine of $100 shall apply for the second violation and each additional violation of this bylaw
after the issuance of a written warning notice.
d. Fines shall be cumulative and each day on which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
Section VI Effective Date
a. This bylaw shall take effect six (6) months following approval of the bylaw by the Attorney General
or on January 1, 2017, whichever is later for Retail Establishments with a floor area equal to or exceeding
3,500 square feet or with at least two (2) locations under the same name within the Town of Wellesley that
total 3,500 square feet or more. This ordinance shall take effect one (1) year after passage for Retail
Establishments less than 3,500 square feet. The Director may exempt a Retail Establishment from the
requirements of this section for a period of up to six (6) months upon a finding by the Director that (1) the
requirements of this section would cause undue hardship; or (2) a Retail Establishment requires additional
time in order to draw down an existing inventory of thin-film, single-use check-out plastic bags.
Section VII Regulations
a. The Board of Health may adopt and amend rules and regulations to effectuate the purposes of this
bylaw.
Section VIII Severability
a. If any provision of this bylaw is declared invalid or unenforceable the other provisions shall not be
affected thereby.
34.6. General Provisions. The Board shall also be governed by Articles 2 through 7 of these
bylaws and other provisions of these bylaws applicable generally to all boards, except as it is specifically
directed by law or a provision of these bylaws to act otherwise.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
ARTICLE 35. HOUSING AUTHORITY
(Amended ATM 2018.)
35.1. Membership. The Town shall have a Housing Authority consisting of five residents, four
elected by the Town and one appointed by the Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community
Development.
35.2. Term. The term of office shall be five years.
35.3. Vacancy. A vacancy in the appointed position shall be filled by the Massachusetts Department
of Housing and Community Development for the balance of the unexpired term. A vacancy among the
elected members shall be filled as provided in Section 7.3.
35.4. Conflict of Interest. Any member of the Authority who is a tenant in a housing project shall
not participate in any decision relating to the project affecting his personal interest, in compliance with
Chapter 121B, Section 6 of the General Laws.
35.5. General Powers and Duties. The Authority shall have the powers and duties of such housing
authorities under Chapter 121B of the General Laws. These include planning, constructing, operating, and
maintaining housing for families, veterans, and elderly of low income.
35.6. Officers and Employees. The Authority shall elect from its members a chair and vice chair,
and may employ counsel, an executive director who shall be ex officio secretary of the Authority, a treasurer
who may be a member of the Authority, and such other officers, agents, and employees as it deems
necessary. The Authority shall determine the qualifications, duties, and compensation for its members,
officers, agents, and employees.
35.7. Relationship with Town. So far as practicable, the Authority shall make use of the services of
the agencies, officers, and employees of the Town, and the Town shall, if requested, make available such
services. Further permitted municipal acts and activities to aid the authority are set forth in said Chapter
121B, Section 23.
35.8. Records and Reports. The Authority shall keep an accurate account of all its activities,
receipts and expenditures and shall report to the Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community
Development, the State Auditor and the Selectmen annually.
35.9. General Provisions. The Authority shall also be governed by Articles 2 through 7 of these
bylaws and other provisions of these bylaws applicable generally to all boards, except as it is specifically
directed by law or a provision of these bylaws to act otherwise.
ARTICLE 36. BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE WELLESLEY FREE LIBRARY
36.1. Membership. The Town shall have an elected Board of Trustees of the Wellesley Free Library
consisting of six residents.(Amended ATM 2000)
36.2. Term. The term of office shall be three years.
36.3. General Duties. The Board shall have the powers and duties of boards of library trustees under
Chapter 78 of the General Laws. These include having the custody and management of the library and of all
the property owned by the Town relating thereto.
36.4. Staff. The Board shall appoint such staff as it deems necessary.
36.5 Annual Reports. The Board shall submit an annual report to the Town in accordance with
Article 4 and Chapter 78, Section 12 of the General Laws. The report shall include its receipts,
expenditures, and the property in its custody.
36.6 General Provisions. The Board shall also be governed by Articles 2 through 7 of these bylaws
and other provisions of these bylaws applicable generally to all boards, except as it is specifically directed by
law or a provision of these bylaws to act otherwise.
ARTICLE 37. RECREATION COMMISSION
37.1. Membership. The Town shall have an elected Recreation Commission consisting of five
residents.
37.2. Term. The term of office shall be three years.
37.3 General Duties. The Commission shall have the powers and duties of recreation commissions
under Section 14, Chapter 45 of the General Laws. These include:
a. conducting and promoting recreation, play, sport, physical education and other programs
to meet the leisure time needs of the community;
b. maintaining communication with other interested boards, such as the Youth
Commission, Council on Aging, Natural Resources Commission and the School
Committee, and insofar as possible, facilitating programs and events requested by and
on behalf of these interested boards; and
c. making long-range recommendations to the Town with respect to playgrounds and
recreation facilities of the Town.
37.4. Superintendent of Recreation. The Commission shall appoint a Superintendent of Recreation
and such staff as it deems necessary.
37.5. General Provisions. The Commission shall also be governed by Articles 2 through 7 of these
bylaws and other provisions of these bylaws applicable generally to all boards, except as it is specifically
directed by law or a provision of these bylaws to act otherwise.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
ARTICLE 38. SCHOOL COMMITTEE
38.1. Membership. The Town shall have an elected School Committee, consisting of five registered
voters of the Town.
38.2. Term. The term of office shall be three years.
38.3. General Duties. The Committee shall have the powers and duties of school committees under
the General Laws, particularly Chapter 71 other than the general charge and superintendence of the
schoolhouses, which shall be the responsibility of the Facilities Management Department. (ATM 2012.
Amended ATM 2018.)
38.4. Appointment of Superintendent. The Committee shall appoint and fix the compensation for
the Superintendent of Schools.
38.5. Superintendent. Under the direction of the Committee, the superintendent shall:
a. be the executive officer of the Committee;
b. have the care and supervision of the public schools;
c. assist the Committee in keeping its records and accounts and in making such reports as
are required by law; and
d. make recommendations to the Committee regarding teachers, textbooks, and courses of
study.
38.6. Legal Counsel. The Committee may hire legal counsel in accordance with Chapter 71,
Sections 37E and 37F of the General Laws.
38.7. General Provisions. The Committee shall also be governed by Articles 2 through 7 of these
bylaws and other provisions of these bylaws applicable generally to all boards, except as it is specifically
directed by law or a provision of these bylaws to act otherwise.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
ARTICLE 39. DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS' SERVICES
39.1. Department of Veterans' Services. The Town shall have a Department of Veterans' Services.
39.2. General Duties. The Department shall have the powers and duties of departments of veterans'
services under Chapter 115 of the General Laws. These include advising and assisting veterans and their
dependents in procuring veterans' benefits.
39.3. Director. The officer in charge of the Department shall be known as the Director of Veterans'
Services. The Director shall be a veteran and shall be appointed by the Executive Director. (Amended ATM
2018.)
39.4. Advisory Board. The Department may have an unpaid advisory board consisting of five
residents to be appointed by the Selectmen in accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated by the
Commission of Veterans' Services of the Commonwealth. The term of office on the Board shall be three
years commencing on July 1.
39.5. Veterans’ Grave Officer. Annually, in April, the Selectmen shall appoint a resident, as a
veterans' grave officer. The veterans’ graves officer shall be a veteran as defined by M.G.L. c. 4, § 43 The
officer shall cause every veteran's grave within the Town to be suitably kept and cared for. (Amended ATM
2018.)
39.6. Budget. The Department shall prepare an annual budget. The budget is subject to approval by
the Selectmen. The Selectmen are responsible for presenting the budget to the Advisory Committee and for
presenting the motion for the budget appropriation to Town Meeting.
39.7 General Provisions. The Department shall also be governed by the applicable provisions of
Articles 2 through 7 of these bylaws and other provisions of these bylaws applicable generally to all boards,
except as it is specifically directed by law or a provision of these bylaws to act otherwise.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
ARTICLE 40. YOUTH COMMISSION
40.1. Membership. The Town shall have a Youth Commission consisting of five residents
appointed by the Board of Selectmen. (Amended ATM 2018.)
40.2. Term. The term of office shall be three years commencing on July 1.
40.3. General Duties.
a. coordinating and implementing programs which may be designed or established with the
approval of the Board of Selectmen to meet the opportunities, challenges, and problems
of the youth of the Town;
b. maintaining communication with those boards and local organizations, such as the
School Committee, Recreation Commission, and Board of Health, which may have an
interest in youth.
40.4. Director of Youth Services. The Executive Director of General Government shall appoint a
Director of Youth Services subject to the approval of the Youth Commission.
40.5. Budget. The Commission shall prepare an annual budget. The budget is subject to approval
by the Selectmen. The Selectmen are responsible for presenting the budget to the Advisory Committee and
for presenting the motion for the budget appropriation to Town Meeting.
40.6. General Provisions. The Commission shall also be governed by Articles 2 through 7 of these
bylaws and other provisions of these bylaws applicable generally to all boards, except as it is specifically
directed by law or a provision of these bylaws to act otherwise.
ARTICLE 41. BOARD OF APPEALS
41.1. Membership. In accordance with Section XXIV of the Zoning Bylaws of the Town, the Town
shall have a Zoning Board of Appeals consisting of three members appointed by the Selectmen for three year
terms.
41.2. General Duties. The Board shall have the powers and duties of zoning boards of appeals under
the General Laws, particularly Chapter 40A. These include deciding zoning appeals and acting on
applications for special permits and variances.
41.3. Rules. The Board shall adopt rules as required by Chapter 40A, Section 12 of the General
Laws.
41.4. General Provisions. The Board shall also be governed by Articles 2 through 7 of these bylaws
and other provisions of these bylaws applicable generally to all boards, except as it is specifically directed by
law or a provision of these bylaws to act otherwise.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
ARTICLE 42. BOARD OF ASSESSORS
42.1. Membership. The Town shall have an elected Board of Assessors consisting of three
registered voters of the Town.
42.2. Term. The term of office shall be three years.
42.3. General Duties. The Board shall:
a. have all of the powers and duties of boards of assessors under the General Laws;
b. annually make a fair cash valuation of all taxable property, both real and personal,
within the Town;
c. establish the annual tax rate;
d. assess and apportion Town taxes and state and county taxes duly certified to them;
e. enter into contracts for the expert appraisal of taxable property;
f. prepare and maintain for public use a list of valuations indexed alphabetically by owner's
name and a list of valuations indexed by street and house number and shall make
available, when requested, copies of such lists for a reasonable reproduction fee;
g. record and keep current all new valuations and revaluation’s;
h. act upon all applications for abatements and exemptions; and
i. administer the Motor Vehicle Excise Tax on the Town level by supervising the
preparation, processing and issuance of motor vehicle excise tax bills.
j. make available upon the request of and at no cost to a local newspaper, the list of
valuations indexed by street and house number and the list of abatements; and
k. make available upon the request of and at no cost to a property owner, reproductions or
copies of all records (not exempt from public disclosure by law) that were used in setting
the valuation of the owner’s taxable property subject to an application for abatement.
42.4. Chief Assessor. (Amended ATM 2018.) The Assessors shall appoint a Chief Assessor, who
shall:
a. be professionally qualified and experienced in the assessment and apportionment of
taxes and the valuation of property for the purpose of taxation;
b. have a term of one year, commencing on the date of appointment, serving at the
discretion of the Assessors; provided, that if the Assessors fail to appoint a successor
during the month preceding the expiration of said term, the incumbent shall continue to
serve during the following period of one year unless sooner removed. The Chief
Assessor may be reappointed annually without limit;
c. assess and apportion taxes in the Town, subject to the approval of the Board of
Assessors;
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
d. value property in the Town, both real and personal, for the purpose of taxation, subject
to the approval of the Board of Assessors;
e. perform such other duties as the Assessors may require including acting as a hearing
officer in the application for abatements and exemptions, and otherwise assisting the
Assessors in the performance of their duties.
42.5. General Provisions. The Board shall also be governed by Articles 2 through 7 of these bylaws
and other provisions of these bylaws applicable generally to all boards, except as it is specifically directed by
law or a provision of these bylaws to act otherwise.
ARTICLE 43. NATURAL RESOURCES COMMISSION
43.1. Natural Resources. For the purposes of this Article "natural resources" includes without
limitation lakes, ponds, streams, parks, athletic and playing fields, conservation lands, reservations, forests,
watersheds, wetlands, wildlife, plantings, and shade and ornamental trees and shrubs, and other outstanding
natural features.
43.2. Membership. The Town shall have an elected Natural Resources Commission consisting of
five residents.
43.3. Term. The term of office shall be three years.
43.4. General Duties. The Commission shall:
a. have overall authority and responsibility with respect to:
i. the use, acquisition, management, preservation, and protection of conservation
land,
ii. the use, management, preservation, and protection of park land and such
other land as may be transferred to, or acquired by, the Commission,
iii. forest and tree nursery management,
iv. insect pest and moth control, and
v. administration of the Conservation Fund under Sections 5(51) and 8C of Chapter
40 of the General Laws.
b. Study and make recommendations regarding the use, maintenance, management,
preservation, and protection of the natural resources of the Town which are under the
jurisdiction of other boards.
c. Establish general policies to be implemented by the Department of Public Works, as
provided in Section 29.3.d. for the carrying out of maintenance, tasks and work affecting
natural resources, as authorized by Section 43.4.a.
d. Propose for acquisition by the Town those natural resources that the Commission deems
useful or important to the Town.
e. Carry out such other responsibilities as the Town may assign to it or as may be permitted
or required by law.
43.5. Statutory Powers and Duties. The Commission shall have all the powers and duties of
conservation commissions, forest committees, park commissioners, tree wardens, moth superintendents, and
superintendents of insect pest control under the General Laws, particularly under Section 8C of Chapter 40,
and Chapters 45, 87 and 132.
43.6. Director of Natural Resources. The Commission shall appoint a Director of Natural Resources
who shall hold office at the will of the Commission and can be removed only with the consent of at least three
members of the Commission. The Commission may delegate to the Director such duties as they deem
appropriate. The delegation of major responsibilities shall be in writing. The Commission shall appoint such
staff as it deems necessary.
43.7. Wetlands Protection Committee. The Commission shall appoint a Wetlands Protection
Committee consisting of five residents, and may appoint up to two residents as associate members to consider
and vote upon applications under the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act in the case of absence, inability
to act, or conflict of interest on the part of any member or in the event of a vacancy on the Board. The term of
office shall be three years commencing on July l. The Commission shall delegate to the Wetlands Protection
Committee the power and authority to administer and enforce the provisions of the Wetlands Protection Act,
Chapter 131, Section 40 of the General Laws.
43.8. Landscape Advisory Committee. The Commission shall appoint a Landscape Advisory
Committee consisting of three residents. The term of office shall be three years commencing on July 1. This
Committee shall assist, advise and submit plans and recommendations to the Commission for preserving,
improving and enhancing Town-owned natural resources and the beauty of the Town.
43.9. Long-Range Planning Committee. The Commission shall appoint a Long-Range Planning
Committee consisting of five residents. The term of office shall be three years commencing on July 1. This
Committee shall assist, advise and submit plans and recommendations to the Commission pertaining to the
long-range use, acquisition, maintenance, protection and development of open space in, and natural resources
of, the Town.
43.10. Plans. The Commission shall take into consideration all Town and regional plans affecting
the natural resources of the Town.
43.11 General Provisions. The Commission shall also be governed by Articles 2 through 7 of these
bylaws and other provisions of these bylaws applicable generally to all boards, except as it is specifically
directed by law or a provision of these bylaws to act otherwise.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
ARTICLE 44.
WETLANDS PROTECTION
(New Section ATM 2002)
44.1. Purpose. The purpose of this bylaw is to protect the wetlands, related water resources, and
adjoining land areas in the Town of Wellesley by prior review and control of activities deemed by the
Wetlands Protection Committee likely to have a significant or cumulative effect upon wetland interests and
values, including but not limited to the following: public or private water supply, groundwater, flood control,
erosion and sedimentation control, storm damage prevention, water pollution prevention, fisheries, wildlife
habitat, and recreation (collectively, the "wetlands values protected by this bylaw").
44.2. Jurisdiction. Except as permitted by the Wetlands Protection Committee or as provided in this
bylaw, no person shall remove, fill, dredge, build upon, or alter any of the following resource areas; marshes;
wet meadows; bogs; swamps; banks; reservoirs; lakes; ponds; rivers; streams; creeks; lands under reservoirs,
lakes, ponds, rivers, creeks or streams; any wetlands bordering on any of the aforesaid resource areas;
isolated wetlands so long as they cover at least 2,500 square feet of surface area; land within 100 feet of the
aforesaid resource areas; vernal pool habitats; lands within 200 feet of perennial streams or rivers; bordering
land subject to flooding; or isolated land subject to flooding.
44.3. Definitions. Except as otherwise provided in this bylaw or in regulations of the Committee,
the definitions of terms in this bylaw shall be as set forth in the Wetlands Protection Act, General Laws
Chapter 131, Section 40, as amended, or regulations promulgated thereunder.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and implementation of this bylaw.
a. The term “stream” means an open body of running water, including brooks and creeks,
which moves in a definite channel, natural or man-made, in the ground due to a
hydraulic gradient, year-round or intermittent. Such bodies of running water which are
intermittent (do not flow throughout the year) are streams, except for those that serve
only to carry the immediate surface runoff from stormwater or snowmelt. A portion of a
stream may flow through a culvert or beneath a bridge.
b. “Vernal pool habitat" means confined basin depressions which, at least in most years,
hold water for a minimum of two continuous months during the spring or summer, and
which are free of adult fish populations. This includes the area within 100 feet of the
mean annual boundaries of such depressions. Such areas need not lie within other
resource areas subject to this bylaw to be protectable hereby. These areas are essential
breeding habitat and provide other extremely important wildlife habitat functions during
non-breeding seasons as well as for a variety of amphibian species.
44.4. Exemptions. The permit and application required by this article shall not be required for
maintaining, or repairing, but not changing or enlarging, an existing and lawfully located structure or facility
used in the service of the public to provide electric, gas, water, sewer, telephone, telegraph or other
telecommunication services, provided that written notice has been given to the Committee at least 14 days
prior to commencement of work, and provided that the work conforms to performance standards and design
specifications in regulations adopted by the Committee.
The provisions of this bylaw shall not apply to any work performed for normal maintenance or
improvement of land in agricultural use or in aqua cultural use.
The application and permit required by this bylaw shall not be required for emergency projects
necessary for the protection of the health and safety of the public, provided that the work is to be performed
by or has been ordered to be performed by an agency of the Commonwealth or a political subdivision
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
thereof; provided that advance notice, oral or written, has been given to the Committee prior to
commencement of work or within 24 hours after commencement; provided that the Committee or its agent,
in writing, certifies the work as an emergency project; provided that the work is performed only for the time
and place certified by the Committee for the limited purposes necessary to abate the emergency; and
provided that within 21 days of commencement of an emergency project a permit application shall be filed
with the Committee for review as provided by this bylaw. Upon failure to meet these and other requirements
of the Committee, the Committee may, after notice and a public hearing, revoke or modify an emergency
project approval and order restoration and mitigation measures.
Other than stated in this section, the exceptions provided in the Wetlands Protection Act shall not apply
under this article.
44.5. Application for Permits and Requests for Determination. Written application shall be filed
with the Committee to perform activities regulated by this bylaw affecting resource areas protected by this
bylaw. This application shall include such information and plans as are deemed necessary by the Committee
to describe proposed activities and their effects on the environment. No activities shall commence without
receiving and complying with a permit pursuant to this bylaw.
The Committee shall accept as the application and plans under this bylaw the Notice of Intent and
plans filed under the Wetlands Protection Act, General Laws Chapter 131, Section 40, as amended, together
with such other information and plans as is required by this bylaw and regulations issued hereunder.
Any person desiring to know whether or not proposed activity or an area is subject to this bylaw may
in writing request a determination from the Committee. The Committee shall accept a Request for
Determination of Applicability under the Wetlands Protection Act as a request under this bylaw. Such a
request for determination shall contain information and plans specified by the regulations of the Committee.
Any person desiring to certify, for purposes of this bylaw, the limits of resource areas on a site may
file a request for wetland delineation. This application shall include such information and plans as are
deemed necessary by the Committee to describe and define the wetland resource areas. The Committee shall
accept a Notice of Resource Area Delineation under the Wetlands Protection Act as a similar request under
this bylaw.
At the time of an application request, the applicant shall pay a filing fee specified in regulations of
the Committee. This fee is in addition to that required by the Wetlands Protection Act. The Committee,
upon written request, may waive the filing fee for an application or request filed by a government agency.
The Committee may, at the expense of the applicant, retain an independent consultant for the
purpose of providing the Committee with the data, analysis, or other information deemed by the Committee
to be reasonably necessary or appropriate to assist the Committee in reviewing the application or rendering
its decision, in conformity with the provisions of Chapter 44 of the General Laws.
44.6. Notice of Hearings. When appropriate, the Committee may combine its hearing under this
bylaw with the hearing conducted under the Wetlands Protection Act, General Laws Chapter 131, Section
40, as amended.
Any person filing an application with the Committee for a permit or for resource area delineation
certification at the same time shall give written notice thereof, by certified mail (return receipt requested) or
hand delivery, to all abutters at their mailing addresses shown on the most recent applicable tax list of the
assessors, including owners of land directly opposite on any public or private street or way, and abutters to
the abutters within 300 feet of the site of the project or wetland, including any in another municipality or
across a body of water. The notice to abutters shall enclose a copy of the application or request, with plans,
or shall state where copies may be examined and obtained by abutters. When a person requesting a
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
determination is other than the owner, the notice of the hearing shall be sent by the Committee to the owner
as well as to the person making the request.
The Committee shall conduct a public hearing on any application or request for determination, with
written notice given at the expense of the applicant, at least five working days prior to the hearing, in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Town.
The Committee shall commence the public hearing within 21 days from the receipt of a completed
application or request for determination unless an extension is authorized in writing by the applicant. The
hearing under the bylaw may be continued in the same manner and conditions as under the Wetlands
Protection Act and regulations. (Amended ATM 2018.)
The Committee shall issue its permit, its denial of a permit, or its determination in writing within 21
days of the close of the public hearing thereon unless an extension is authorized in writing by the applicant.
44.7. Permits, Determinations, and Conditions If the Committee after a public hearing determines
that the activities which are the subject of the application are likely to have a significant or cumulative effect
upon the wetland values protected by this bylaw, the Committee shall issue or deny a permit for the activities
requested. If it issues a permit, the Committee shall impose conditions which the Committee deems
necessary or desirable to protect those values, and all activities shall be done in accordance with those
conditions.
The Committee is empowered to deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements of this bylaw; for
failure to submit necessary information and plans requested by the Committee; for failure to meet the
performance standards and other requirements in this bylaw and the regulations issued hereunder, for failure
to avoid or prevent unacceptable significant or cumulative effects upon the wetland values protected by this
bylaw, and where no conditions are adequate to protect those values.
A permit shall expire three years from the date of issuance. The Committee may extend a permit for
one or more periods of up to three years each, upon written request made at least 30 days prior to the
expiration of the permit.
For good cause the Committee may revoke or modify a permit issued under this bylaw.
The Committee in an appropriate case may combine the permit or other action on an application
issued under this bylaw with the Order of Conditions issued under the Wetlands Protection Act.
No work proposed in any application shall be undertaken until the permit issued by the Committee
with respect to such work has been recorded in the Norfolk Registry of Deeds or, if the land affected thereby
be registered land, in the registry section of the land court for the Norfolk district, and until the holder of the
permit certifies in writing to the Committee that the permit has been so recorded.
44.8. Regulations After public notice and public hearing, the Committee shall promulgate rules and
regulations to affect the purposes of this bylaw. Failure by the Committee to promulgate such rules and
regulations or a legal declaration of their invalidity by a court of law shall not act to suspend or invalidate the
effect of this bylaw.
At a minimum, these regulations when promulgated shall define key terms in this bylaw not
inconsistent with this bylaw.
44.9. Security As a part of a permit issued under this bylaw, in addition to any security required by
any other municipal or state board, agency or official, the Committee may require that the performance and
observance of the conditions imposed hereunder be secured wholly or in part by one or more of the methods
described below:
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
By a proper bond or deposit of money or negotiable securities or other undertaking of financial
responsibility sufficient in the opinion of the Committee, to be released in whole or in part upon issuance of a
Certificate of Compliance for work performed pursuant to the permit;
By a covenant enforceable in a court of law, executed and duly recorded by the owner of record,
running with the land to the benefit of the municipality whereby the permit conditions shall be performed and
observed before any lot may be conveyed other than by mortgage deed. This method shall be used only with
the consent of the applicant.
44.10. Enforcement No person shall remove, fill, dredge, build upon, degrade, or otherwise alter
resource areas protected by this bylaw, or cause, suffer, or allow such activity, or leave in place unauthorized
fill, or otherwise fail to restore illegally altered land to its original condition, or fail to comply with a permit
or an enforcement order issued pursuant to this bylaw.
The Committee shall have authority to enforce this bylaw, its regulations, and permits issued
thereunder by violation notices, enforcement orders, and civil and criminal court actions.
Upon request of the Committee, Town Counsel shall take legal action for enforcement under civil
law. Upon request of the Committee, the Chief of Police and/or Town Counsel shall take legal action for
enforcement under criminal law.
Municipal boards and officers, including any police officer or other officer having police powers,
shall have authority to assist the Committee in enforcement.
Whoever violates any provision of this bylaw, regulations hereunder, or permits issued hereunder,
shall be punished by a fine of not more than $300. Each day or portion thereof during which a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense, and each provision of the bylaw, regulations, or permit violated
shall constitute a separate offense.
As an alternative to criminal prosecution in a specific case, the Committee may issue citations under
the non-criminal disposition procedure set forth in General Laws Ch. 40, Section 21D, as amended, which
has been adopted by the Town in Article 52 of the general bylaws.
44.11. Burden of Proof The applicant for a permit shall have the burden of proving by a
preponderance of the credible evidence that the work proposed in the application will not have unacceptable
significant or cumulative effect upon the wetland values protected by this bylaw. Failure to provide adequate
evidence to the Committee supporting this burden shall be sufficient cause for the Committee to deny a
permit or grant a permit with conditions.
44.12. Appeals A decision of the Committee shall be reviewable in the Superior Court in an action
filed within 60 days thereof, in accordance with General Laws Chapter 249, Section 4, as amended.
44.13. Relation to the Wetlands Protection Act This bylaw is adopted under the Home Rule
Amendment of the Massachusetts Constitution and the Home Rule statutes, independent of the Wetlands
Protection Act, General Laws Chapter 131, Section 40, as amended, and regulations thereunder.
44.14. Severability The invalidity of any section or provision of this bylaw shall not invalidate any
other section or provision thereof, nor shall it invalidate any permit or determination previously issued.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
ARTICLE 45. PLANNING BOARD
45.1. Membership. The Town shall have an elected Planning Board consisting of five residents and
an associate member who shall be a resident appointed by the Board of Selectmen and Planning Board in
joint session.
45.2. Term. The term of office of elected Planning Board members shall be five years; the term of
office of the associate member shall be two years.
45.3. General Duties. (Amended ATM 2004, Article 32) The Board shall have the powers and
duties of planning boards under the General Laws. These include:
a. controlling subdivision development in accordance with the Subdivision Control Law and
the Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land in Wellesley;
b. making careful studies of the resources, possibilities, and needs of the Town and preparing
therefrom a comprehensive plan for the Town in accordance with Chapter 41, Section 81D,
Massachusetts General Laws;
c. studying and recommending changes in the Town Zoning Bylaw and Zoning Map;
d. appointing members of the Design Review Board;
e. determining the adequacy of unaccepted ways in accordance with Section XIX. YARD
REGULATIONS. of the Zoning Bylaw;
f. considering applications under the Scenic Road Act;
g. considering applications for Projects of Significant Impact in accordance with Section
XVIA. SITE PLAN APPROVAL. of the Zoning Bylaw.
45.4. Planning Director. The Board shall appoint a Planning Director who shall hold office at the
will of the Board and such staff as it deems necessary.
45.5. Annual Report. The Board shall submit an annual report in accordance with Article 4 and
Chapter 41 of the General Laws. It shall also file a copy with the Massachusetts Department of Housing and
Community Development and other agencies as required by law. (Amended ATM 2018.)
45.6. General Provisions. The Board shall also be governed by Articles 2 through 7 of these bylaws
and other provisions of these bylaws applicable generally to all boards, except as it is specifically directed by
law or a provision of these bylaws to act otherwise.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
ARTICLE 46. DESIGN REVIEW BOARD
46.1. Membership. In accordance with Section XXII of the Zoning Bylaws of the Town, the Town
shall have a Design Review Board appointed by the Planning Board to consist of five members and up to
three alternate members.
46.2. General Duties. The Board shall have the powers and duties granted in Section XXII of the
Zoning Bylaws, including the reviewing of requests for special permits on the basis of the design criteria
specified therein.
46.3. Design Review. The Board shall review the design, placement, and artistic appropriateness of
any structure or portion thereof, work of art, ornament, or decoration to be placed on any public way, on
Town lands other than cemeteries, or on or in Town buildings. The Board may use the design criteria
established in Part C of Section XXII of the Zoning Bylaws.
No such structure or portion thereof, work of art, ornament or decoration shall be constructed,
installed, altered, or removed, and no payment shall be paid on account of any such work until:
1. The Board has received plans for the work to be done, and
2. The board, officer, or official undertaking the work has received a written report on the work
from the Board, or thirty days have passed after the plans for the work were submitted to the
Board.
46.4 General Provisions. The Board shall also be governed by Articles 2 through 7 of these bylaws
and other provisions of these bylaws applicable generally to all boards, except as it is specifically directed by
law or a provision of these or the Zoning Bylaws to act otherwise.
ARTICLE 46A.
NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
(New Section ATM 2007, Article 58)
46A.1 Purpose
(a) This Bylaw enables the establishment of Neighborhood Conservation Districts in the Town of
Wellesley for the following purposes:
(i) to recognize that the Town of Wellesley contains unique and distinctive neighborhoods and
areas which contribute significantly to the overall character and identity of the town and
which are worthy of preservation and protection. Some of these may be eligible for
designation as Historic Districts, while others may lack sufficient historical, architectural or
cultural significance at present to qualify. The Town aims to preserve, protect and enhance
these neighborhoods through the establishment of Neighborhood Conservation Districts.
(ii) to promote conservation and preservation of existing buildings; to encourage new
construction that will complement and be compatible with existing Buildings, Structures,
Settings and neighborhood character; and to foster appropriate reuse and upgrading of
Buildings and Structures in designated neighborhoods.
(iii) to provide residents and property owners with the opportunity to participate in planning the
future of their neighborhoods.
(iv) to promote wider public knowledge about and appreciation for Wellesley’s distinctive
neighborhoods and their Buildings, Structures and Settings.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
(v) and by furthering these purposes, to enhance public welfare by offering current and potential
Wellesley residents a variety of neighborhoods from which to choose, thereby making the
Town a more attractive and desirable place in which to live.
(b) Under this Bylaw, the Buildings in and characteristics of a neighborhood are not intended to be
frozen in time by an NCD designation. Neighborhoods will be able to grow and change to meet
the needs of current and future owners, while conserving the neighborhood’s distinctive
qualities.
(c) An NCD designation acknowledges a neighborhood and its distinctive architectural, aesthetic,
historical, cultural, political, economic or social role in developing the Town of Wellesley’s
character.
46A.2. Definitions (Amended ATM 2018.)
Alteration -- a change to a Building, Structure or Setting, or part thereof, including construction,
demolition, moving, reconstruction, rehabilitation, removal, replication, restoration, or similar
activities, and/or significant changes to the site itself.
Area –the total geographic area covered by all of the properties to be included in an NCD.
Building – a structure built, erected and framed with any combination of materials having a roof and
permanent foundation and forming a shelter, open or enclosed, for persons, animals, or property.
Gazebos and/or pavilions are included in this definition.
Certificate Of Compatibility – a form created and issued by the NCD Commission under this Bylaw,
which states that a proposed plan for Construction and/or Alterations to a Building, Structure or
Setting within an NCD meets the Design Guidelines adopted for that NCD, and which is signed by
that NCD Commission’s Chair or other officially delegated person responsible for its issuance. A
building or demolition permit may be applied for by presenting this Certificate, if the scope or nature
of such projects is covered under the Design Guidelines.
Certificate Of Non-Applicability – a form created and issued by the NCD Commission under this Bylaw,
which states that proposed changes to a Building, Structure, or Setting within an NCD are not subject
to review under Article 46A, and which is signed by that NCD Commission’s Chair or other
officially designated person.
Certificate Of Hardship – a form created and issued by the NCD Commission under this Bylaw, which
states that substantial hardship, financial or otherwise, would occur if the application for work which
is not otherwise compatible failed to be approved, and that such work would not be a significant
detriment to the NCD. It must be signed by that NCD Commission’s Chair or other officially
designated person. A building permit or demolition permit may be applied for by presenting this
Certificate, if the scope or nature of such projects is covered under the Design Guidelines.
Construction – the erection of a new Building or Structure.
Demolition – the act of pulling down, destroying, removing or razing a Building and/or Structure or the
act of commencing such work toward total or substantial destruction.
Design Guidelines – the official set of guidelines, duly adopted under this Bylaw, to guide the review of
proposed Construction and/or Alterations within a particular designated NCD. The Guidelines may
be mandatory, advisory or a hybrid of both as chosen for and by a specific NCD.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
Exterior Architectural Features – such portions of the exterior of a Building or Structure, including but
not limited to the architectural style, general arrangement and Setting thereof; the type and texture of
exterior building materials; and the type and style of windows, doors, lights, signs and other
appurtenant fixtures.
Guidelines – a written set of Design Guidelines and other regulations which describe the authority vested
in the Area’s Neighborhood Conservation District Commission
Neighborhood Conservation District Commission - a body established under this Bylaw with the
authority to review and approve or disapprove proposed Construction and/or Alterations to a
Building, Structure or Setting in the NCD for compliance or compatibility with the Design
Guidelines established for that District. A separate Neighborhood District Commission will be
established for each designated NCD.
Petition - a document signed by at least 80% of the Property Owners, one signature per property, of a
neighborhood stating the intent of the Property Owners to form a Neighborhood Conservation
District, and including the supporting materials required to initiate the process by which an NCD is
created.
Property Owner - the owner or one of multiple owners or one representative of other forms of legal
ownership of a property as listed on the Town of Wellesley’s property tax rolls. Before entering the
NCD process, multiple owners must select one representative and provide the Historical Commission
with written, signed confirmation of that selection.
Report - the document prepared by a Study Committee recommending favorable or unfavorable action
on a Petition to create an NCD.
Setting - the characteristics of the site of a Building, Structure or undeveloped property, including, but
not limited to, placement and orientation of the Building or Structure, and vegetation and
landscaping.
Structure - a functional construction or object other than a Building, including but not limited to walls,
fences, walks, driveways, bridges, paving, street furniture, lights and curbing.
Study Committee - the group of five (5) people appointed to review, recommend or reject a Petition to
create an NCD.
Temporary Structures – constructions or other objects of any combination of materials, including, but not
limited to, tents and signs, which have no permanent foundation, and are intended to remain on a
property for a brief period of time,
46A.3. Designation of Neighborhood Conservation Districts (NCD).
(a) To be considered for designation as an NCD, a neighborhood must satisfy the following criteria:
(i) The Area as a whole constitutes a recognizable neighborhood which has a distinctive
character, and,
(ii) the Area contains Buildings and/or Structures and/or Settings that are significant to the
architectural, aesthetic, cultural, political, economic or social history of Wellesley; or
(iii) the Area has generally cohesive features, such as the scale, size, type of construction,
materials or style of its Buildings and Structures, and/or its land use patterns and
landscaping.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
(b) The designation of an NCD may be initiated by neighborhood Property Owners, the Wellesley
Historical Commission, the Planning Board, or the Board of Selectmen. A Petition requesting
designation as an NCD shall be submitted to the Historical Commission, containing signatures of
at least 80% of the Property Owners electing to be included in the proposed NCD Area, one
signature per property, which petition shall also include,
(i) a general statement of the historical, architectural or other qualities of the Area which make
it appropriate for NCD designation,
(ii) a preliminary map of the Area, and
(iii) a general outline of the scope of the Guidelines and review authority that would be proposed
for the NCD
(c) Following receipt of a Petition for NCD designation, the Historical Commission shall appoint a
Study Committee to investigate and prepare a Report on the appropriateness of such a
designation for the Area. The Study Committee shall consist of five (5) members, of which one
(1) shall be a designee of the Planning Board; one (1) shall be a designee of the Historical
Commission, and three (3) shall be residents of the Area proposed for NCD designation who
shall be appointed by the Historical Commission. When reasonably possible, the Study
Committee should include an architect, landscape architect, or historic preservationist. Notice of
a Study Committee’s appointment shall be conveyed to all Property Owners in the Area and all
property owners abutting the Area within 300 feet, at the address for such owners as listed in the
real estate tax list of the Board of Assessors, and such information shall also be made available,
to the extent reasonable, to prospective buyers through distribution to realtors with offices in
Wellesley.
(d) The Study Committee, working with residents of the Area, shall evaluate the appropriateness of
an NCD designation for the Area. If an NCD designation is not deemed appropriate, the Study
Committee, within one (1) year of its appointment, shall prepare and file with the Historical
Commission a written Report explaining why it reached a negative conclusion. If the Study
Committee determines that an NCD designation is appropriate, it shall, within one (1) year of its
appointment, prepare and file with the Historical Commission a written Report, to include
(i) an overview of the significant historical, architectural or other relevant qualities of the Area,
and
(ii) a map of the geographic boundaries of the Area, and
(iii) Guidelines for the Area, including Design Guidelines and a general statement describing the
nature of the authority to be vested in the Area’s Neighborhood Conservation Commission.
(e) A public hearing shall be convened by the Planning Board and conducted jointly by the
Historical Commission and the Planning Board to discuss the Study Committee’s findings within
60 days after the filing of its completed Report. Public notice shall be given by publication in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Town once in each of two (2) successive weeks, the first
publication to be not less than fourteen (14) days before the day of the hearing; and by posting
such notice in a conspicuous place in the Town Hall for a period of not less than fourteen (14)
days before the day of such hearing, and by conveying said notice, together with copies of the
Report, to all Property Owners in the Area and by conveying said notice, with notification that
the Report is available in the Planning Office, to property owners abutting the Area within 300
feet, at the address for such owners as listed in the real estate tax list of the Board of Assessors.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
(f) Following the close of the public hearing, the Historical Commission and the Planning Board
may, by majority vote at a joint meeting, recommend the Area for designation as an NCD. If the
Historical Commission and Planning Board, acting jointly, do not vote to recommend the Area
for NCD designation, or if, at or prior to the public hearing, more than 20% of the Property
Owners in the proposed NCD object in writing to the proposed designation, then the proposed
designation shall be deemed rejected. Property owners numbering below this 20% who do not
wish to be part of the proposed NCD shall, at their request at, or prior to this hearing, be
excluded from the NCD. If the NCD is favorably recommended by the Historical Commission
and the Planning Board, acting jointly, the designation of the NCD shall be brought to Town
Meeting for approval by majority vote.
(g) Each NCD, as adopted by Town Meeting, shall be listed by its name hereunder in Article 46A
with its date of acceptance. Each NCD, as adopted by Town Meeting, shall have is own
Guidelines, which are appropriate for the conservation of the particular qualities of that NCD,
and shall
(i) be based, to the extent appropriate, on the Guidelines proposed in the Petition, and
(ii) establish the nature and scope of review authority granted the corresponding NCD
Commission under this Bylaw for activities within the NCD, including, but not limited to,
selecting categories and types of changes exempt from and/or subject to review.
(h) The establishment of an NCD shall not be construed to prevent the Construction or Alteration of
a Building or Structure located in the NCD under a building permit, zoning permit or other
municipal approval duly issued prior to the date of that NCD’s establishment by the Town
Meeting.
(i) Amendments to the geographic boundaries, including additions to or withdrawals from the NCD;
changes in the Guidelines, including governance and procedural changes; or dissolution of the
NCD, may be proposed by 10% of the Property Owners in the NCD, an NCD Commission, the
Historical Commission, the Planning Board or the Board of Selectmen. Proposals to amend or
dissolve an NCD will follow the procedures described in 3.(c) - (f), beginning with the
appointment of a study Committee, except, if it deems the changes minor, the Historical
Commission may, by majority vote, waive appointment of a study committee. A decision to
accept or reject the proposed changes will be made jointly by the Historic Commission and
Planning Board following a public hearing. Proposed NCD amendments, and/or a proposal for
dissolution of an NCD, must be brought to Town Meeting for approval by majority vote.
46A.4. Neighborhood Conservation District Commissions
(a) Following Town Meeting acceptance of an NCD designation, a Neighborhood Conservation
District Commission shall be appointed under Article 46A and shall consist of five (5) members
and at least two (2) alternates. One (1) member and one (1) alternate shall be designees of the
Historical Commission and one (1) member shall be a designee of the Planning Board. Three (3)
members and one alternate shall be residents of the NCD, to be appointed by the Historical
Commission. When reasonably possible, the NCD Commission shall include an architect,
architectural preservationist, or landscape architect.
(b) Members and alternates of the NCD Commission designated by the Historical Commission
and/or the Planning Board shall initially be appointed for staggered terms, and to two (2) year
terms thereafter. Members who are residents of the NCD shall initially be appointed to
staggered terms, and to three-year terms thereafter. Each NCD Commission member or alternate
may continue to serve in office after the expiration of his or her term until a successor is duly
appointed.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
46A.5. Review of construction and/or alterations.
(a) The Design Guidelines for each NCD shall establish the extent of review required for
Construction and/or Alterations proposed within that NCD.
(b) Except as otherwise provided in this Bylaw or in the Guidelines of an NCD, no Building and/or
Structure, or their Settings, within a Neighborhood Conservation District shall be Constructed,
Demolished or Altered in any way unless the NCD Commission shall first have issued a
Certificate of Compatibility, a Certificate of Non-Applicability or a Certificate of Hardship.
(c) Exemptions from Review
(i) None of the following categories or types of Construction and/or Alterations shall require
review by the NCD Commission
(1) Temporary structures
(2) Interior alterations
(3) Storm windows, storm doors, and screens
(4) Colors
(5) Accessory structures of less than 120 square feet of floor area and less than 15 feet
in height
(6) Exterior Alterations and Exterior Architectural Features not visible from a public
way or other areas open to public access, including but not limited to, a public street,
public way, public park or public body of water.
(7) The ordinary maintenance, repair or replacement in kind of Exterior Architectural
Features and/or changes made to meet requirements deemed necessary by the
Building Inspector to be necessary for public safety because of an unsafe or
dangerous condition.
(ii) In addition, the Design Guidelines for an NCD may provide for other categories or types of
Construction and/or Alterations within that NCD which shall not require review by its NCD
Commission.
(iii) Although not a condition for obtaining a building permit, any Property Owner may request,
and the NCD Commission shall issue, a Certificate of Non-Applicability for any
Construction and/or Alterations that are exempt from the review of the NCD Commission
pursuant to the foregoing.
(d) Review
(i) All Construction and/or Alterations that are not exempt from review shall be subject to
review by the NCD Commission.
(ii) Any person wishing to perform Construction and/or Alterations that require review shall first
file an application with the NCD Commission for a Certificate of Compatibility in such form
as the NCD Commission may reasonably determine. In addition, plans, elevations,
specifications, photographs, description of materials and other information as may be
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
reasonably deemed necessary by the NCD Commission to enable it to make a determination
on the application may be requested of the applicant. The date of the filing of an application
shall be the date of the receipt of the application by the NCD Commission
(iii) Following submission of an application for a Certificate of Compatibility deemed complete
by the NCD Commission, the Commission shall determine within fourteen (14) days
whether the application involves features that are subject to approval by the Commission. If
it determines that the application is subject to review, the NCD Commission shall then hold
a public hearing within 45 days of the filing date. Public notice of the time, place and
purposes of the hearing shall be given at least fourteen (14) days before the hearing date by
publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town once in each of two (2)
successive weeks, the first publication to be not less than fourteen (14) days before the day
of the hearing, and by conveying said notice to all Property Owners in the NCD and owners
of properties abutting the property subject to the hearing, at the address for such owners as
listed in the real estate tax list of the Board of Assessors.
(iv) Following the close of the public hearing, the NCD Commission shall determine whether the
proposed Construction and/or Alterations are compatible with the Design Guidelines. If the
NCD Commission decides that the proposed Construction and/or Alterations are compatible,
it shall issue a Certificate of Compatibility. If the NCD Commission decides that the
Construction and/or Alterations are not compatible, the NCD Commission shall provide the
applicant with a written statement of the reasons for its disapproval. A Certificate of
Hardship may be issued if the NCD Commission determines that failure to issue a Certificate
of Compatibility would result in substantial hardship, financial or otherwise, and that the
proposed alteration, construction or demolition would not be a significant detriment to the
NCD.
(v) If the NCD Commission fails to make a determination within 60 days after the close of the
public hearing, or such further time as the applicant may allow in writing, the Certificate of
Compatibility shall be deemed granted, and the NCD Commission shall issue a Certificate of
Compatibility.
(vi) The NCD Commission shall file with the Building Inspector, Zoning Board of Appeals,
Planning Board, and Historical Commission a copy of all Certificates of Compatibility,
Certificates of Non-Applicability, Certificates of Hardship and determinations of
disapproval.
(vii) The Design Guidelines for the NCD may provide that certain categories or types of
Construction and/or Alterations shall be subject to advisory, non-binding review by the NCD
Commission, or an owner may request such non-binding review of otherwise exempt
Construction and/or Alterations, in which event the review procedures shall be followed, but
without the NCD Commission voting or rendering a binding decision.
(viii) The NCD Commission shall meet with the Property Owners in the NCD for the purpose of
determining whether or not the District’s Guidelines are still appropriate. The first of these
meeting shall occur two (2) years from the date of the District’s designation as an NCD, and
shall occur at no less than five (5) year intervals thereafter, unless this interval is changed, by
a majority vote of the Property Owners after the first two (2) years. Recommendations for
amendments to the Guidelines must be approved by a majority of the District’s Property
Owners and the amendment procedures described in 3.(i) must be followed.
46A.6. Decision Criteria
(a) In passing upon matters before it, the NCD Commission may consider, among other things:
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
(i) the historical and architectural value and significance of the particular Buildings, Structures
and/or Settings being affected, as well as the effects of same on the NCD;
(ii) the suitability of the Construction’s, Alterations’ and/or Setting’s general design,
arrangement and composition of its elements; the scale and massing of the proposed changes
relative to nearby Buildings and Structures; and the textures and materials of the features
involved in the proposed Construction and/or Alterations, as well as the effects of same on
the NCD;
(iii) Setting and landscape characteristics, including their relationship to the street, topography
and existing vegetation, including mature trees, of the particular site involved in the
Construction and/or Alterations, as well as the effects of same on the NCD;
(iv) for demolitions, the Building, Structure and/or Setting proposed to replace that/those
existing; and
(v) alterations necessary for handicap accessibility: and
(vi) all such other standards, factors and matters contained in the Design Guidelines for the
NCD.
(b) In making its determination, the NCD Commission shall, among other things,
(i) allow for appropriate architectural diversity and individualized Construction and/or
Alterations while respecting the characteristics of the neighborhood, and
(ii) encourage the compatible updating, expansion and renovation of Buildings and Structures in
the neighborhood consistent with the foregoing.
46A.7. Judicial Review, enforcements and lapse.
(a) The Building Inspector shall be charged with the enforcement of this Bylaw. Anyone found in
violation may be fined not more than $300 dollars for each day such violation continues, each
day constituting a separate offense.
(b) Any party dissatisfied with a determination may, within 45 days after the filing of the notice of
such determination with the Building Inspector, the Zoning Board of Appeals, The Historical
Commission and the Planning Board, file a written request with the NCD Commission for a
review by a joint meeting with at least three members each of the Historical Commission and
Planning Board. The findings of this joint committee, which may sustain or overrule the prior
decision of the NCD Commission, shall be filed with the Building Inspector, the Zoning Board
of Appeals, the Historical Commission and the Planning Board within 45 days after the close of
the public hearing, and shall be binding on the applicant and the joint committee, unless a further
appeal is sought in the Superior Court of Norfolk County.
(c) Certificates of Compatibility and Certificates of Hardship shall expire eighteen (18) months, plus
such time as may be required to pursue or await the determination of a judicial review as
provided above, from their date of issuance, if construction has not begun by such date.
Notwithstanding the above, the NCD Commission may grant one or more extensions, of up to
six (6) months each, if there are unavoidable delays.
46A.8. Existing Bylaws not repealed.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
(a) Nothing contained in this bylaw shall be construed as repealing or modifying any existing bylaw or
regulation of the Town, but it shall be in addition thereto. If this bylaw imposes greater restrictions
upon the Construction and/or Alteration, of Buildings, Structures or Settings than other bylaws or
provisions of law, such greater restrictions shall prevail.
ARTICLE 46B.
DENTON ROAD NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICT
(Section added ATM 2008, Article 33)
46B.1 Purpose of the Denton Road Neighborhood Conservation District
(a) This Bylaw enables the establishment of the Denton Road Neighborhood Conservation District
(NCD) in the Town of Wellesley for the following purposes:
(i) To recognize that the Denton Road Neighborhood, which dates back to the 1800’s and
which contains a variety of homes clustered along a tree-shaded, U-shaped street, is a
distinctive neighborhood that contributes significantly to the diversity and character of
Wellesley.
(ii) To promote conservation and preservation of its existing Buildings and Structures; to
encourage compatible new construction that will complement existing Buildings,
Structures, Settings and overall neighborhood character; and to foster appropriate reuse
of and upgrades to Buildings and Structures.
(iii) To provide residents and property owners with the opportunity to participate in planning
the future of their neighborhood.
(b) This Bylaw will enable changing the Buildings, Structures, and Settings of Denton Road to meet
the needs of current and future owners, without sacrificing the neighborhood’s attractive
qualities.
(c) The NCD designation acknowledges Denton Road’s distinctive architectural, aesthetic,
historical, cultural, and social role in the development of the Town of Wellesley’s character.
46B.2 Boundaries of the Denton Road NCD (Amended ATM 2009 Art. 40)
The Denton Road NCD shall comprise 23 properties bounded by 10 Denton Road on the East and 72
Denton Road on the West.
The owners of the following 19 properties fronting Denton Road have elected to participate in the NCD:
9, 10, 14, 15, 16, 19, 24, 28, 29, 31, 32, 44, 55, 56, 60, 61, 71, 72, and 75.
The owners of the following 4 properties fronting Denton Road have elected not to participate in the
NCD at this time: 11, 39, 40, and 65 Denton Road.
46B.3 Review authority of the Denton Road NCD Commission
(a) Membership of the Commission shall be in accordance with Article 46A, Section 4,
Neighborhood Conservation District Commissions.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
(b) The authority of the Denton Road NCD Commission shall extend to the review of all
Construction, Demolition, or Alteration of exterior features on a property within the District
visible from a public way, unless otherwise specified in this Bylaw, and review will follow the
procedures described in Article 46 A, Section 5, Review of Construction and/or Alterations.
(c) As described in Article 46 A, Section 5 (d) (vii), the NCD Commission shall meet periodically
with the Property Owners in the NCD for the purpose of determining whether or not the
District’s Guidelines are still appropriate, and shall send a report to the Historical Commission
containing their findings. The first of these meetings shall occur two years from the date of the
District’s designation as an NCD, and shall occur at no less than five year intervals thereafter,
unless this interval is changed by a majority vote of the Property Owners after the first two years.
(d) Recommendations for amendments to the District, including Guidelines, governance, procedural
changes and geographical boundaries, must be approved by a majority of the District’s Property
Owners and the amendment procedures described in Article 46A, Section 3 (i) must be followed.
Proposed changes approved by the Historical Commission and Planning Board must be approved
by a majority vote of Town Meeting.
46B.4 Determinations by the Denton Road NCD Commission. Except as otherwise provided in Article 46 A
or this Bylaw and its Guidelines, no Building, Structure, or Setting within the District shall be
Constructed, Demolished, or Altered in any way unless the NCD Commission has first issued a
Certificate of Compatibility, a Certificate of Hardship, or a Certificate of Non-Applicability.
(a) Exempt from review
i. Temporary Structures.
ii. Interior Alterations.
iii. Storm windows, storm doors and screens.
iv. Colors.
v. Accessory Structures of less than 120 square feet of floor area and less than 15 feet
in height.
vi. Skylights and solar panels.
vii. Exterior features of a Building or Structure and its Setting not visible from a public
way or other area open to public access.
viii. The ordinary maintenance, repair or replacement in kind of Exterior Architectural
Features and/or changes made to meet the requirements deemed necessary by the
Building Inspector for public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition.
ix. Fences four feet high or less and their equal height entry gates measuring from the
lowest grade on either side of the structure.
x. Handicapped-accessible ramps.
xi. Replacement of window(s) similar in size and style.
xii. Similar or in kind replacement of plant material.
xiii. Siding materials and trim.
(b) Subject to Review. All Construction, Alteration, or Demolition not exempted from review in 5
(a) are subject to review by the NCD Commission, and the Commission’s determinations are
binding. These determinations may contain conditions necessary to fulfill the terms of Section 7
of this Bylaw. Included are the following:
i. Construction of a new Building or Structure.
ii. Demolition of an existing Building or Structure.
iii. Alteration or Construction of an Addition to an existing Building or Structure which
requires a building permit.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
iv. Alteration of the existing landscape by removal of significant shrubbery over 5 feet
in height or trees over 8” in diameter.
v. Construction of a retaining or landscape wall or fence of four feet or more.
vi. Cut and fill of 3 feet or more.
vii. Addition of paving or creation of a new driveway.
viii. Exterior lighting that shines on adjacent properties.
46B.5 The Review Process
(a) Per description in Article 46 A, Section 5. (d), any person wishing to perform Construction,
Alterations, or Demolition that require review shall first file an application with the NCD
Commission for a Certificate of Compatibility, Certificate of Hardship, or Certificate of Non-
Applicability in such form as the NCD Commission may reasonably determine. Materials
required for a building permit and other information as may be reasonably deemed necessary by
the NCD Commission to enable it to make a determination on the application may be requested
of the applicant. The Commission, at its discretion, may waive certain required submission
documents or steps in the review process. The date of the filing of an application shall be the
date of the receipt of the application by the NCD Commission
(b) The Commission shall hold a Public Hearing within 45 days of the filing of a complete
application for a Certificate of Compatibility, a Certificate of Hardship, or a Certificate of Non-
Applicability, following the steps outlined in Article 46 A, Section 5 (d).
(c) If the NCD Commission fails to make a determination within 60 days after the close of the
public hearing, or after any further time the applicant, in writing, may allow the NCD
Commission, a Certificate of Compatibility shall be deemed granted, and the NCD Commission
shall issue a Certificate of Compatibility.
(d) The NCD Commission shall file with the Building Inspector, Zoning Board of Appeals, Planning
Board, and Historical Commission a copy of all Certificates of Compatibility, Certificates of
Non-Applicability, Certificates of Hardship, and determinations of disapproval.
46B.6 Criteria for NCD Commission Determinations
(a) Specific Criteria for the Denton Road NCD. The following objectives are to be sought in
considering applications for Certificates of Compatibility or Certificates of Hardship:
(i) Conserving the diversity of styles and historic architectural character of the
neighborhood, including the existing size and massing of abutting Buildings and
Structures, as well as others elsewhere in the District.
(ii) Conserving the diversity of styles and historic architectural character of the
neighborhood, including the existing size and massing of abutting Buildings and
Structures, as well as elsewhere in the District.
(iii) Conserving the District’s pattern of wood frame architecture.
(iv) Allowing for architectural diversity and individualized alterations while reserving
the traditional scale of the Buildings and Structures.
(v) Encouraging the retention of mature landscape materials and the planting of trees
and greenery to enhance the landscape amenities of the neighborhood.
(vi) Preserving the existing grade, location and setback of Buildings and Structures to
maintain the sightlines of the street.
(vii) Encouraging the separation of properties by means of landscape planting rather than
fencing.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
(b) General Conservation Standards. All applications shall be considered with regard to the potential
adverse effects of the Construction, Alteration or Demolition of an existing Building, Structure,
or Setting on the abutters, the immediate streetscape, and the District as a whole. Consideration
will also be given to:
(i) The architectural or historical significance of the Building, Structure, or Setting, if
any.
(ii) The physical characteristics of the site, including, but not limited to, existing
topography and vegetation.
(iii) The use, if possible, of energy-conserving materials and techniques.
(c) Design Guidelines. In addition to (a) and (b) above, the Commission shall base its decisions on
the following specific factors when considering Applications for Compatibility or Hardship:
(i) Construction of a new Building or Structure. Review of the design of a new Building
or Structure or addition to an existing Building or Structure shall be made with
regard to the general compatibility of the building with its surroundings, and the
following elements of the proposal shall be among those considered:
1. Site layout.
2. Volume and dimensions of the Building or Structure.
3. Provision for open space and landscaping.
4. The scale and massing of the Building or Structure in relation to its surroundings.
5. Provisions for driveways and parking.
6. The effect on the water table or subsoil conditions of adjacent properties.
(ii) Alterations to an existing Building, Structure or Setting. Review of proposed
Alterations or additions to an existing Building, Structure or Setting and of all
features not exempted from review in 5. (a) shall be made with regard to the
following factors:
1. The architectural or historical significance of the Building or Structure to be
altered. The extent to which the integrity of the original design or style has been
retained or previously diminished.
2. The potential adverse effect of the Alteration of, or proposed addition to the
existing Building or Structure on the neighboring properties, the immediate
streetscape and on the District as a whole.
(d) Demolition Guidelines. In evaluating an application to demolish a Building or Structure, the
Commission shall review and consider the following factors:
(i) The architectural or historical significance of the Building or Structure of which any
portion is to be demolished, giving consideration to its possible eligibility for listing
on the National Register of Historic Places.
(ii) The physical condition of the Building or Structure and its subsoil conditions, if
applicable.
(iii) A claim of substantial hardship, financial or otherwise.
(iv) The design of any replacement Building(s) or Structure(s).
46B.7 Judicial Review, Enforcement and Lapse
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
(a) The Building Inspector shall be charged with the enforcement of this Bylaw. Anyone found in
violation may be fined not more than $300 dollars for each day such violation continues, each
day constituting a separate offense.
(b) Any party dissatisfied with a determination may, within 45 days after the filing of the notice of
such determination with the Building Inspector, the Zoning Board of Appeals, The Historical
Commission and the Planning Board, file a written request with the NCD Commission for a
review by a joint meeting with at least three members each of the Historical Commission and
Planning Board. The findings of this joint committee, which may sustain or overrule the prior
decision of the NCD Commission, shall be filed with the Building Inspector, the Zoning Board
of Appeals, the Historical Commission and the Planning Board within 45 days after the close of
the public hearing, and shall be binding on the applicant and the joint committee, unless a further
appeal is sought in the Superior Court of Norfolk County.
(c) Certificates of Compatibility and Certificates of Hardship shall expire eighteen (18) months, plus
such time as may be required to pursue or await the determination of a judicial review as
provided above, from their date of issuance, if construction has not begun by such date.
Notwithstanding the above, the NCD Commission may grant one or more extensions, of up to
six (6) months each, if there are unavoidable delays.
46B.8 Existing Bylaws not repealed.
Nothing contained in this bylaw shall be construed as repealing or modifying any existing bylaw or
regulation of the Town, but it shall be in addition thereto. If this bylaw imposes greater restrictions
upon the Construction and/or Alteration, of Buildings, Structures or Settings than other bylaws or
provisions of law, such greater restrictions shall prevail.
ARTICLE 46C.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION DEMOLITION REVIEW
(NEW ATM 2017)
EFFECTIVE AUGUST 15, 2017
A. PURPOSE
This Article is adopted by the Town to assure the preservation and enhancement of the Town of Wellesley’s
historical and cultural heritage by preserving, rehabilitating or restoring whenever possible, buildings that have
distinctive architectural features or historical associations that contribute to the historic fabric of the Town.
B. DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases have the definitions set forth next to them:
“Application”: An application to the Commission for a Demolition review determination of a Building in
accordance with the provisions of this Article that shall include the following information supplied by the
Owner: (i) the name of each Owner (including of the underlying property, if different from the Owner of the
Building), (ii) the address of the Building, (iii) an indication whether the Owner is seeking a full or partial
Demolition, (iv) the earliest date that the Owner believes the Building, or any part thereof, was constructed,
and (v), if the Owner is seeking a partial Demolition, non-certified plans and drawings showing such proposed
partial Demolition.
“Article”: This Article 46C of the Town Bylaws.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
“Building”: Any combination of materials forming a shelter for persons, animals or property located in the
Town of Wellesley that is larger than 100 square feet.
“Change of Control”: As defined in Section D(6)(b).
“Commission”: The Wellesley Historical Commission.
“Commission Staff”: The person(s) regularly providing staff services for the Commission who the
Commission has designated to perform tasks for the purposes of this Article and who shall be located in Town
Hall. All communication with the Commission shall, unless otherwise specified in writing by the Commission,
be done through the Commission Staff.
“Delay Period”: As defined in Section D(3)(b).
“Demolition” or “Demolish(ed)”: With respect to a Building regardless of whether another Building is
constructed within the original footprint of such Building, the (i) pulling down, razing or destruction of the
entire Building or (ii) the removal or envelopment of 50% or more of the existing exterior structure of the
Building as determined in Section D(2), provided that, any non-structural changes to the siding or roofing of a
Building shall not constitute a Demolition for purposes of this Article.
“Demolition Permit”: Any permit issued by the Inspector of Buildings that is required by the State Building
Code and which authorizes the Demolition of a Building (excluding interior Demolition) regardless of whether
such permit is called a demolition permit, alteration permit, building permit, etc.
“Effective Date”: July 1, 2017 at 12:01 a.m., Eastern Standard Time. (Effective date disapproved by Attorney
General therefore by operation of state statute, Article 46C effective date is the date of publication. August 15,
2017)
“Eligibility Notice”: As defined in Section D (2).
“Eligible Building”: Any Building that requires a Demolition Permit in order to be Demolished that was built,
in whole or in part, on or prior to December 31, 1949 and that is or was at any point during the three (3) years
preceding an Application, a dwelling as defined and regulated under the State Building Code. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, Buildings owned by the Town of Wellesley and dormitories and residence halls owned by
educational institutions used to house students or staff are not considered Eligible Buildings for purposes of
this Article.
The determination of what constitutes a Building’s date of construction shall be made by the Commission Staff
using any combination of records generally available to the public, including but not limited to, Board of
Assessor’s records (e.g., property record cards), Building Department records (e.g., building permits),
applicable Registry of Deeds (e.g., deeds), and the Wellesley Townsman archives.
“Inspector of Buildings”: The Town of Wellesley’s Inspector of Buildings.
“Owner”: With respect to a Building that is the subject of this Article, the owner(s) of record, determined to
be the last grantee(s) of record on file with the applicable Registry of Deeds.
“Preferably Preserved”: A Building should be preferably preserved if it is an Eligible Building, the
Demolition of which that is proposed in the Application would be detrimental to the historical or architectural
heritage of the Town because such Building is (i) importantly associated with one or more historic persons or
events, or with the architectural, cultural, political, economic or social history of the Town, the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts or the United States of America, (ii) historically or architecturally important by reason of
period, style, method of building construction or association with a particular architect or builder, either by
itself or in the context of a group of Buildings, or (iii) located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the
boundary line of any federal or local historic district and contextually similar to the Buildings located in the
adjacent federal or local historic district.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
“Preservation Determination”: As defined in Section D(3)(b).
“Public Hearing”: As defined in Section D (5).
“Submission Date”: As defined in Section D (1).
“Waiver Hearing”: As defined in Section D(4)(a).
C. APPLICABILITY AND INTERPRETATION
(1) Applicability. Commencing on the Effective Date, no Demolition Permit for an Eligible
Building shall be issued by the Inspector of Buildings without first complying with the provisions of this
Article. After complying with the provisions of this Article, any request to the Inspector of Buildings for a
Demolition Permit shall, along with all other documents required by the Inspector of Buildings, be
accompanied by the Eligibility Notice and/or the Preservation Determination. Unless otherwise noted, all days
are calendar days. An Owner may be represented for all purposes under this Article by the Owner’s duly
authorized agent or representative.
(2) Damage and Reconstruction. Subject to Section G, this Article does not apply to the
reconstruction of a Building that was damaged or destroyed by fire, storm, or other disaster, provided that (a)
such damage or destruction is not caused by the owner or his agents or representatives’ negligence or willful
misconduct, including but not limited to, with respect to securing the Building, and (b) such reconstruction is
commenced within two (2) years from the date of the damage or destruction and is conducted at a commercially
reasonable pace. This exception shall be limited to reconstruction of only that portion of the Building damaged
by such catastrophic event. Time incurred in resolving an appeal or other court action or insurance claim shall
not be counted as part of the two-year limit. (Amended ATM 2018.)
(3) Validity of Commission’s Determination. A Preservation Determination shall remain valid,
if Preferably Preserved, for two years after the expiration of the Delay Period, or if not Preferably Preserved,
for two years after the Preservation Determination. While valid, the Inspector of Buildings may act upon a
request for a Demolition Permit without regard to the provisions of this Article.
D. PROCEDURE
(1) Application. An Owner seeking to Demolish a Building shall first file an Application with
the Commission Staff. The Commission Staff will date stamp the Application (the “Submission Date”) and
provide the Owner with a stamped acknowledgement copy of the first page of the Application.
(2) Determination if an Eligible Building
a. Determination. Within five (5) business days after the Submission Date, the
Commission Staff shall make a determination as to whether the Building is or is not an Eligible Building and
shall send written notice of such determination to the Owner (the “Eligibility Notice”). The Eligibility Notice
shall include instructions to the Owner on its permissible next steps.
b. Appeal. The determination made in the Eligibility Notice may be appealed by the
Owner to the Commission by filing a written notice of appeal with the Commission within twenty (20) days
after the date of the Eligibility Notice. The Owner shall include all relevant reasons and documentation
supporting its appeal. The Commission shall schedule a Public Hearing for a date not later than forty-five (45)
days after the Commission’s receipt of the notice of appeal. Within ten (10) days following the conclusion of
such hearing, the Commission shall provide written notice of its determination to the Owner.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
(3) Determination if Preferably Preserved
a. Documentation Requirements. Upon the Owner’s receipt of the Eligibility Notice that
indicates that the Building is an Eligible Building and the exhaustion of the appeal process provided for in
Section D(2)(b) above, the Owner shall provide the Commission with the following additional information:
i. in the case of a partial Demolition, plans showing the use or development of
the site after such Demolition, if known, and a statement identifying all zoning variances and/or special permits
which may be required in order to implement the proposed use or development, if known; and
ii. in the case of any Demolition, photographs of all existing façade elevations
of the Building.
b. Hearing and Determination. Within forty-five (45) days following the Commission’s
receipt of the documentation required pursuant to Section D(3)(a) above, the Commission shall hold a Public
Hearing and make a determination as to whether or not the Building should be Preferably Preserved (the
“Preservation Determination”). If the Commission determines that the Building should be Preferably
Preserved, then no Demolition Permit with respect to such Building shall be issued until twelve (12) months
after the date of the Preservation Determination (the “Delay Period”), provided that, the length of the Delay
Period may be reduced pursuant to Section D(4) below. If the Owner does not provide to the Commission all
documentation required by Section D(3)(a) above within ninety (90) days of (i) the Owner’s receipt of the
Eligibility Notice or (ii) if the Owner has elected to appeal pursuant to Section D(2)(b) above, the conclusion
of any appeal period, then the Application shall be automatically withdrawn.
c. Continuances. The Commission and the Owner may mutually agree to continue any
hearing at which the Commission is to make the Preservation Determination. Any such continuances shall
automatically extend the time for the Commission to make the Preservation Determination and all associated
dates that fall thereafter.
d. Notice of Preservation Determination. Within ten (10) days of making the
Preservation Determination, the Commission shall send written notice of such determination to the Owner.
e. Appeal. The determination made in the Preservation Notice may be appealed by the
Owner to any court of competent jurisdiction in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
(4) Reduction in Length of Delay Period (Waiver Process)
a. Earlier Issuance. After a Delay Period has been imposed, an Owner may apply to the
Commission for a reduction of the Delay Period. Within forty-five (45) days following the Commission’s
receipt of such request, the Commission shall schedule a Public Hearing and make a determination as to
whether or not to reduce or modify the Delay Period (the “Waiver Hearing”). At the Waiver Hearing, the
Commission may consider whether the Owner has:
i. made a bona fide, reasonable and unsuccessful effort to locate a purchaser for
the Building who is willing to preserve, rehabilitate or restore the Building; or
ii. agreed to accept a Demolition Permit on specified conditions approved by the
Commission. If the specified conditions involve approved plans and elevations, then no Demolition Permit
shall be issued by the Inspector of Buildings unless the Owner provides to the Inspector of Buildings a complete
set of plans and elevation drawings which have been signed and stamped by the Commission, provided,
however, that if such plans and elevations are subsequently modified, no copy signed and stamped by the
Commission shall be required if such modifications do not substantially alter the plans and elevations
previously approved by the Commission.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
b. Notice. The Waiver Hearing shall remain open until closed by the Commission,
provided that, if the Waiver Hearing is still open on the date that the Delay Period expires, the Waiver Hearing
shall be automatically closed on that date without any further action of the Commission or Owner. Within
fifteen (15) days after the Commission has closed the Waiver Hearing, the Commission shall provide to the
Owner written notice of its determination or a summary of the Owner and the Commission’s agreed-upon plans
with respect to the Delay Period and the Building.
(5) Hearing Notice Requirements. Public notice of all Commission hearings conducted in
accordance with this Article (each, a “Public Hearing”) shall provide the date, place and time of the Public
Hearing and the address of the Building. With respect to each such notice, the Commission shall, at least
fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the Public Hearing, (i) advertise once in a newspaper of general local
circulation, (ii) post it with the Town Clerk and (iii) send it by regular United States Postal Service mail to the
Owner and to the owners of all abutting properties of the Building. The Commission may also send such notice
to other property owners deemed by the Commission to be materially affected by the Application.
(6) Transferability
a. Requirement to Submit New Application. Once a Building is deemed Preferably
Preserved, if, prior to the expiration of the Delay Period, ownership (whether of record, legal, beneficial or
otherwise) in the Building or underlying property is transferred, directly or indirectly, in whole or in part, by
the Owner to any other person, irrespective of whether the Owner retains any ownership interest therein or
rights thereto, the transferee must submit a new Application pursuant to the procedures of this Article. During
the period that such new Application is under review by the Commission, the existing Delay Period shall
remain in effect. If the Commission determines that the Building is Preferably Preserved, a new Delay Period
shall be implemented for the full twelve (12) months, commencing on the date that the Commission makes
such new Preservation Determination; the previously-existing Delay Period shall thereafter immediately
terminate.
b. Owner. For purposes of Section D(6)(a) above, a transfer shall (i) not include transfers
done for purposes of estate planning by the Owner, and (ii) in addition to the types of transfers noted in Section
D(6)(a) above, be deemed to occur upon a Change of Control of the Owner. “Change of Control” means,
regardless of the form thereof, consummation of (i) the dissolution or liquidation of the Owner, (ii) the sale of
all or substantially all of the assets of the Owner on a consolidated basis, (iii) a merger, reorganization or
consolidation in which the outstanding equity interests of the Owner are converted into or exchanged for
securities of the successor entity and the holders of the Owner’s outstanding voting power immediately prior
to such transaction do not own a majority of the outstanding voting power of the successor entity immediately
upon completion of such transaction, (iv) the sale or other transfer of all or a majority of the outstanding equity
or beneficial interests (or such other amount necessary to control the Owner) of the Owner or (v) any other
transaction in which the holders of the Owner’s outstanding voting power immediately prior to such transaction
do not hold at least a majority of the outstanding voting power (or such other amount necessary to control the
Owner) of the Owner or the successor entity immediately upon completion of the transaction.
E. EMERGENCY DEMOLITION
If the Inspector of Buildings determines that a Building poses an imminent threat to public health and safety
and that immediate Demolition of the Building is warranted, the Inspector of Buildings may issue a Demolition
Permit without requiring compliance with the provisions of this Article. Whenever the Inspector of Buildings
issues a Demolition Permit under the provisions of this Section E, it shall prepare and file with the Commission
a written report describing the Demolition of the Building and the basis of its decision to issue such Demolition
Permit.
F. NON-COMPLIANCE
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
Anyone who effects, or begins to effect, a Demolition of an Eligible Building without first complying fully
with the provisions of this Article shall be subject to a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00)
for each day in violation of this Article.
In addition, unless a Demolition Permit issued in accordance with this Article is obtained and unless the
Demolition Permit is fully complied with, including full compliance with plans and elevation drawings signed
and stamped by the Commission, the Inspector of Buildings may elect, and the Commission may request the
Inspector of Buildings to, (1) issue a stop work order halting all work on the Building unless and until the
Commission notifies the Inspector of Buildings in writing that the Owner has appeared before the Commission
to address such non-compliance, and the Commission has accepted the Owner’s plans to remediate such noncompliance;
(2) refuse to issue any certificates of occupancy, temporary or final, until any non-compliance has
been remediated; and/or (3) refuse to issue any permit required by the State Building Code pertaining to any
property on which an Eligible Building has been Demolished, or such Demolition was commenced, for a period
of two (2) years from the date of such Demolition, provided that this provision shall not prevent the Inspector
of Buildings from issuing any permit required to insure the safety of persons and property. The Inspector of
Buildings shall give prompt written notice to the Commission of any action taken or refused to be taken
pursuant to this Section F.
Notwithstanding the first two paragraphs of this Section F, upon a determination by the Commission that reuse
of the property in accordance with building plans prepared by the Owner and submitted to the Commission
(and all other relevant Town boards and departments) will substantially benefit the Town, the neighborhood in
which the Building is situated, and will provide compensation for the loss of the historic elements of the
Building either through reconstruction of the lost historic elements or significant enhancement of the remaining
historic elements of the Building or the surrounding neighborhood, the Commission may waive the fine, in
whole or in part, and/or the Inspector of Buildings’ ban on issuance of any permits as provided for in this
Section F, in order to allow for the construction or reconstruction of a Building or architectural elements as
approved by the Commission. An Owner receiving such a waiver of the fine and/or ban shall execute a binding
agreement with the Commission enforceable against all of the Owner’s heirs, assigns and successors in interest
to insure that any reuse of site undertaken during the two-year ban shall be implemented in accordance with
the plans, terms and conditions approved by the Commission. Any reuse of the site undertaken during the twoyear
ban which fails to comply with the terms of the Commission’s approval granted under this Section F shall
also permit reinstitution of the fine for non-compliance with this Article.
G. SECURING BUILDINGS
(1) Rebuttable Presumption. If a Building has been determined by the Commission Staff or
Commission, respectively, to be (a) an Eligible Building and is subsequently destroyed (in whole or in part)
by fire or other cause before a Preservation Determination is made, or (b) Preferably Preserved and is
subsequently destroyed (in whole or in part) by fire or other cause before the expiration of the Delay Period,
then in each such case a rebuttable presumption shall arise that the Owner voluntarily Demolished the Building
without complying with the provisions of this Article.
(2) Non-Issuance of Permits. If the rebuttable presumption has arisen, the Inspector of Buildings
shall not issue any permit required under the State Building Code pertaining to the Building, with respect to
Section G(1)(a) above, for a period of two (2) years from the date of such destruction, and with respect to
Section G(1)(b) above, until the end of the Delay Period.
(3) Exceptions. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Section G, the Inspector of
Buildings may issue any permit required under the State Building Code pertaining to the Building (a) as may
be necessary to secure public safety or health or (b) if the Owner has provided satisfactory evidence to the
Inspector of Buildings that (i) such Owner took reasonable steps to secure the Building against fire or other
loss, (ii) the cause of the destruction was not due to the Owner’s negligence or willful misconduct, or (iii) the
Wellesley Fire Department or Massachusetts State Fire Marshall makes a determination that the cause of the
destruction cannot be determined.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
H. BUILDINGS LOCATED IN OTHER DISTRICTS
The provisions of this Article shall not apply to any Building located in a (a) local historic district established
pursuant to M.G.L. C. 40C and subject to regulation by the local historic district commission under the
provision of Section XIVD of the Zoning Bylaws or (b) Neighborhood Conservation District established
pursuant to Article 46A of the Town Bylaws.
I. SEVERABILITY
In case any section, paragraph, or part of this Article is declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, every other section, paragraph, or part of this Article shall continue in full force and
effect.
J. ENFORCEMENT
The Commission is authorized to institute any and all actions and proceedings, in law or in equity, in any court
of competent jurisdiction, as it deems necessary and appropriate to obtain compliance with the requirements
of this Article.
K. FEES
Any Owner whose Application is subject to this Article shall pay such fees as shall be determined by the
Commission.
L. RULES AND REGULATIONS
The Commission may promulgate or amend Rules and Regulations (“Rules”) which pertain to this Article,
and shall file a copy of the Rules in the office of the Town Clerk. The adoption or amendment of Rules shall
be after a Public Hearing to receive comments on the proposed or amended Rules.
(Approved by Attorney General August 7, 2017; published August 15, 2017.
Effective date August 15, 2017)
ARTICLE 46A.
NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
(New Section ATM 2007, Article 58)
46A.1 Purpose
(a) This Bylaw enables the establishment of Neighborhood Conservation Districts in the Town of
Wellesley for the following purposes:
(i) to recognize that the Town of Wellesley contains unique and distinctive neighborhoods and
areas which contribute significantly to the overall character and identity of the town and
which are worthy of preservation and protection. Some of these may be eligible for
designation as Historic Districts, while others may lack sufficient historical, architectural or
cultural significance at present to qualify. The Town aims to preserve, protect and enhance
these neighborhoods through the establishment of Neighborhood Conservation Districts.
(ii) to promote conservation and preservation of existing buildings; to encourage new
construction that will complement and be compatible with existing Buildings, Structures,
Settings and neighborhood character; and to foster appropriate reuse and upgrading of
Buildings and Structures in designated neighborhoods.
(iii) to provide residents and property owners with the opportunity to participate in planning the
future of their neighborhoods.
(iv) to promote wider public knowledge about and appreciation for Wellesley’s distinctive
neighborhoods and their Buildings, Structures and Settings.
(v) and by furthering these purposes, to enhance public welfare by offering current and potential
Wellesley residents a variety of neighborhoods from which to choose, thereby making the
Town a more attractive and desirable place in which to live.
(b) Under this Bylaw, the Buildings in and characteristics of a neighborhood are not intended to be
frozen in time by an NCD designation. Neighborhoods will be able to grow and change to meet
the needs of current and future owners, while conserving the neighborhood’s distinctive qualities.
(c) An NCD designation acknowledges a neighborhood and its distinctive architectural, aesthetic,
historical, cultural, political, economic or social role in developing the Town of Wellesley’s
character.
46A.2. Definitions
Alteration -- a change to a Building, Structure or Setting, or part thereof, including construction,
demolition, moving, reconstruction, rehabilitation, removal, replication, restoration, or similar
activities, and/or significant changes to the site itself.
Area –the total geographic area covered by all of the properties to be included in an NCD.
Building – a structure built, erected and framed with any combination of materials having a roof and
permanent foundation and forming a shelter, open or enclosed, for persons, animals, or property.
Gazebos and/or pavilions are included in this definition.
Certificate Of Compatibility – a form created and issued by the NCD Commission under this Bylaw,
which states that a proposed plan for Construction and/or Alterations to a Building, Structure or
Setting within an NCD meets the Design Guidelines adopted for that NCD, and which is signed by
that NCD Commission’s Chair or other officially delegated person responsible for its issuance. A
building or demolition permit may be applied for by presenting this Certificate, if the scope or nature
of such projects is covered under the Design Guidelines.
Certificate Of Non-Applicability – a form created and issued by the NCD Commission under this Bylaw,
which states that proposed changes to a Building, Structure, or Setting within an NCD are not subject
to review under Article 46A, and which is signed by that NCD Commission’s Chair or other officially
designated person.
Certificate Of Hardship – a form created and issued by the NCD Commission under this Bylaw, which
states that substantial hardship, financial or otherwise, would occur if the application for work which
is not otherwise compatible failed to be approved, and that such work would not be a significant
detriment to the NCD. It must be signed by that NCD Commission’s Chair or other officially
designated person. A building permit or demolition permit may be applied for by presenting this
Certificate, if the scope or nature of such projects is covered under the Design Guidelines.
Construction – the erection of a new Building or Structure.
Demolition – the act of pulling down, destroying, removing or razing a Building and/or Structure or the
act of commencing such work toward total or substantial destruction.
Design Guidelines – the official set of guidelines, duly adopted under this Bylaw, to guide the review of
proposed Construction and/or Alterations within a particular designated NCD. The Guidelines may
be mandatory, advisory or a hybrid of both as chosen for and by a specific NCD.
Exterior Architectural Features – such portions of the exterior of a Building or Structure, including but
not limited to the architectural style, general arrangement and Setting thereof; the type and texture of
exterior building materials; and the type and style of windows, doors, lights, signs and other
appurtenant fixtures.
Guidelines – a written set of Design Guidelines and other regulations which describe the authority vested
in the Area’s Neighborhood Conservation Commission
Neighborhood Conservation District Commission - a body established under this Bylaw with the
authority to review and approve or disapprove proposed Construction and/or Alterations to a
Building, Structure or Setting in the NCD for compliance or compatibility with the Design Guidelines
established for that District. A separate Neighborhood District Commission will be established for
each designated NCD.
Petition - a document signed by at least 80% of the Property Owners, one signature per property, of a
neighborhood stating the intent of the Property Owners to form a Neighborhood Conservation
District, and including the supporting materials required to initiate the process by which an NCD is
created.
Property Owner - the owner or one of multiple owners or one representative of other forms of legal
ownership of a property as listed on the Town of Wellesley’s property tax rolls. Before entering the
NCD process, multiple owners must select one representative and provide the Historical Commission
with written, signed confirmation of that selection.
Report - the document prepared by a Study Committee recommending favorable or unfavorable action on
a Petition to create an NCD.
Setting - the characteristics of the site of a Building, Structure or undeveloped property, including, but not
limited to, placement and orientation of the Building or Structure, and vegetation and landscaping.
Structure - a functional construction or object other than a Building, including but not limited to walls,
fences, walks, driveways, bridges, paving, street furniture, lights and curbing.
Study Committee - the group of five (5) people appointed to review, recommend or reject a Petition to
create an NCD.
Temporary Structures – constructions or other objects of any combination of materials, including, but not
limited to, tents and signs, which have no permanent foundation, and are intended to remain on a
property for a brief period of time,.
46A.3. Designation of Neighborhood Conservation Districts (NCD).
(a) To be considered for designation as an NCD, a neighborhood must satisfy the following criteria:
(i) The Area as a whole constitutes a recognizable neighborhood which has a distinctive
character, and,
(ii) the Area contains Buildings and/or Structures and/or Settings that are significant to the
architectural, aesthetic, cultural, political, economic or social history of Wellesley; or
(iii) the Area has generally cohesive features, such as the scale, size, type of construction,
materials or style of its Buildings and Structures, and/or its land use patterns and landscaping.
(b) The designation of an NCD may be initiated by neighborhood Property Owners, the Wellesley
Historical Commission, the Planning Board, or the Board of Selectmen. A Petition requesting
designation as an NCD shall be submitted to the Historical Commission, containing signatures of
at least 80% of the Property Owners electing to be included in the proposed NCD Area, one
signature per property, which petition shall also include,
(i) a general statement of the historical, architectural or other qualities of the Area which make it
appropriate for NCD designation,
(ii) a preliminary map of the Area, and
(iii) a general outline of the scope of the Guidelines and review authority that would be proposed
for the NCD
(c) Following receipt of a Petition for NCD designation, the Historical Commission shall appoint a
Study Committee to investigate and prepare a Report on the appropriateness of such a designation
for the Area. The Study Committee shall consist of five (5) members, of which one (1) shall be a
designee of the Planning Board; one (1) shall be a designee of the Historical Commission, and
three (3) shall be residents of the Area proposed for NCD designation who shall be appointed by
the Historical Commission. When reasonably possible, the Study Committee should include an
architect, landscape architect, or historic preservationist. Notice of a Study Committee’s
appointment shall be conveyed to all Property Owners in the Area and all property owners
abutting the Area within 300 feet, at the address for such owners as listed in the real estate tax list
of the Board of Assessors, and such information shall also be made available, to the extent
reasonable, to prospective buyers through distribution to realtors with offices in Wellesley.
(d) The Study Committee, working with residents of the Area, shall evaluate the appropriateness of
an NCD designation for the Area. If an NCD designation is not deemed appropriate, the Study
Committee, within one (1) year of its appointment, shall prepare and file with the Historical
Commission a written Report explaining why it reached a negative conclusion. If the Study
Committee determines that an NCD designation is appropriate, it shall, within one (1) year of its
appointment, prepare and file with the Historical Commission a written Report, to include
(i) an overview of the significant historical, architectural or other relevant qualities of the Area,
and
(ii) a map of the geographic boundaries of the Area, and
(iii) Guidelines for the Area, including Design Guidelines and a general statement describing the
nature of the authority to be vested in the Area’s Neighborhood Conservation Commission.
(e) A public hearing shall be convened by the Planning Board and conducted jointly by the Historical
Commission and the Planning Board to discuss the Study Committee’s findings within 60 days
after the filing of its completed Report. Public notice shall be given by publication in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Town once in each of two (2) successive weeks, the first
publication to be not less than fourteen (14) days before the day of the hearing; and by posting
such notice in a conspicuous place in the Town Hall for a period of not less than fourteen (14)
days before the day of such hearing, and by conveying said notice, together with copies of the
Report, to all Property Owners in the Area and by conveying said notice, with notification that the
Report is available in the Planning Office, to property owners abutting the Area within 300 feet,
at the address for such owners as listed in the real estate tax list of the Board of Assessors.
(f) Following the close of the public hearing, the Historical Commission and the Planning Board
may, by majority vote at a joint meeting, recommend the Area for designation as an NCD. If the
Historical Commission and Planning Board, acting jointly, do not vote to recommend the Area
for NCD designation, or if, at or prior to the public hearing, more than 20% of the Property
Owners in the proposed NCD object in writing to the proposed designation, then the proposed
designation shall be deemed rejected. Property owners numbering below this 20% who do not
wish to be part of the proposed NCD shall, at their request at, or prior to this hearing, be excluded
from the NCD. If the NCD is favorably recommended by the Historical Commission and the
Planning Board, acting jointly, the designation of the NCD shall be brought to Town Meeting for
approval by majority vote.
(g) Each NCD, as adopted by Town Meeting, shall be listed by its name hereunder in Article 46A
with its date of acceptance. Each NCD, as adopted by Town Meeting, shall have is own
Guidelines, which are appropriate for the conservation of the particular qualities of that NCD, and
shall
(i) be based, to the extent appropriate, on the Guidelines proposed in the Petition, and
(ii) establish the nature and scope of review authority granted the corresponding NCD
Commission under this Bylaw for activities within the NCD, including, but not limited to,
selecting categories and types of changes exempt from and/or subject to review.
(h) The establishment of an NCD shall not be construed to prevent the Construction or Alteration of a
Building or Structure located in the NCD under a building permit, zoning permit or other
municipal approval duly issued prior to the date of that NCD’s establishment by the Town
Meeting.
(i) Amendments to the geographic boundaries, including additions to or withdrawals from the NCD;
changes in the Guidelines, including governance and procedural changes; or dissolution of the
NCD, may be proposed by 10% of the Property Owners in the NCD, an NCD Commission, the
Historical Commission, the Planning Board or the Board of Selectmen. Proposals to amend or
dissolve an NCD will follow the procedures described in 3.(c) - (f), beginning with the
appointment of a study Committee, except, if it deems the changes minor, the Historical
Commission may, by majority vote, waive appointment of a study committee. A decision to
accept or reject the proposed changes will be made jointly by the Historic Commission and
Planning Board following a public hearing. Proposed NCD amendments, and/or a proposal for
dissolution of an NCD, must be brought to Town Meeting for approval by majority vote.
46A.4. Neighborhood Conservation District Commissions
(a) Following Town Meeting acceptance of an NCD designation, a Neighborhood Conservation
District Commission shall be appointed under Article 46A and shall consist of five (5) members
and at least two (2) alternates. One (1) member and one (1) alternate shall be designees of the
Historical Commission and one (1) member shall be a designee of the Planning Board. Three (3)
members and one alternate shall be residents of the NCD, to be appointed by the Historical
Commission. When reasonably possible, the NCD Commission shall include an architect,
architectural preservationist, or landscape architect.
(b) Members and alternates of the NCD Commission designated by the Historical Commission
and/or the Planning Board shall initially be appointed for staggered terms, and to two (2) year
terms thereafter. Members who are residents of the NCD shall initially be appointed to staggered
terms, and to three-year terms thereafter. Each NCD Commission member or alternate may
continue to serve in office after the expiration of his or her term until a successor is duly
appointed.
46A.5. Review of construction and/or alterations.
(a) The Design Guidelines for each NCD shall establish the extent of review required for
Construction and/or Alterations proposed within that NCD.
(b) Except as otherwise provided in this Bylaw or in the Guidelines of an NCD, no Building and/or
Structure, or their Settings, within a Neighborhood Conservation District shall be Constructed,
Demolished or Altered in any way unless the NCD Commission shall first have issued a
Certificate of Compatibility, a Certificate of Non-Applicability or a Certificate of Hardship.
(c) Exemptions from Review
(i) None of the following categories or types of Construction and/or Alterations shall require
review by the NCD Commission
(1) Temporary structures
(2) Interior alterations
(3) Storm windows, storm doors, and screens
(4) Colors
(5) Accessory structures of less than 120 square feet of floor area and less than 15 feet in
height
(6) Exterior Alterations and Exterior Architectural Features not visible from a public way
or other areas open to public access, including but not limited to, a public street,
public way, public park or public body of water.
(7) The ordinary maintenance, repair or replacement in kind of Exterior Architectural
Features and/or changes made to meet requirements deemed necessary by the
Building Inspector to be necessary for public safety because of an unsafe or
dangerous condition.
(ii) In addition, the Design Guidelines for an NCD may provide for other categories or types of
Construction and/or Alterations within that NCD which shall not require review by its NCD
Commission.
(iii) Although not a condition for obtaining a building permit, any Property Owner may request,
and the NCD Commission shall issue, a Certificate of Non-Applicability for any Construction
and/or Alterations that are exempt from the review of the NCD Commission pursuant to the
foregoing.
(d) Review
(i) All Construction and/or Alterations that are not exempt from review shall be subject to
review by the NCD Commission.
(ii) Any person wishing to perform Construction and/or Alterations that require review shall first
file an application with the NCD Commission for a Certificate of Compatibility in such form
as the NCD Commission may reasonably determine. In addition, plans, elevations,
specifications, photographs, description of materials and other information as may be
reasonably deemed necessary by the NCD Commission to enable it to make a determination
on the application may be requested of the applicant. The date of the filing of an application
shall be the date of the receipt of the application by the NCD Commission
(iii) Following submission of an application for a Certificate of Compatibility deemed complete
by the NCD Commission, the Commission shall determine within fourteen (14) days whether
the application involves features that are subject to approval by the Commission. If it
determines that the application is subject to review, the NCD Commission shall then hold a
public hearing within 45 days of the filing date. Public notice of the time, place and purposes
of the hearing shall be given at least fourteen (14) days before the hearing date by publication
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town once in each of two (2) successive weeks,
the first publication to be not less than fourteen (14) days before the day of the hearing, and
by conveying said notice to all Property Owners in the NCD and owners of properties
abutting the property subject to the hearing, at the address for such owners as listed in the real
estate tax list of the Board of Assessors.
(iv) Following the close of the public hearing, the NCD Commission shall determine whether the
proposed Construction and/or Alterations are compatible with the Design Guidelines. If the
NCD Commission decides that the proposed Construction and/or Alterations are compatible,
it shall issue a Certificate of Compatibility. If the NCD Commission decides that the
Construction and/or Alterations are not compatible, the NCD Commission shall provide the
applicant with a written statement of the reasons for its disapproval. A Certificate of
Hardship may be issued if the NCD Commission determines that failure to issue a Certificate
of Compatibility would result in substantial hardship, financial or otherwise, and that the
proposed alteration, construction or demolition would not be a significant detriment to the
NCD.
(v) If the NCD Commission fails to make a determination within 60 days after the close of the
public hearing, or such further time as the applicant may allow in writing, the Certificate of
Compatibility shall be deemed granted, and the NCD Commission shall issue a Certificate of
Compatibility.
(vi) The NCD Commission shall file with the Building Inspector, Zoning Board of Appeals,
Planning Board, and Historical Commission a copy of all Certificates of Compatibility,
Certificates of Non-Applicability, Certificates of Hardship and determinations of disapproval.
(vii) The Design Guidelines for the NCD may provide that certain categories or types of
Construction and/or Alterations shall be subject to advisory, non-binding review by the NCD
Commission, or an owner may request such non-binding review of otherwise exempt
Construction and/or Alterations, in which event the review procedures shall be followed, but
without the NCD Commission voting or rendering a binding decision.
(viii) The NCD Commission shall meet with the Property Owners in the NCD for the purpose of
determining whether or not the District’s Guidelines are still appropriate. The first of these
meeting shall occur two (2) years from the date of the District’s designation as an NCD, and
shall occur at no less than five (5) year intervals thereafter, unless this interval is changed, by
a majority vote of the Property Owners after the first two (2) years. Recommendations for
amendments to the Guidelines must be approved by a majority of the District’s Property
Owners and the amendment procedures described in 3.(i) must be followed.
46A.6. Decision Criteria
(a) In passing upon matters before it, the NCD Commission may consider, among other things:
(i) the historical and architectural value and significance of the particular Buildings, Structures
and/or Settings being affected, as well as the effects of same on the NCD;
(ii) the suitability of the Construction’s, Alterations’ and/or Setting’s general design, arrangement
and composition of its elements; the scale and massing of the proposed changes relative to
nearby Buildings and Structures; and the textures and materials of the features involved in the
proposed Construction and/or Alterations, as well as the effects of same on the NCD;
(iii) Setting and landscape characteristics, including their relationship to the street, topography
and existing vegetation, including mature trees, of the particular site involved in the
Construction and/or Alterations, as well as the effects of same on the NCD;
(iv) for demolitions, the Building, Structure and/or Setting proposed to replace that/those existing;
and
(v) alterations necessary for handicap accessibility: and
(vi) all such other standards, factors and matters contained in the Design Guidelines for the NCD.
(b) In making its determination, the NCD Commission shall, among other things,
(i) allow for appropriate architectural diversity and individualized Construction and/or
Alterations while respecting the characteristics of the neighborhood, and
(ii) encourage the compatible updating, expansion and renovation of Buildings and Structures in
the neighborhood consistent with the foregoing.
46A.7. Judicial Review, enforcements and lapse.
(a) The Building Inspector shall be charged with the enforcement of this Bylaw. Anyone found in
violation may be fined not more than $300 dollars for each day such violation continues, each day
constituting a separate offense.
(b) Any party dissatisfied with a determination may, within 45 days after the filing of the notice of
such determination with the Building Inspector, the Zoning Board of Appeals, The Historical
Commission and the Planning Board, file a written request with the NCD Commission for a
review by a joint meeting with at least three members each of the Historical Commission and
Planning Board. The findings of this joint committee, which may sustain or overrule the prior
decision of the NCD Commission, shall be filed with the Building Inspector, the Zoning Board of
Appeals, the Historical Commission and the Planning Board within 45 days after the close of the
public hearing, and shall be binding on the applicant and the joint committee, unless a further
appeal is sought in the Superior Court of Norfolk County.
(c) Certificates of Compatibility and Certificates of Hardship shall expire eighteen (18) months, plus
such time as may be required to pursue or await the determination of a judicial review as
provided above, from their date of issuance, if construction has not begun by such date.
Notwithstanding the above, the NCD Commission may grant one or more extensions, of up to six
(6) months each, if there are unavoidable delays.
46A.8. Existing Bylaws not repealed.
(a) Nothing contained in this bylaw shall be construed as repealing or modifying any existing bylaw or
regulation of the Town, but it shall be in addition thereto. If this bylaw imposes greater restrictions
upon the Construction and/or Alteration, of Buildings, Structures or Settings than other bylaws or
provisions of law, such greater restrictions shall prevail.
ARTICLE 46B.
DENTON ROAD NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICT
(Section added ATM 2008, Article 33)
46B.1 Purpose of the Denton Road Neighborhood Conservation District
(a) This Bylaw enables the establishment of the Denton Road Neighborhood Conservation District
(NCD) in the Town of Wellesley for the following purposes:
(i) To recognize that the Denton Road Neighborhood, which dates back to the 1800’s and
which contains a variety of homes clustered along a tree-shaded, U-shaped street, is a
distinctive neighborhood that contributes significantly to the diversity and character of
Wellesley.
(ii) To promote conservation and preservation of its existing Buildings and Structures; to
encourage compatible new construction that will complement existing Buildings,
Structures, Settings and overall neighborhood character; and to foster appropriate reuse of
and upgrades to Buildings and Structures.
(iii) To provide residents and property owners with the opportunity to participate in planning
the future of their neighborhood.
(b) This Bylaw will enable changing the Buildings, Structures, and Settings of Denton Road to meet
the needs of current and future owners, without sacrificing the neighborhood’s attractive qualities.
(c) The NCD designation acknowledges Denton Road’s distinctive architectural, aesthetic, historical,
cultural, and social role in the development of the Town of Wellesley’s character.
46B.2 Boundaries of the Denton Road NCD (Amended ATM 2009 Art. 40)
The Denton Road NCD shall comprise 23 properties bounded by 10 Denton Road on the East and 72
Denton Road on the West.
The owners of the following 19 properties fronting Denton Road have elected to participate in the NCD:
9, 10, 14, 15, 16, 19, 24, 28, 29, 31, 32, 44, 55, 56, 60, 61, 71, 72, and 75.
The owners of the following 4 properties fronting Denton Road have elected not to participate in the NCD
at this time: 11, 39, 40, and 65 Denton Road.
46B.3 Review authority of the Denton Road NCD Commission
(a) Membership of the Commission shall be in accordance with Article 46A, Section 4,
Neighborhood Conservation District Commissions.
(b) The authority of the Denton Road NCD Commission shall extend to the review of all
Construction, Demolition, or Alteration of exterior features on a property within the District
visible from a public way, unless otherwise specified in this Bylaw, and review will follow the
procedures described in Article 46 A, Section 5, Review of Construction and/or Alterations.
(c) As described in Article 46 A, Section 5 (d) (vii), the NCD Commission shall meet periodically
with the Property Owners in the NCD for the purpose of determining whether or not the District’s
Guidelines are still appropriate, and shall send a report to the Historical Commission containing
their findings. The first of these meetings shall occur two years from the date of the District’s
designation as an NCD, and shall occur at no less than five year intervals thereafter, unless this
interval is changed by a majority vote of the Property Owners after the first two years.
(d) Recommendations for amendments to the District, including Guidelines, governance, procedural
changes and geographical boundaries, must be approved by a majority of the District’s Property
Owners and the amendment procedures described in Article 46A, Section 3 (i) must be followed.
Proposed changes approved by the Historical Commission and Planning Board must be approved
by a majority vote of Town Meeting.
46B.4 Determinations by the Denton Road NCD Commission. Except as otherwise provided in Article 46 A
or this Bylaw and its Guidelines, no Building, Structure, or Setting within the District shall be
Constructed, Demolished, or Altered in any way unless the NCD Commission has first issued a
Certificate of Compatibility, a Certificate of Hardship, or a Certificate of Non-Applicability.
(a) Exempt from review
i. Temporary Structures.
ii. Interior Alterations.
iii. Storm windows, storm doors and screens.
iv. Colors.
v. Accessory Structures of less than 120 square feet of floor area and less than 15 feet in
height.
vi. Skylights and solar panels.
vii. Exterior features of a Building or Structure and its Setting not visible from a public
way or other area open to public access.
viii. The ordinary maintenance, repair or replacement in kind of Exterior Architectural
Features and/or changes made to meet the requirements deemed necessary by the
Building Inspector for public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition.
ix. Fences four feet high or less and their equal height entry gates measuring from the
lowest grade on either side of the structure.
x. Handicapped-accessible ramps.
xi. Replacement of window(s) similar in size and style.
xii. Similar or in kind replacement of plant material.
xiii. Siding materials and trim.
(b) Subject to Review. All Construction, Alteration, or Demolition not exempted from review in 5 (a)
are subject to review by the NCD Commission, and the Commission’s determinations are
binding. These determinations may contain conditions necessary to fulfill the terms of Section 7
of this Bylaw. Included are the following:
i. Construction of a new Building or Structure.
ii. Demolition of an existing Building or Structure.
iii. Alteration or Construction of an Addition to an existing Building or Structure which
requires a building permit.
iv. Alteration of the existing landscape by removal of significant shrubbery over 5 feet in
height or trees over 8” in diameter.
v. Construction of a retaining or landscape wall or fence of four feet or more.
vi. Cut and fill of 3 feet or more.
vii. Addition of paving or creation of a new driveway.
viii. Exterior lighting that shines on adjacent properties.
46B.5 The Review Process
(a) Per description in Article 46 A, Section 5. (d), any person wishing to perform Construction,
Alterations, or Demolition that require review shall first file an application with the NCD
Commission for a Certificate of Compatibility, Certificate of Hardship, or Certificate of Non-
Applicability in such form as the NCD Commission may reasonably determine. Materials
required for a building permit and other information as may be reasonably deemed necessary by
the NCD Commission to enable it to make a determination on the application may be requested of
the applicant. The Commission, at its discretion, may waive certain required submission
documents or steps in the review process. The date of the filing of an application shall be the date
of the receipt of the application by the NCD Commission
(b) The Commission shall hold a Public Hearing within 45 days of the filing of a complete
application for a Certificate of Compatibility, a Certificate of Hardship, or a Certificate of Non-
Applicability, following the steps outlined in Article 46 A, Section 5 (d).
(c) If the NCD Commission fails to make a determination within 60 days after the close of the public
hearing, or after any further time the applicant, in writing, may allow the NCD Commission, a
Certificate of Compatibility shall be deemed granted, and the NCD Commission shall issue a
Certificate of Compatibility.
(d) The NCD Commission shall file with the Building Inspector, Zoning Board of Appeals, Planning
Board, and Historical Commission a copy of all Certificates of Compatibility, Certificates of
Non-Applicability, Certificates of Hardship, and determinations of disapproval.
46B.6 Criteria for NCD Commission Determinations
(a) Specific Criteria for the Denton Road NCD. The following objectives are to be sought in
considering applications for Certificates of Compatibility or Certificates of Hardship:
(i) Conserving the diversity of styles and historic architectural character of the
neighborhood, including the existing size and massing of abutting Buildings and
Structures, as well as others elsewhere in the District.
(ii) Conserving the diversity of styles and historic architectural character of the
neighborhood, including the existing size and massing of abutting Buildings and
Structures, as well as elsewhere in the District.
(iii) Conserving the District’s pattern of wood frame architecture.
(iv) Allowing for architectural diversity and individualized alterations while reserving the
traditional scale of the Buildings and Structures.
(v) Encouraging the retention of mature landscape materials and the planting of trees and
greenery to enhance the landscape amenities of the neighborhood.
(vi) Preserving the existing grade, location and setback of Buildings and Structures to
maintain the sightlines of the street.
(vii) Encouraging the separation of properties by means of landscape planting rather than
fencing.
(b) General Conservation Standards. All applications shall be considered with regard to the potential
adverse effects of the Construction, Alteration or Demolition of an existing Building, Structure,
or Setting on the abutters, the immediate streetscape, and the District as a whole. Consideration
will also be given to:
(i) The architectural or historical significance of the Building, Structure, or Setting, if
any.
(ii) The physical characteristics of the site, including, but not limited to, existing
topography and vegetation.
(iii) The use, if possible, of energy-conserving materials and techniques.
(c) Design Guidelines. In addition to (a) and (b) above, the Commission shall base its decisions on
the following specific factors when considering Applications for Compatibility or Hardship:
(i) Construction of a new Building or Structure. Review of the design of a new Building
or Structure or addition to an existing Building or Structure shall be made with regard
to the general compatibility of the building with its surroundings, and the following
elements of the proposal shall be among those considered:
1. Site layout.
2. Volume and dimensions of the Building or Structure.
3. Provision for open space and landscaping.
4. The scale and massing of the Building or Structure in relation to its surroundings.
5. Provisions for driveways and parking.
6. The effect on the water table or subsoil conditions of adjacent properties.
(ii) Alterations to an existing Building, Structure or Setting. Review of proposed
Alterations or additions to an existing Building, Structure or Setting and of all
features not exempted from review in 5. (a) shall be made with regard to the
following factors:
1. The architectural or historical significance of the Building or Structure to be
altered. The extent to which the integrity of the original design or style has been
retained or previously diminished.
2. The potential adverse effect of the Alteration of, or proposed addition to the
existing Building or Structure on the neighboring properties, the immediate
streetscape and on the District as a whole.
(d) Demolition Guidelines. In evaluating an application to demolish a Building or Structure, the
Commission shall review and consider the following factors:
(i) The architectural or historical significance of the Building or Structure of which any
portion is to be demolished, giving consideration to its possible eligibility for listing
on the National Register of Historic Places.
(ii) The physical condition of the Building or Structure and its subsoil conditions, if
applicable.
(iii) A claim of substantial hardship, financial or otherwise.
(iv) The design of any replacement Building(s) or Structure(s).
46B.7 Judicial Review, Enforcement and Lapse
(a) The Building Inspector shall be charged with the enforcement of this Bylaw. Anyone found in
violation may be fined not more than $300 dollars for each day such violation continues, each day
constituting a separate offense.
(b) Any party dissatisfied with a determination may, within 45 days after the filing of the notice of
such determination with the Building Inspector, the Zoning Board of Appeals, The Historical
Commission and the Planning Board, file a written request with the NCD Commission for a
review by a joint meeting with at least three members each of the Historical Commission and
Planning Board. The findings of this joint committee, which may sustain or overrule the prior
decision of the NCD Commission, shall be filed with the Building Inspector, the Zoning Board of
Appeals, the Historical Commission and the Planning Board within 45 days after the close of the
public hearing, and shall be binding on the applicant and the joint committee, unless a further
appeal is sought in the Superior Court of Norfolk County.
(c) Certificates of Compatibility and Certificates of Hardship shall expire eighteen (18) months, plus
such time as may be required to pursue or await the determination of a judicial review as
provided above, from their date of issuance, if construction has not begun by such date.
Notwithstanding the above, the NCD Commission may grant one or more extensions, of up to six
(6) months each, if there are unavoidable delays.
46B.8 Existing Bylaws not repealed.
Nothing contained in this bylaw shall be construed as repealing or modifying any existing bylaw or
regulation of the Town, but it shall be in addition thereto. If this bylaw imposes greater restrictions
upon the Construction and/or Alteration, of Buildings, Structures or Settings than other bylaws or
provisions of law, such greater restrictions shall prevail.
ARTICLE 46C
HISTORIC PRESERVATION DEMOLITION REVIEW
(NEW ATM 2017)
EFFECTIVE AUGUST 15, 2017
A. PURPOSE
This Article is adopted by the Town to assure the preservation and enhancement of the Town of Wellesley’s
historical and cultural heritage by preserving, rehabilitating or restoring whenever possible, buildings that have
distinctive architectural features or historical associations that contribute to the historic fabric of the Town.
B. DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases have the definitions set forth next to them:
“Application”: An application to the Commission for a Demolition review determination of a Building in
accordance with the provisions of this Article that shall include the following information supplied by the
Owner: (i) the name of each Owner (including of the underlying property, if different from the Owner of the
Building), (ii) the address of the Building, (iii) an indication whether the Owner is seeking a full or partial
Demolition, (iv) the earliest date that the Owner believes the Building, or any part thereof, was constructed, and
(v), if the Owner is seeking a partial Demolition, non-certified plans and drawings showing such proposed
partial Demolition.
“Article”: This Article 46C of the Town Bylaws.
“Building”: Any combination of materials forming a shelter for persons, animals or property located in the
Town of Wellesley that is larger than 100 square feet.
“Change of Control”: As defined in Section D(6)(b).
“Commission”: The Wellesley Historical Commission.
“Commission Staff”: The person(s) regularly providing staff services for the Commission who the Commission
has designated to perform tasks for the purposes of this Article and who shall be located in Town Hall. All
communication with the Commission shall, unless otherwise specified in writing by the Commission, be done
through the Commission Staff.
“Delay Period”: As defined in Section D(3)(b).
“Demolition” or “Demolish(ed)”: With respect to a Building regardless of whether another Building is
constructed within the original footprint of such Building, the (i) pulling down, razing or destruction of the
entire Building or (ii) the removal or envelopment of 50% or more of the existing exterior structure of the
Building as determined in Section D(2), provided that, any non-structural changes to the siding or roofing of a
Building shall not constitute a Demolition for purposes of this Article.
“Demolition Permit”: Any permit issued by the Inspector of Buildings that is required by the State Building
Code and which authorizes the Demolition of a Building (excluding interior Demolition) regardless of whether
such permit is called a demolition permit, alteration permit, building permit, etc.
“Effective Date”: July 1, 2017 at 12:01 a.m., Eastern Standard Time. (Effective date disapproved by Attorney
General therefore by operation of state statute, Article 46C effective date is the date of publication. August 15,
2017)
“Eligibility Notice”: As defined in Section D(2).
“Eligible Building”: Any Building that requires a Demolition Permit in order to be Demolished that was built,
in whole or in part, on or prior to December 31, 1949 and that is or was at any point during the three (3) years
preceding an Application, a dwelling as defined and regulated under the State Building Code. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, Buildings owned by the Town of Wellesley and dormitories and residence halls owned by
educational institutions used to house students or staff are not considered Eligible Buildings for purposes of this
Article.
The determination of what constitutes a Building’s date of construction shall be made by the Commission Staff
using any combination of records generally available to the public, including but not limited to, Board of
Assessor’s records (e.g., property record cards), Building Department records (e.g., building permits),
applicable Registry of Deeds (e.g., deeds), and the Wellesley Townsman archives.
“Inspector of Buildings”: The Town of Wellesley’s Inspector of Buildings.
“Owner”: With respect to a Building that is the subject of this Article, the owner(s) of record, determined to be
the last grantee(s) of record on file with the applicable Registry of Deeds.
“Preferably Preserved”: A Building should be preferably preserved if it is an Eligible Building, the Demolition
of which that is proposed in the Application would be detrimental to the historical or architectural heritage of
the Town because such Building is (i) importantly associated with one or more historic persons or events, or
with the architectural, cultural, political, economic or social history of the Town, the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts or the United States of America, (ii) historically or architecturally important by reason of period,
style, method of building construction or association with a particular architect or builder, either by itself or in
the context of a group of Buildings, or (iii) located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the boundary line of
any federal or local historic district and contextually similar to the Buildings located in the adjacent federal or
local historic district.
“Preservation Determination”: As defined in Section D(3)(b).
“Public Hearing”: As defined in Section D(5).
“Submission Date”: As defined in Section D(1).
“Waiver Hearing”: As defined in Section D(4)(a).
C. APPLICABILITY AND INTERPRETATION
(1) Applicability. Commencing on the Effective Date, no Demolition Permit for an Eligible
Building shall be issued by the Inspector of Buildings without first complying with the provisions of this Article.
After complying with the provisions of this Article, any request to the Inspector of Buildings for a Demolition
Permit shall, along with all other documents required by the Inspector of Buildings, be accompanied by the
Eligibility Notice and/or the Preservation Determination. Unless otherwise noted, all days are calendar days.
An Owner may be represented for all purposes under this Article by the Owner’s duly authorized agent or
representative.
(2) Damage and Reconstruction. Subject to Section G, this Article does not apply to the
reconstruction of a Building that was damaged or destroyed by fire, storm, or other disaster, provided that (a)
such damage or destruction is not caused by the owner or his agents or representatives’ negligence or willful
misconduct, including but not limited to, with respect to securing the Building, and (b) such reconstruction is
commenced within two (2) years from the date of the damage or destruction and is conducted at a commercially
reasonable pace. This exception shall be limited to reconstruction of only that portion of the Building damaged
by such catastrophic event. Time incurred in resolving an appeal or other court action or insurance claim shall
not be counted as part of the two year limit.
(3) Validity of Commission’s Determination. A Preservation Determination shall remain valid, if
Preferably Preserved, for two years after the expiration of the Delay Period, or if not Preferably Preserved, for
two years after the Preservation Determination. While valid, the Inspector of Buildings may act upon a request
for a Demolition Permit without regard to the provisions of this Article.
D. PROCEDURE
(1) Application. An Owner seeking to Demolish a Building shall first file an Application with the
Commission Staff. The Commission Staff will date stamp the Application (the “Submission Date”) and
provide the Owner with a stamped acknowledgement copy of the first page of the Application.
(2) Determination if an Eligible Building
a. Determination. Within five (5) business days after the Submission Date, the
Commission Staff shall make a determination as to whether the Building is or is not an Eligible Building and
shall send written notice of such determination to the Owner (the “Eligibility Notice”). The Eligibility Notice
shall include instructions to the Owner on its permissible next steps.
b. Appeal. The determination made in the Eligibility Notice may be appealed by the
Owner to the Commission by filing a written notice of appeal with the Commission within twenty (20) days
after the date of the Eligibility Notice. The Owner shall include all relevant reasons and documentation
supporting its appeal. The Commission shall schedule a Public Hearing for a date not later than forty-five (45)
days after the Commission’s receipt of the notice of appeal. Within ten (10) days following the conclusion of
such hearing, the Commission shall provide written notice of its determination to the Owner.
(3) Determination if Preferably Preserved
a. Documentation Requirements. Upon the Owner’s receipt of the Eligibility Notice that
indicates that the Building is an Eligible Building and the exhaustion of the appeal process provided for in
Section D(2)(b) above, the Owner shall provide the Commission with the following additional information:
i. in the case of a partial Demolition, plans showing the use or development of
the site after such Demolition, if known, and a statement identifying all zoning variances and/or special permits
which may be required in order to implement the proposed use or development, if known; and
ii. in the case of any Demolition, photographs of all existing façade elevations of
the Building.
b. Hearing and Determination. Within forty-five (45) days following the Commission’s
receipt of the documentation required pursuant to Section D(3)(a) above, the Commission shall hold a Public
Hearing and make a determination as to whether or not the Building should be Preferably Preserved (the
“Preservation Determination”). If the Commission determines that the Building should be Preferably
Preserved, then no Demolition Permit with respect to such Building shall be issued until twelve (12) months
after the date of the Preservation Determination (the “Delay Period”), provided that, the length of the Delay
Period may be reduced pursuant to Section D(4) below. If the Owner does not provide to the Commission all
documentation required by Section D(3)(a) above within ninety (90) days of (i) the Owner’s receipt of the
Eligibility Notice or (ii) if the Owner has elected to appeal pursuant to Section D(2)(b) above, the conclusion
of any appeal period, then the Application shall be automatically withdrawn.
c. Continuances. The Commission and the Owner may mutually agree to continue any
hearing at which the Commission is to make the Preservation Determination. Any such continuances shall
automatically extend the time for the Commission to make the Preservation Determination and all associated
dates that fall thereafter.
d. Notice of Preservation Determination. Within ten (10) days of making the Preservation
Determination, the Commission shall send written notice of such determination to the Owner.
e. Appeal. The determination made in the Preservation Notice may be appealed by the
Owner to any court of competent jurisdiction in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
(4) Reduction in Length of Delay Period (Waiver Process)
a. Earlier Issuance. After a Delay Period has been imposed, an Owner may apply to the
Commission for a reduction of the Delay Period. Within forty-five (45) days following the Commission’s
receipt of such request, the Commission shall schedule a Public Hearing and make a determination as to whether
or not to reduce or modify the Delay Period (the “Waiver Hearing”). At the Waiver Hearing, the Commission
may consider whether the Owner has:
i. made a bona fide, reasonable and unsuccessful effort to locate a purchaser for
the Building who is willing to preserve, rehabilitate or restore the Building; or
ii. agreed to accept a Demolition Permit on specified conditions approved by the
Commission. If the specified conditions involve approved plans and elevations, then no Demolition Permit
shall be issued by the Inspector of Buildings unless the Owner provides to the Inspector of Buildings a complete
set of plans and elevation drawings which have been signed and stamped by the Commission, provided,
however, that if such plans and elevations are subsequently modified, no copy signed and stamped by the
Commission shall be required if such modifications do not substantially alter the plans and elevations previously
approved by the Commission.
b. Notice. The Waiver Hearing shall remain open until closed by the Commission,
provided that, if the Waiver Hearing is still open on the date that the Delay Period expires, the Waiver Hearing
shall be automatically closed on that date without any further action of the Commission or Owner. Within
fifteen (15) days after the Commission has closed the Waiver Hearing, the Commission shall provide to the
Owner written notice of its determination or a summary of the Owner and the Commission’s agreed-upon plans
with respect to the Delay Period and the Building.
(5) Hearing Notice Requirements. Public notice of all Commission hearings conducted in
accordance with this Article (each, a “Public Hearing”) shall provide the date, place and time of the Public
Hearing and the address of the Building. With respect to each such notice, the Commission shall, at least
fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the Public Hearing, (i) advertise once in a newspaper of general local
circulation, (ii) post it with the Town Clerk and (iii) send it by regular United States Postal Service mail to the
Owner and to the owners of all abutting properties of the Building. The Commission may also send such notice
to other property owners deemed by the Commission to be materially affected by the Application.
(6) Transferability
a. Requirement to Submit New Application. Once a Building is deemed Preferably
Preserved, if, prior to the expiration of the Delay Period, ownership (whether of record, legal, beneficial or
otherwise) in the Building or underlying property is transferred, directly or indirectly, in whole or in part, by
the Owner to any other person, irrespective of whether the Owner retains any ownership interest therein or
rights thereto, the transferee must submit a new Application pursuant to the procedures of this Article. During
the period that such new Application is under review by the Commission, the existing Delay Period shall remain
in effect. If the Commission determines that the Building is Preferably Preserved, a new Delay Period shall be
implemented for the full twelve (12) months, commencing on the date that the Commission makes such new
Preservation Determination; the previously-existing Delay Period shall thereafter immediately terminate.
b. Owner. For purposes of Section D(6)(a) above, a transfer shall (i) not include transfers
done for purposes of estate planning by the Owner, and (ii) in addition to the types of transfers noted in Section
D(6)(a) above, be deemed to occur upon a Change of Control of the Owner. “Change of Control” means,
regardless of the form thereof, consummation of (i) the dissolution or liquidation of the Owner, (ii) the sale of
all or substantially all of the assets of the Owner on a consolidated basis, (iii) a merger, reorganization or
consolidation in which the outstanding equity interests of the Owner are converted into or exchanged for
securities of the successor entity and the holders of the Owner’s outstanding voting power immediately prior to
such transaction do not own a majority of the outstanding voting power of the successor entity immediately
upon completion of such transaction, (iv) the sale or other transfer of all or a majority of the outstanding equity
or beneficial interests (or such other amount necessary to control the Owner) of the Owner or (v) any other
transaction in which the holders of the Owner’s outstanding voting power immediately prior to such transaction
do not hold at least a majority of the outstanding voting power (or such other amount necessary to control the
Owner) of the Owner or the successor entity immediately upon completion of the transaction.
E. EMERGENCY DEMOLITION
If the Inspector of Buildings determines that a Building poses an imminent threat to public health and safety
and that immediate Demolition of the Building is warranted, the Inspector of Buildings may issue a Demolition
Permit without requiring compliance with the provisions of this Article. Whenever the Inspector of Buildings
issues a Demolition Permit under the provisions of this Section E, it shall prepare and file with the Commission
a written report describing the Demolition of the Building and the basis of its decision to issue such Demolition
Permit.
F. NON-COMPLIANCE
Anyone who effects, or begins to effect, a Demolition of an Eligible Building without first complying fully with
the provisions of this Article shall be subject to a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each
day in violation of this Article.
In addition, unless a Demolition Permit issued in accordance with this Article is obtained and unless the
Demolition Permit is fully complied with, including full compliance with plans and elevation drawings signed
and stamped by the Commission, the Inspector of Buildings may elect, and the Commission may request the
Inspector of Buildings to, (1) issue a stop work order halting all work on the Building unless and until the
Commission notifies the Inspector of Buildings in writing that the Owner has appeared before the Commission
to address such non-compliance, and the Commission has accepted the Owner’s plans to remediate such noncompliance;
(2) refuse to issue any certificates of occupancy, temporary or final, until any non-compliance has
been remediated; and/or (3) refuse to issue any permit required by the State Building Code pertaining to any
property on which an Eligible Building has been Demolished, or such Demolition was commenced, for a period
of two (2) years from the date of such Demolition, provided that this provision shall not prevent the Inspector
of Buildings from issuing any permit required to insure the safety of persons and property. The Inspector of
Buildings shall give prompt written notice to the Commission of any action taken or refused to be taken pursuant
to this Section F.
Notwithstanding the first two paragraphs of this Section F, upon a determination by the Commission that reuse
of the property in accordance with building plans prepared by the Owner and submitted to the Commission (and
all other relevant Town boards and departments) will substantially benefit the Town, the neighborhood in which
the Building is situated, and will provide compensation for the loss of the historic elements of the Building
either through reconstruction of the lost historic elements or significant enhancement of the remaining historic
elements of the Building or the surrounding neighborhood, the Commission may waive the fine, in whole or in
part, and/or the Inspector of Buildings’ ban on issuance of any permits as provided for in this Section F, in order
to allow for the construction or reconstruction of a Building or architectural elements as approved by the
Commission. An Owner receiving such a waiver of the fine and/or ban shall execute a binding agreement with
the Commission enforceable against all of the Owner’s heirs, assigns and successors in interest to insure that
any reuse of site undertaken during the two-year ban shall be implemented in accordance with the plans, terms
and conditions approved by the Commission. Any reuse of the site undertaken during the two-year ban which
fails to comply with the terms of the Commission’s approval granted under this Section F shall also permit
reinstitution of the fine for non-compliance with this Article.
G. SECURING BUILDINGS
(1) Rebuttable Presumption. If a Building has been determined by the Commission Staff or
Commission, respectively, to be (a) an Eligible Building and is subsequently destroyed (in whole or in part) by
fire or other cause before a Preservation Determination is made, or (b) Preferably Preserved and is subsequently
destroyed (in whole or in part) by fire or other cause before the expiration of the Delay Period, then in each
such case a rebuttable presumption shall arise that the Owner voluntarily Demolished the Building without
complying with the provisions of this Article.
(2) Non-Issuance of Permits. If the rebuttable presumption has arisen, the Inspector of Buildings
shall not issue any permit required under the State Building Code pertaining to the Building, with respect to
Section G(1)(a) above, for a period of two (2) years from the date of such destruction, and with respect to
Section G(1)(b) above, until the end of the Delay Period.
(3) Exceptions. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Section G, the Inspector of
Buildings may issue any permit required under the State Building Code pertaining to the Building (a) as may
be necessary to secure public safety or health or (b) if the Owner has provided satisfactory evidence to the
Inspector of Buildings that (i) such Owner took reasonable steps to secure the Building against fire or other
loss, (ii) the cause of the destruction was not due to the Owner’s negligence or willful misconduct, or (iii) the
Wellesley Fire Department or Massachusetts State Fire Marshall makes a determination that the cause of the
destruction cannot be determined.
H. BUILDINGS LOCATED IN OTHER DISTRICTS
The provisions of this Article shall not apply to any Building located in a (a) local historic district established
pursuant to M.G.L. C. 40C and subject to regulation by the local historic district commission under the provision
of Section XIVD of the Zoning Bylaws or (b) Neighborhood Conservation District established pursuant to
Article 46A of the Town Bylaws.
I. SEVERABILITY
In case any section, paragraph, or part of this Article is declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, every other section, paragraph, or part of this Article shall continue in full force and
effect.
J. ENFORCEMENT
The Commission is authorized to institute any and all actions and proceedings, in law or in equity, in any court
of competent jurisdiction, as it deems necessary and appropriate to obtain compliance with the requirements of
this Article.
K. FEES
Any Owner whose Application is subject to this Article shall pay such fees as shall be determined by the
Commission.
L. RULES AND REGULATIONS
The Commission may promulgate or amend Rules and Regulations (“Rules”) which pertain to this Article, and
shall file a copy of the Rules in the office of the Town Clerk. The adoption or amendment of Rules shall be
after a Public Hearing to receive comments on the proposed or amended Rules.
(Approved by Attorney General August 7, 2017; published August 15, 2017.
Effective date August 15, 2017)
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
ARTICLE 47. ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS
(Replaced ATM 2018.)
47.1. Purpose. Pursuant to the authority set forth in G.L. c. 140, §§ 136A-174E, inclusive, and any
other relevant statutes and regulations issued pursuant thereto, this section is adopted by the Town for the
control and regulation of dogs within the Town.
47.2. Definitions. The definitions of words and terms set forth G.L. c. 140, § 136A are incorporated
into Article 47 and shall be applicable herein.
47.3. Administration.
a. The Board of Selectmen shall annually appoint an Animal Control Officer who shall be
responsible for the enforcement of this bylaw and the General Laws relating to the
regulation of animals.
b. For purposes of this bylaw and G.L. c. 140, § 157, the Executive Director shall be the
Hearing Authority.
47.4 Registration and License Requirements for Dogs.
a. In accordance with G.L. c. 140, § 137, the owner or keeper of a dog six months of age or
older, while residing in the Town of Wellesley, shall obtain a license (either individual or
kennel) for the dog from the Town Clerk, which shall be affixed to the dog’s collar. To
obtain or renew a license, each dog owner or keeper shall annually present proof of a
current rabies vaccination or a certification of exemption from the vaccination
requirement, pursuant to G.L. c. 140, § 137(b) and 145B.
b. All dogs within the Town shall be licensed and registered and the fees for such license
and registration shall be established by the Town Meeting from time to time in accordance
with G.L. c. 140, § 139. Fees for the issuance of licenses for dogs shall be:
1) Males and Females: $20
2) Neutered Males and Spayed Females: $12
3) Service Animals as defined by the Americans
with Disabilities Act or regulations promulgated
thereunder: No fee.
4) Kennels with 4-6 Dogs: $75
5) Kennels with 7-10 Dogs: $100
6) Kennels with 11 or more Dogs: $150
c. Dog owners and keepers shall renew each dog license annually. The annual licensing
period runs from April 1 through March 31.
d. Kennels. All kennels within the Town of Wellesley shall be licensed, operated,
maintained and regulated in accordance with G.L. c. 140, §§ 137A-137D and any other
applicable statute or regulation.
47.5. Policies and Procedures. The Selectmen shall from time to time adopt and publish such
policies and procedures as they deem necessary to enforce the intent and purpose of this Bylaw.
47.6. Conduct of Dogs.
a. Nuisance and Dangerous Behavior. No dog owner or keeper shall permit the dog to
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
become or remain a nuisance dog or a dangerous dog, as those terms are defined and used
in G.L. c. 140, §§ 136A and 157.
b. Leash Law. When not on the private property of its owner or keeper, or on private
property with express permission of that property’s owner, a dog shall be on a leash of not
more than seven (7) feet.
c. Dogs on Town Property. Any dog on the street or sidewalk in the Town of Wellesley
shall be on a leash of not more than seven (7) feet. Any dog, while on any other property
owned or controlled by the Town of Wellesley, shall remain under the control of its owner
or keeper in the manner prescribed by the regulations promulgated by the board,
commission or officer having authority or control of said property.
d. Service Animals. The provisions of Articles 47.6.b and 47.6.c shall not apply to any
properly trained assistance or service animal while performing its duties.
47.7. Animal Control Officer.
a. Complaint Investigation. The Animal Control Officer shall investigate all written
complaints arising within the Town pertaining to violations of Article 47 and of G.L. c.
140, §§ 136A-174E and any relevant state or local regulations.
b. Issuance of Temporary Restraint Orders. The Animal Control Officer may issue a
Temporary Restraint Order to the owner or keeper of any dog that is alleged to be a
nuisance dog or a dangerous dog and is awaiting a decision under Article 47.8. A
Temporary Restraint Order shall be in force for no more than thirty (30) days unless the
Animal Control Officer renews it in writing for a subsequent thirty (30) day periods. The
Animal Control Officer may rescind or stop renewing the order when, in the Animal
Control Officer’s judgment, restraint is no longer required. The Animal Control Officer’s
order shall expire upon receipt of a decision from the Board of Selectmen on the nuisance
dog or dangerous dog hearing.
c. Issuance of Temporary Confinement Order. The Animal Control Officer may make
arrangements for the temporary housing of any dog that requires such temporary housing,
and may issue an Order of Temporary Confinement authorizing such temporary housing.
The housing may be at local veterinary clinics, or at dog kennels within the Town or
neighboring towns, and shall be at the dog owner’s or keeper’s expense.
d. Record Keeping. The Animal Control Officer shall keep accurate, detailed records of
the confinement and disposition of all dogs held in custody, all bite cases reported, and
the results of investigations. The Animal Control Officer shall maintain a telephone log of
all calls received regarding dogs and submit a monthly report summarizing the log to the
Board of Selectmen.
47.8. Nuisance or Dangerous Dog Hearings. Any person may file a complaint in writing to the Board
of Selectmen that a dog owned or kept in the Town is a nuisance dog or a dangerous dog. All such complaints
shall be investigated and addressed in accordance with G.L. c. 140 § 157.
47.9. Violations and Penalties.
a. The failure of the owner or keeper of any dog or pet to comply with this bylaw or with
any order of the Animal Control Officer or the Board of Selectmen shall be a violation of
this bylaw.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
b. The failure of the owner or keeper of any dog to comply with the registration and license
requirements provided in this Article 47 and in G.L. c. 140, §§ 136A-174E shall be in
violation of this bylaw.
c. In addition to any other remedy provided by law, this Article may be enforced by the
Animal Control Officer, or any police officer of the Town, or the Board of Selectmen,
through any means available in law or equity, including but not limited to criminal
indictment in accordance with G.L. c. 40, § 21, noncriminal disposition in accordance with
G.L. c. 40, § 21D and the Article 52.1, “Non-Criminal Disposition, as may be amended
from time to time. When enforced in accordance with G.L. c. 40, § 21, the maximum
penalty shall be $300 and each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate violation.
d. If the Animal Control Officer confines a dog and the dog owner or keeper does not pay
all fees directly to the kennel or veterinary clinic, then the dog’s owner or keeper shall be
required to reimburse the Town for any expenses incurred in boarding that dog. If the dog
has not been licensed, the owner or keeper shall obtain a license and pay any applicable
fine before the dog can be released.
e. Violation of Nuisance Dog or Dangerous Dog Order. An owner or keeper of a dog who
fails to comply with an order of the Selectmen or district court issued pursuant to G.L. c.
140, § 157A shall be punished as provided in that statute;
ARTICLE 48. CEMETERY FUND REGULATIONS
48.1. Deposits. The Town will accept and hold in trust any money or securities which may be
deposited with the Town Treasurer for the preservation, care, improvement, or embellishment of any public or
private burial place situated in the Town or any lots or graves situated in such burial places.
48.2. Cemetery Fund. Money and securities received under Section 48.1. shall not be mingled with
other money or securities of the Town, but shall be kept and invested separately as a Cemetery Fund.
48.3. Investment and Expenditure. The Town Treasurer shall invest and expend such funds in
accordance with the stipulations, if any, accompanying them. Otherwise The Town Treasurer shall invest
them in accordance with guidelines and criteria as provided in Article 19. Board of Selectmen, Section 19.5.3.
Investment of Town Funds.
48.4. Statutory Authority. The provisions of this Article shall be interpreted and implemented
consistently with the provisions of the General Laws, particularly Chapter 114.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
ARTICLE 49. POLICE REGULATIONS
(Amended ATM 2018.)
49.1. Trespassing. No person shall enter upon the premises of another in the Town for the purpose
of committing any wanton or malicious act or with intent to invade the privacy of another by peeping into the
windows of a house or spying upon any person or persons resident therein. Nothing contained in this section
shall be construed to abridge or in any way limit the right of a police officer to enter upon private property in
the performance of his official duties.
49.2. Use of Public Ways and Places. No person shall throw, place or cause to be placed in any
public way or public place in the Town, any tree, bush or other planting, or any obstruction, or any garbage,
fuel, building material, paper, cards, handbills, leaves, or rubbish of any kind, nor stones or rocks or other
objects to act as curbing, except in such place and in such manner as shall be directed by the Selectmen and
except as hereinafter provided in Section 49.2A.
49.2A. Printed Matter Vending Machines in Public Ways and Places. No person shall place, install,
use or maintain a vending machine for the purpose of distributing printed matter in a public way or place
except according to regulations for the same as shall be promulgated by the Board of Selectmen. Said
regulations may include but shall not necessarily be limited to dimensional and design criteria; siting
requirements; insurance and indemnification; and administrative fees and review process. Whoever violates
any provisions of this bylaw or the regulations promulgated by the Board of Selectmen under the authority
hereof shall be liable for a fine of $10.00 for each offense, each day any violation continues to constitute a
separate offense.
49.2B Retail Hours of Operation.
(a) Subject to such other restrictions as may be applicable, no retail business establishment shall be
open for business for the sale of goods or services to the public at retail, nor shall any retail business
establishment sell any goods or services to the public at retail, between the hours of 11:00 o'clock
p.m. and 6:00 o'clock a.m. unless both,
(i) the floor area of such retail business establishment devoted to the display and sale to
the public of retail goods or services contains 6,000 usable square feet or less; and
(ii) the Board of Selectmen, upon such terms and conditions as they may deem
appropriate, has granted to the owner and/or operator of such retail business establishment a
license under this bylaw to remain open for such night-time hours in order to serve the
public necessity or convenience.
(b) The Board of Selectmen shall not grant to the owner and/or operator of a retail business
establishment a license under this bylaw to be open to the public for business between the hours of
11:00 o'clock p.m. and 6:00 o'clock a.m., unless the Board of Selectmen shall have made the
following specific findings with respect to such establishment:
1. That such night-time hours of operation by such establishment will not cause
unreasonable disruption, or disturbance to, or otherwise adversely affect, the customary
character of any adjacent or nearby residential neighborhoods;
2. That such night-time hours of operation are reasonably necessary to serve a public
need or person to provide a convenience to the public that outweighs any increase in
any of the following impacts on the adjacent or nearby residential neighborhood (or the
character thereof) that are likely to result from such retail business establishment being open
for such night-time hours: noise, lighting, vibration, traffic congestion, or volume of
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
pedestrian or vehicular retail customer traffic; risk to pedestrian or vehicular safety, accident
potential or other public safety impacts, or any other adverse safety impact.
(c) The Board of Selectmen may adopt rules and regulations to govern the administration of the
licensing process, and in so doing may impose such terms and conditions upon granting such license
as it may consider to be appropriate.
(d) This bylaw shall not be interpreted to prohibit emergency motor vehicle services from operating
during such night-time hours or require any emergency vehicle services to obtain a license under this
bylaw in order to be permitted to operate during such night-time hours.
(e) This bylaw shall not apply to, nor shall be interpreted to require a license under this bylaw for
the operation during such night-time hours by, any of the following retail business establishments:
(i) any restaurant or food service establishment engaged in the sale of food or alcoholic
beverages to be consumed on the premises at which they are sold or to be consumed off the
premises at which they are sold when such sale is by a licensed common Victualler primarily
engaged in the sale of food to be consumed on such premises.
(ii) any retail business establishment that as of March 27, 1995 was regularly open to the
public for retail sales between the hours of 11:00 o'clock p.m. and 6:00 o'clock a.m.,
provided however, that if from and after such date any such establishment (A) increases its
hours of operation during such night-time hours beyond those hours of operation being
conducted as of March 27, 1995, or (B) changes the manner of conduct of its retail business
in any way that differs materially from the manner of conduct of such business as of March
27, 1995, and (C) the Board of Selectmen determines that as of a result of any such increase
or change, the nature or character of the business conducted by such retail business
establishment has become substantially more detrimental to the adjacent or nearby
residential neighborhood than was the business being conducted by such retail business
establishment as of March 27, 1995, then the Board of Selectmen shall be authorized to
determine that the provisions of this bylaw shall apply to such retail business establishment,
in which case such establishment shall be entitled to be open for business during such nighttime
hours only if it complies with the provisions of Section 49.2B(a) above. For purposes
of determining whether any such increase or change has been “substantially more
detrimental” the Board of Selectmen shall analyze such increase or change in light of the
impacts described in Section 49.2B(b)(2) above.
(f) Whoever violates any provision of this bylaw shall forfeit and pay a fine of three hundred dollars
($300) for each offense, and each calendar day on which any violation occurs shall constitute a
separate offense.
(g) The Board of Selectmen may, in addition to imposing the fines provided herein, secure
injunctive relief to prohibit any such operation not grandfathered or properly licensed as provided in
Sections (b) or (e) hereof.
49.2C Preparation and/or retail sale of food or beverage. (New section ATM 2006, Article 42)
(a) The Board of Selectmen may grant licenses to persons whose principal business is to prepare and
sell food or beverage at retail who are not otherwise licensed as a common Victualler. No person
who is eligible for such license shall conduct said business without being so licensed. This bylaw
shall not require the Selectmen to grant said license if, in their opinion, the public good does not
require it. For these purposes, in determining whether the public good is served, the Selectmen
shall ascertain whether the traveling public will be inconvenienced in its use of the public ways
and sidewalks, whether the business has sufficient parking, and whether the public safety is
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
protected. The fee for such license shall be determined from time to time by the Board of
Selectmen after a public hearing. (Amended ATM 2013)
(b) The Board of Selectmen may adopt rules and regulations to govern the administration of the
licensing process, and in doing so may impose such terms and conditions upon granting such
license as it may consider to be appropriate.
Provided, any person conducting said principal business as of the day this bylaw takes effect may
continue to do so for up to 90 days, by the end of which time said business shall be discontinued
unless a license has by then been issued. In entertaining an application the Selectmen shall apply the
standards set forth in Bylaw 49.2C insofar as is practicable considering that the applicant has been
operating prior to the Town enacting said bylaw.
49.3. Excavation in Streets and Sidewalks. No person except the Director of Public Works in the
performance of his duties shall break or dig up or cause to be broken or dug up the pavement or ground in
any public street or any sidewalk or ground or curbing in any public street without the permission in writing
of the Board of Public Works, nor having obtained such permission, shall fail to comply with the conditions
thereof. The Board of Public Works may give such permission on the first business day following the
commencement of any excavation required by an emergency and made by a department of the Town or a
corporation engaged in the manufacture, transmission or distribution of gas, electricity, or intelligence
transmitted by electricity. In this case, the rights granted by and conditions contained in such permission
shall apply to all acts of such department or corporation in making the excavation. In addition to any penalty
to which an excavator may be subjected under these bylaws for such failure, he shall also reimburse the
Town for all expenses and damages which the Town may be compelled to pay by reason of such
unauthorized use or any failure to comply with said conditions.
49.4. Fire on Streets. No person shall make any fire in any street in the Town except under the
authority of the Director of Public Works and the Chief Engineer of the Fire Department.
49.5. Ice and Snow on Streets. No person shall plow or shovel, lay, throw or place, or cause to be
laid, thrown or placed (either by one’s own action or by the actions of a plowing contractor or other agent)
any ice or snow on any street or sidewalk in the Town which has been cleared or plowed for travel.
(Amended ATM 2006, Article 37)
49.6. Removal of Vehicles. The Director of Public Works, or other officer having charge of ways,
for the purpose of removing or plowing snow, or removing ice, from any way, may remove or cause to be
removed to some convenient place, including a public garage, any vehicle interfering with such work. The
owner of such vehicle shall be liable for the reasonable cost of such removal and storage charges.
49.7. Playing in or Across Public Ways. No person shall throw stones, snowballs, sticks, or other
missiles, or kick or throw a football, or play at any game in which a ball is used, or fly any kite or balloon, or
shoot with or use a bow and arrow, gun, air-gun, or sling, in or across any public way in the Town.
49.8A. Mutilation of Plants. No person shall, without lawful authority, remove, cut, deface, mutilate
or apply paint to any tree, bush, flower or plant growing on land held under the jurisdiction of any Town
board.
49.8B. Replacement of Public Shade Trees. Any person, firm, corporation or agency that in the
course of construction or subdivision development wishes to remove any living Public Shade Tree with
caliper 2 1/2" or greater in diameter at 5' above grade level shall, in accordance with Chapter 87 Section 3 of
the Massachusetts General Laws, obtain a permit from the Natural Resources Commission as Tree Warden;
and, if removal is permitted, shall at no cost to the Town, within the spring or fall months following
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
completion of construction, replace in locations specified by the Tree Warden a number of smaller trees
determined to be equivalent on the following basis:
The total caliper of all replacement trees shall equal or exceed the total caliper of all trees to be
removed. Replacement trees shall be balled and burlapped and of caliper not less than 2 1/2" in diameter at 5'
above grade level. Species, caliper and location of replacement trees shall be determined by the Tree
Warden at the time of issuance of the permit.
The Tree Warden may require a bond, escrow account, irrevocable letter of credit, or other surety to
ensure Public Shade Tree replacement. Such surety may be held for one year from the date of planting to
ensure survival of the replacement trees. At the option of the applicant, the Town may, upon payment of an
agreed upon sum, replace said trees according to the standards herein set forth.
49.9A. Use of Firearms and Air-Guns. No person shall fire or discharge any firearm or air-gun in or
across any street in the Town, or on any property of the Town, or on any private property in the Town
without the written permission of the owner or tenant of such private property, but in no event shall such
firearm or air-gun be fired or discharged within 500 feet of a public street or a dwelling or other occupied
building other than a dwelling or building owned or occupied by the person entitled to give such permission.
This section shall not apply to the use of such weapons in the performance of a legal duty or military exercise
or in the lawful defense of the person, family or property of any citizen. (Amended ATM 2018.)
49.9B. Use of Traps. No person shall use, set, place or maintain any type of leghold, steel-jaw,
Conibear, or padded jaw trap within the limits of any highway, street, park, or other public property of the
Town, or on any private property except with the written consent of the owner or legal occupant or person
having the right of control thereof.
49.9C. Any person violating this Section shall be subject to a fine of not less than three hundred
dollars ($300) for each offense, and each trap in violation of paragraph 49.9B shall constitute a separate
offense.
49.10. Nude Bathing. No person in the nude shall bathe or swim in any of the lakes, ponds or rivers
within the Town.
49.11. Obstructions on Streets and Sidewalks. No person shall use any portion of any street which
the Town is obligated to keep in repair for the purpose of placing building materials or rubbish or moving a
building on either the sidewalk or roadway without a permit from the Board of Public Works and approval of
the Chief of Police. (Amended ATM 2002) No person to whom such a permit is issued shall fail to comply
with the conditions thereof. Application for such permit shall be made to the Board of Public Works. The
Board of Public Works may by vote grant such permit to be in force for a period they may designate, not
exceeding ninety days, upon condition that during the whole of every night, from sunset until sunrise,
warning lights shall be so placed as to warn travelers of the presence of the obstruction and upon such further
conditions as the Board of Public Works may by vote determine. The Board of Public Works may require
that a bond be furnished to secure the performance of the provisions of this section. A copy of said vote
certified by the Secretary or Clerk of the Board of Public Works shall forthwith be transmitted to the Chief of
Police.
49.11A. Regulation of Utility Poles/Replacement of Existing Poles (New Section ATM 2000)
(a) A distribution company or a telephone company engaging in the removal of an existing pole and the
installation of a new pole in place thereof shall, in accordance with Section 34B of Chapter 164 of the General
Laws, complete the transfer of wires, all repairs, and the removal of existing pole from the site within 90 days
from the date of installation of the new pole; provided, however, that for any approved commercial or industrial
construction project, the completion of which is expected to take longer than one year, said company shall be
required to remove such pole within six months from the date of installation of the new pole. The utility
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
responsible for setting the new pole shall notify in writing all other users and also the Board of Selectmen and
the Manager of the Municipal Light Plant of the starting date of such removal and installation work at least 48
hours prior to the commencement of such work. Said utility shall also require all other users to remove their
wiring and other attachments from the poles within 30 days of such notice, and all other users shall comply.
(b) Any distribution company, telephone company or user violating this section shall be subject to a fine
of not less than Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) for each offense, each day constituting a separate offense.
(c) The Board of Selectmen, or its designee, shall be the enforcement officer of this section. Upon the making
of any complaint that a violation of this Section has occurred, the Board of Selectmen shall within 14 days, or such
longer or shorter time as the board shall determine, convene a hearing to determine whether a complaint shall be
sought in District Court (or whether the provision for non-criminal disposition in Article 52 shall be implemented).
At said hearing, the Board shall also determine the date when the violation first occurred, for purposes of
establishing the date of offense, each subsequent day constituting a separate offense, so that the fine as set forth in
subparagraph (b) above may be correctly computed.
49.12a. Use of Town Water System. No person shall open a hydrant or turn off or turn on the water
in any water main, service pipe, hydrant, water post, drinking fountain, or other fixture or appurtenance not
on his own premises connected with the water system of the Town, nor make any opening into or connection
therewith, without authority from the Director of Public Works, except in case of fire.
49.12b. Restrictions on the Use of the Town’s Water Supply. (New Section ATM 2003)
49.12b.1 Authority This Bylaw is adopted by the Town under its police powers pursuant to the
Home Rule Amendment of the Massachusetts Constitution, Article LXXXIX, to protect public health and
welfare and its powers under M.G.L. c.40, §21 et seq. and implements the Town’s authority to regulate water
use pursuant to M.G.L. c. 41, §69B. This bylaw also implements the Town’s authority under M.G.L. c. 40,
§41A, conditioned upon a declaration of water supply emergency issued by the Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP).
49.12b.2 Purpose The purpose of this bylaw is to protect, preserve and maintain the public health,
safety and welfare whenever there is in force a State of Water Supply Conservation or State of Water Supply
Emergency by providing for enforcement of any duly imposed restrictions, requirements, provisions or
conditions imposed by the Town or by the DEP. .
49.12b.3 Definitions
a. Agriculture shall mean farming in all its branches and agriculture, as defined at
M.G.L. c. 128, § 1A.
b. Outdoor watering shall mean any residential, municipal, industrial, or commercial
watering of non-agricultural lawns, trees or shrubbery.
c. Person shall mean any individual, corporation trust, partnership, agency, authority
association, or other entity and any officer, employee, group or agent of such persons.
d. State of Water Supply Emergency shall mean a State of Water Supply Emergency
declared by the DEP under M.G.L. c.21G, §15-17.
e. State of Water Supply Conservation shall mean a State of Water Supply Conservation
declared by the Town pursuant to Section 4 of this bylaw.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
f. Water Users or Water Consumers shall mean all public and private users of the Town’s
public water system, irrespective of any person’s responsibility for billing purposes for
water used at any particular facility.
49.12b.4 Declaration of a State of Water Supply Conservation.
The Town, through the Board of Public Works, may declare a State of Water Supply Conservation
upon a determination by a majority vote of the Board of Public Works that a shortage of water exists and
conservation measures are appropriate to ensure an adequate supply of water to all water consumers. Public
notice of a State of Water Conservation shall be given under section 6 of this bylaw before it may be
enforced.
49.12b.5 Restricted Water Uses.
A declaration of a State of Water Supply Conservation shall include one or more of the following
restrictions, conditions, or requirements limiting the use of water as necessary to protect the water supply.
The applicable restrictions, conditions or requirements shall be included in the public notice required under
Section 6.
1) Outdoor Watering Hours Outdoor water use is permitted only during daily periods of low
demand, at night or early morning, to be specified in the declaration of a State of Water
Supply Conservation and public notice thereof.
2) Alternate Day Outdoor Water Use: Outdoor water use by water users with odd numbered
addresses is restricted to Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays. Outdoor water use by water
users with even numbered addresses is restricted to Wednesdays, Fridays and Sundays.
3) Outdoor Water Method Restriction: Outdoor watering is restricted to bucket, can or hand
held hose watering. The use and operation of automatic or unattended irrigation systems (inground
or hose-connected) is prohibited.
4) Car Washing: Washing of a car or vehicle is prohibited.
5) Filling Swimming Pools: Filling of swimming pools is prohibited.
6) Outdoor Water Use Ban: Outdoor water use is prohibited.
49.12b.6 Public Notification of a State of Water Supply Conservation and State of Water Supply
Emergency; Notification of DEP
Notification of any provision, restriction, requirement or condition imposed by the Town as part of a
State of Water Supply Conservation shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the
Town, or by such other means reasonably calculated to reach and inform all users of water of the State of
Water Supply Conservation. Notification of a State Water Supply Emergency declared by the DEP shall be
provided by furnishing a copy of the Notice to radio and television stations serving the area served by the
public water system as soon as possible, but no later than 48 hours after the public water system receives
notice of the DEP’s declaration. Any restriction imposed under Section 5 or in the DEP declaration of
emergency or Order shall not be effective until such notification is provided. Notification of the State of
Water Supply Conservation shall also be simultaneously provided to the DEP at the same time that
notification is given.
49.12b.7 Termination of State of Water Supply Conservation; Notice
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
A State of Water Supply Conservation may be terminated by a majority vote of the Board of Public
Works, upon a determination that the water supply shortage no longer exists. Public notification of the
termination of a State of Water Supply Conservation shall be given in the same manner required by Section
6.
49.12b.8 State of Water Supply Emergency; Compliance with DEP Orders
Upon notification to the public that the DEP has issued a State of Water Supply Emergency, no
person shall violate any provision, restriction, requirement, condition of any order approved or issued by the
DEP intended to bring about an end to the State of Emergency. The notice prescribed by this section shall be
in writing and shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation within the town. The notice shall
summarize the provisions of the Declaration of Water Supply Emergency and the requirements and
conditions thereof. Notice as prescribed by this section shall be sufficient for enforcement of the
requirements of such a Declaration on and after the date following newspaper publication.
49.12b.9 Violation and Penalties
Any person violating this bylaw shall be liable to the Town in the amount of $50.00 for the first
violation, and $100 for each subsequent violation which shall inure to the Town for such uses as the Board of
Public Works may direct. Fines shall be recovered by indictment, or on complaint before the District Court,
or by non-criminal disposition in accordance with Section 21D of Chapter 40 of the General Laws. For
purpose of non-criminal disposition, the enforcing person(s) shall be any police of the Town of Wellesley.
Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
49.12b.10 Severability. The invalidity of any portion or provision of this bylaw shall not invalidate
any other portion or provision thereof.
49.12b.11 Exemptions
The Board of Public Works may grant exemptions for the following uses:
a) Water to sustain animal life;
b) Swimming pools used as a primary means of exercise, therapy or rehabilitation located
at a medical or rehabilitation facility;
c) Commercial car or vehicle washing facilities;
provided the user demonstrates:
1. that the water will be used efficiently, and
2. that any additional eligibility criteria established by the Board of Public Works are being
met.
Requests for exemptions shall be made in writing to the Board of Public Works.
49.13. Internal Combustion Engines on Morse's Pond. The operation or use of any internal
combustion engine in or upon that portion of Morse's Pond situated in the Town of Wellesley is prohibited.
The provisions of this Section shall not apply to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or to any political
subdivision thereof.
49.14. Interference with Fire and Police Department Apparatus. No unauthorized person shall
handle or in any way interfere with apparatus, machinery or fixtures belonging to the Fire or Police
Department, or with any signal-box, wire, pole, or other thing connected with the fire alarm or police signal
system.
49.15. Interference with Passage of Fire Apparatus. No person shall leave any vehicle unattended
within the limits of any private way furnishing means of access for fire apparatus to any building so as to
interfere with or restrict the passage of such apparatus.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
49.16. Buildings Occupied by Fire or Police Department. No person shall enter into or remain in
any building occupied by the Fire or Police Department without the permission of the officer having charge
of such building, unless for some lawful purpose.
49.17. Interference with Hose Pipe. No person shall drive any vehicle upon or over any hose pipe
lawfully placed in a street, or in use at a fire, except with the consent of the person in charge thereof.
49.18. Interference with Town Property. No person shall enter into, climb on or remain in any
building or structure belonging to the Town without authorization from the department, board or official
having custody of the building or structure. No unauthorized person shall handle, injure, remove, tamper
with, or interfere with any seal, switch, wire, light, pole, fixture, apparatus, machinery or equipment
belonging to the Town.
49.19. Possession and Use of Alcoholic Beverages. Drinking or possession of any alcoholic
beverage, as defined in Chapter 138 of the Massachusetts General Laws, while in or upon any Wellesley
Public Schools building or grounds, or Town owned grounds, is prohibited. Drinking or possession of any
alcoholic beverage while in a Town building is prohibited, except insofar as may be allowed by temporary
license issued by the Board of Selectmen to a nonprofit organization; provided, however, that any license so
issued shall be conditioned on the licensee’s compliance with the requirements of Chapter 138 of the
Massachusetts General Laws and Chapter 635 of the Acts of 1982 and the Board of Selectmen’s Rules and
Regulations Governing Alcoholic Beverages. (Amended ATM 2018.)
No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage, as defined above, on any public way or way to which
the public has a right of access as invitees or licensees, including any person in a motor vehicle while it is in,
on, or upon any public way or any way to which the public has a right of access as aforesaid, within the limits
of the Town of Wellesley; and no person shall consume any alcoholic beverages, in, on, or upon any private
land or place without the consent of the owner or person in control of such private land or place.
Any person who violates this section may be arrested by a police officer without a warrant.
All alcoholic beverages being used in violation of this sentence may be seized and held until final
adjudication of the charge against any such person or persons has been made by the Court.
Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars
($50) for such offense.
49.19A. Consumption of Marijuana Prohibited. No person shall smoke, ingest, or otherwise use or
consume marijuana or tetrahydrocannabinol (as defined in Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 94C, Section
1, as amended) while in or upon any street, sidewalk, public way, including any person, in a motor vehicle
while it is in, on or upon any public way or any way to which the public has right of access within the limits
of the Town Wellesley, footway, passageway, stairs, bridge, park, playground, beach, recreation area, boat
landing, public building, schoolhouse, school grounds, cemetery, parking lot, or any area owned by or under the
control of the Town, or in or upon any bus or other passenger conveyance operated by a common carrier within
the Town, or in any place to which the public has a right of access.
Violation of this Section is punishable by a fine of $300. If said fine is unpaid through the non-criminal
disposition process as outlined under Bylaw Article 52. Non-criminal Disposition, such payment shall be
enforceable through indictment or on complaint before a district court. Any penalty imposed under this
Bylaw shall be in addition to any civil penalty imposed under General Laws Chapter 94C, Section 32L.
(New section ATM 2013)
49.20. Licensing of Vehicles for Hire. Except as otherwise provided by law, the Selectmen, upon
such terms and conditions as they may deem expedient, may grant licenses to owners of vehicles to use such
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
vehicles for the conveyance of persons or property for hire, and may designate stands and locations upon the
streets of the Town where such vehicles may stand or wait for employment. Every such license shall be
granted to expire on the last day of March next ensuing after the date of its issue and it may be revoked at
any time for cause satisfactory to said Board. Each license may cover one or more vehicles belonging to the
same owner, shall bear upon its face the date of its issue, the date of its expiration, the name and address of
the owner of the vehicle or vehicles to whom the license is issued, and a description of each vehicle so
licensed sufficient for its identification. The fee for each license shall be twenty-five dollars for each vehicle
covered thereby and no license shall be transferred except with the approval of the Selectmen duly endorsed
thereon. No person shall hold himself out as the owner, driver or operator of any vehicle used for the
purposes mentioned in this section, unless such vehicle is duly licensed as provided in this section.
49.21. Licensing of Junk Dealers. No person shall collect, deal in, or keep a shop for the purchase,
sale or barter of junk, old metals or second hand articles within the limits of the Town, unless licensed by the
Selectmen under such rules and regulations as they shall prescribe.
49.22. Possession and Use of Inflammable Substances. Except as otherwise provided in Chapter
148, no person shall keep, store, use, manufacture, sell or otherwise handle petroleum products, fuel oil,
gasoline or inflammable fluids or compounds or any substance having such properties that it might
spontaneously or acting under the influence of any contiguous substance, or of any chemical or physical
agency, ignite or inflame or generate inflammable or explosive vapors or gases to a dangerous extent without
registering so to do and obtaining a license therefor. The fee for such license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00)
and the annual Public Safety Certificates shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). This section shall not apply
to permits issued by the Chief Engineer of the Fire Department pursuant to the authority granted under
Chapter 148, Section 10A of the General Laws.
49.23. Clearance Areas at Intersections. At each intersection of public or private streets or ways in
the Town there shall be a clearance area consisting of the triangular area formed by the side lines of the
intersecting streets or ways and a line joining each side line at a point twenty (20) feet distance from the
point of intersection or, in case of rounded corners, from the point at which the side lines would intersect if
projected. In case of uncertainty as to a point of intersection of such projected side line the Town Engineer
shall certify to the Selectmen the clearance area drawn as nearly as may be in accordance with the foregoing
provisions and having due regard for the safety of the public. No fence or other structure, shrubbery, foliage,
hedge, tree or the like, which unreasonably interferes with sightlines across such clearance areas and thereby
is hazardous to the safety of the public shall be erected, planted, maintained or allowed to exist within a
clearance area. This section shall not apply to buildings which are not in violation of the Town Zoning
Bylaws.
49.24. Fire Lanes. The Board of Fire Engineers is authorized to designate Fire Lanes on any
property within the Town to allow for unimpeded access of firefighting apparatus. Fire Lanes shall be
designated and posted as such. No person shall obstruct or park a vehicle in any Fire Lane.
49.25. Mechanical Protection Devices. Except as approved in writing by the Wellesley Fire
Department and/or Police Department pursuant to regulations adopted by them, no person shall install a
mechanical protection device that is automatically keyed to and/or activates the telephone (numbers) lines
controlled by and/or listed to the Wellesley Fire Department and/or Police Department; all devices installed
before the effective date of this section shall be removed within sixty days of said effective date, unless so
approved. For the purposes of this section a mechanical protection device shall be defined as an electrically
operated instrument composed of sensing apparatus and related hardware which automatically sends over
regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a pre-recorded voice alarm upon receipt of a
stimulus from the sensing apparatus that has detected a physical force or condition inherently characteristic
of a fire or unauthorized intrusion.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
Notwithstanding compliance with the foregoing paragraph, no persons shall maintain any protection
device designed to emit an audible alarm upon detection of a physical force or condition inherently
characteristic of an unauthorized intrusion on property which continuously or intermittently sounds for a
period of time in excess of twenty (20) minutes. All such devices installed before the effective date of this
Section shall be brought into compliance hereof or shall be removed within sixty (60) days of said effective
date. Any person violating this Section shall be subject to a fine of not less than twenty ($20) dollars for
each offense.
The Board of Fire Engineers shall enact regulation requiring that any person having installed an
electric or mechanical fire protection device in a lodging house, shall, in addition to such other requirements
as shall be required in the license for such, take such steps as said regulations shall specify to preserve the
integrity and safety of the device against vandalism or other improper use. Said regulations shall include,
among other things, that there be posted in a conspicuous place on each floor copies of the General Laws
making it a crime to interfere with firefighting operations and the causing of a false fire alarm. Said
regulations may also govern lodgers and visitors, and may include penalties for the violation of the same,
which may be enforceable under the procedure for non-criminal disposition set forth in Town Bylaw Article
52. BYLAW VIOLATION: NON-CRIMINAL DISPOSITION
The Board of Selectmen shall enact regulations requiring that any person having installed an electric
or mechanical police alarm device shall, in addition to such other requirements as shall be required by law, or
deemed to be in the Town's best interest, take such steps as said regulations shall specify to preserve the
integrity and safety of the device against improper or negligent use. Said regulations shall include penalties
for the violation of the same, which may be enforceable under the procedure for non-criminal disposition set
forth in Town Bylaw Article 52. BYLAW VIOLATION: NON-CRIMINAL DISPOSITION.
49.26. Handicapped Parking.
A. Any person having lawful control of a public or private way or of improved or enclosed
property used as off-street parking areas for businesses, shopping malls, theaters,
auditoriums, sporting or recreational facilities, cultural centers, residential dwellings, or
for any other place where the public has a right of access as invitees or licensees shall, if
said area contains more than 15 parking spaces, reserve, identify and locate parking
spaces in said off-street parking areas for any vehicle owned and operated by a disabled
veteran or handicapped person pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (23) of Section
21 of Chapter 40 of the General Laws.
B. The leaving of any unauthorized vehicle within parking spaces designated for use by
disabled veterans or handicapped persons as authorized and required by this bylaw, or in
any manner as to obstruct a curb ramp designed for use by handicapped persons as a
means of egress to a street or public way, is hereby prohibited. Whoever violates any
provisions of this bylaw 49.29.(B.) shall forfeit and pay for each offense the fine
established for the same in Section 10-1 of Article X of the Town Traffic Regulations, as
the same may from time to time be amended; and for each subsequent offense, the
vehicle may be removed according to the provisions of Section 120 D of Chapter 266 of
the General Laws.(Sentence amended STM 5/21/01 9:30)
49.27. Disabled, Dismantled, Inoperative and/or Unregistered Motor Vehicles. No person in charge
or control of any property in any part of the Town, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise,
shall allow any partially dismantled, inoperative, wrecked, junked or unregistered motor vehicle to remain on
such property longer than thirty (30) days, unless said vehicle:
1. is enclosed within a building or, if not enclosed,
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
2. is parked or stored other than in the front yard of the property, and is screened from view
from all public or private ways and no unsightly condition is visible from adjacent
property is created or,
3. is stored or parked on land or premises located in any business district, by a licensee
authorized by the Board of Selectmen to sell or lease motor vehicles pursuant to Section
59 of Chapter 140 of the General Laws.
The right to park or store such a vehicle under subparagraph (2) shall be restricted to no more than
one such vehicle on the property at the same time.
49.28. Recreational Trailers or Vehicles. No person shall keep, store or park a recreational trailer or
vehicle unless said trailer or vehicle:
1. is enclosed within a building or, if not enclosed,
2. is stored or parked on property being used for residential purposes, is located thereon
other than in the front yard of the property, as defined in the Zoning Bylaws, is screened
from view from all public or private ways, and is used solely for intermittent
recreational, non-commercial use by the resident(s) living on the property, or
3. is stored or parked on premises by a licensee authorized by the Board of Selectmen to
sell or lease motor vehicles pursuant to Section 59 of Chapter 140 of the General Laws.
The right to park or store such a vehicle or trailer shall be unrestricted for a period of not more than
forty-eight (48) hours for loading or unloading purposes. In no case shall any such trailer or vehicle be
occupied on any property for an aggregate total of more than thirty (30) days in any one year.
For purposes of this section, a recreational trailer or vehicle is defined as follows:
A vehicular, portable unit designed for travel, camping or recreational use, including but not limited
to the following:
1. Travel Trailer - A vehicular, portable dwelling unit built on a chassis, being of any
length provided its gross weight does not exceed 4500 pounds, or being of any weight
provided its overall length does not exceed 28 feet.
2. Pick-Up Camper - A portable dwelling unit, designed to be mounted on a pick-up truck
or chassis, whether or not so mounted.
3. Motorized Camper - A portable dwelling designed and constructed as an integral part of
a self-propelled vehicle.
4. Tent Trailer - A folding structure, constructed of canvas, plastic or similar water
repellent material, designed to be mounted on wheels to be used as a temporary
dwelling.
5. Boat Trailer - A vehicle without motive power, designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle
and designed for the hauling or storage of a boat, aircraft, snowmobile or other
recreational vehicle.
6. Boat - Any vehicle for recreational use on water having an overall length of 16 or more
feet.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
49.29. Scenic Roads. Whoever violates the provisions of Section 15C of Chapter 40 of the
Massachusetts General Laws, governing Scenic Road designations, or the Town of Wellesley Scenic Road
Regulations, shall forfeit and pay for each offense a fine not exceeding three hundred ($300) dollars.
49.30. Temporary and Transient Vendors. The Board of Selectmen shall enact regulations
governing the licensing and manner of conducting business of persons engaging in a temporary or transient
business activity, whether or not for profit, in the Town. Said regulations may include penalties for the
violation of the same, which may be enforceable under the procedure for non-criminal disposition set forth in
Town Bylaw Article 52. BYLAW VIOLATION: NON-CRIMINAL DISPOSITION.
49.31. Restrictions on hours of certain commercial activity. Except in an emergency, and except as
permitted by statute or the Chief of Police as herein provided, no person shall undertake or perform any
outdoor commercial activity involving construction, earth moving, yard maintenance, home improvement, or
the delivery or pick up of equipment or supplies for use therein, except during the following periods of time:
Monday through Friday: 7 a.m. until 7 p.m.
Saturday and state observed holidays: 8 a.m. until 7 p.m.
Sunday: Prohibited.
The foregoing regulated activity includes, but is not limited to, the use of equipment powered by electric or
internal combustion engines.
Upon application, the Chief of Police or his designee may issue permits for the conduct of necessary
commercial outdoor activity which could not be performed during the otherwise permitted times without
serious suffering, loss, damage, or public inconvenience.
This bylaw shall not apply to snow removal operations.
(New Section ATM 2009, Article 41)
49.32. Penalty for Violation. Whoever violates any provisions of this article shall, in cases not
otherwise provided for, forfeit and pay for each offense a fine not exceeding fifty ($50) dollars.
49.33 Fingerprint-Based Criminal Record Background Checks (New Section STM 2011)
49.33.1 Purpose and Authorization
In order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of Wellesley, and as
authorized by Chapter 6, section 172B ½ of the Massachusetts General Laws as enacted by Chapter 256 of
the Acts of 2010, this by-law shall require a) applicants for certain Town licenses permitting the engagement
in specific occupational activities within the Town as enumerated in Section 49.36.2 below to submit to
fingerprinting by the Wellesley Police Department, b) the Police Department to conduct criminal record
background checks based on such fingerprints, and c) the Town to consider the results of such background
checks in determining whether or not to grant a license.
The Town authorizes the Massachusetts State Police, the Massachusetts Department of Criminal Justice
Information Systems (DCJIS), and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) as may be applicable to conduct
on the behalf of the Town and its Police Department fingerprint-based state and national criminal record
background checks, including of FBI records, consistent with this by-law. The Town authorizes the Police
Department to receive and utilize FBI records in connection with such background checks, consistent with
this by-law.
49.33.2 Applicant's Submission to Fingerprinting by the Wellesley Police Department
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
Any applicant for a license to engage in any of the following occupational activities within the Town shall
submit a full set of fingerprints taken by the Wellesley Police Department within ten (l0) days of the date of
the application for a license for the purpose of conducting a state and national criminal record background
check to determine the suitability of the applicant for the license:
Manager of Alcoholic Beverage License
Hawker and Peddler
Owner or Operator of Public Conveyance
Dealer of Second-Hand Articles
Ice Cream Truck Vendor
At the time of fingerprinting, the Police Department shall notify the individual fingerprinted that the
fingerprints will be used to check the individual's FBI criminal history records.
49.33.3 Police Department Processing of Fingerprint-Based Criminal Record Background Checks
and Communication of Results
The Police Department shall transmit fingerprints it has obtained pursuant to Section
49.36.2 of this by-law to the Identification Section of the Massachusetts State Police, DCJIS, and/or the FBI
as may be necessary for the purpose of conducting fingerprint-based state and national criminal records
background checks of license applicants specified in Section 49.36.2.
The Police Department shall provide the applicant with a copy of the results of his or her fingerprint-based
criminal record background check and supply the applicant the opportunity to complete or challenge the
accuracy of the information contained in it, including in the FBI identification record. The Police Department
shall also supply applicants with information regarding the procedures for obtaining a change, correction, or
updating of a criminal record, including a copy of 28 C.F.R. Part 16.34 pertaining to FBI identification
records. The Police Department shall not utilize the fingerprint-based criminal record background check
pursuant to the paragraph below until it has taken the steps detailed in this paragraph and otherwise complied
with the Town's policy applicable to Town licensing-related criminal record background checks.
The Police Department shall communicate the results of fingerprint-based criminal record background
checks to the applicable licensing authority within the Town. The Police Department shall indicate whether
the applicant has been convicted of, or is awaiting final adjudication for, a crime that bears upon his or her
suitability, or any felony or misdemeanor that involved force or threat of force, controlled substances or a
sex-related offense.
49.33.4 Reliance on Results of Fingerprint-Based Criminal Record Background Checks
Licensing authorities of the Town shall utilize the results of fingerprint-based criminal record background
checks for the sole purpose of determining the suitability of the subjects of the checks in connection with the
license applications specified in Section 49.36.2. A Town licensing authority may deny an application for a
license on the basis of the results of a fingerprint-based criminal record background check if it determines
that the results of the check render the subject unsuitable for the proposed occupational activity. The
licensing authority shall consider all applicable laws, regulations and Town policies bearing on an applicant's
suitability in making this determination. The licensing authority shall not deny a license based on
information in a criminal record unless the applicant has been afforded a reasonable time to correct or
complete the record or has declined to do so.
49.33.5 Compliance with Law, Regulation, and Town Policy
Implementation of this by-law and the conducting of fingerprint-based criminal record background checks by
the Town shall be in accordance with all applicable laws, regulations, and Town policies, including, but not
limited to, the Town's policy applicable to licensing-related criminal record background checks which shall
include record retention and confidentiality requirements. The Town shall not disseminate the results of
fingerprint-based criminal background checks except as may be provided by law, regulation, and Town
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
policy. The Town shall not disseminate criminal record information received from the FBI to unauthorized
persons or entities.
49.33.6 Fees. The fee charged by the Police Department for the purpose of conducting fingerprintbased
criminal record background checks shall be one hundred dollars ($100). A portion of the fee, as
specified in Mass. Gen. Laws Chapter 6, Section 172B 1/2, shall be deposited into the Firearms Fingerprint
Identity Verification Trust Fund, and the remainder of the fee may be retained by the Town for costs
associated with the administration of the fingerprinting system.
This by-law shall take effect May 4, 2012.
ARTICLE 50. MUNICIPAL PARKING LOT REGULATIONS
50.1. Definitions. For the purposes of this article
a. "Person" shall mean and include an individual, firm, co-partnership, association or
corporation.
b. Municipal Parking Lot" shall mean and include any land acquired or leased by the Town
for use as a parking lot and any other land of the Town set aside for such use, either
permanently or temporarily, by vote of Town Meeting.
c. Parking Meter" shall mean any mechanical device, not inconsistent with the provisions of
this Article, placed or erected on any municipal parking lot of the Town for regulation of
parking.
d. “Parking Meter Space" shall mean a space in the portion of any municipal parking lot
where parking meters have been installed which is duly designated for the parking of a
single vehicle by painted lines or other markings on the surface of the lot adjacent to or
adjoining a parking meter.
50.2. Revocable License to Park. The parking of any vehicle in a municipal parking lot shall be
under a temporary license or permit from the Town. The license or permit shall be granted only to those
persons who comply with, and shall be subject to, the provisions and conditions set out in this article and in
the policies and procedures adopted by the Selectmen under this Article. The license or permit shall be
revocable at the will of the Town.
No person shall enter upon any municipal parking lot except in connection with the parking of a
vehicle therein in accordance with such a license or permit.
50.3. Installation of Meters. Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 40, Section 22C of the General
Laws, parking meters shall be installed in such municipal parking lots or portions thereof as the Selectmen
shall determine from time to time. Such meters shall be installed under the direction and supervision of the
Selectmen in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
Each parking meter installed hereunder shall show by proper legend the maximum parking time
established by the Selectmen for the parking meter space adjacent to it, as hereinafter provided, and shall at
all times show the balance of parking time permitted. At the expiration of the period for which a parking fee
was paid, the meter shall indicate illegal or overtime parking. Each such meter shall show by similar legend
the parking fees established by the Selectmen for said space.
50.4. Assumption of Risk. By parking a vehicle in a municipal parking lot the owner or operator
thereof accepts and exercises a license or permit from the Town to do so under the provisions of this Article
and thereby agrees to assume all risk of and responsibility for any loss or damage thereto or to any property
therein, while said vehicle is in said municipal parking lot, from any cause whatever and to indemnify the
Town, its officers, officials and employees, and save it and them harmless from and against all claims and
demands whatsoever for or because of such loss or damage.
Any person, including but not limited to any owner, operator, or occupant of a vehicle, going into,
upon or across a municipal parking lot, whether on foot or in a vehicle, for or in connection with the parking
of a vehicle therein accepts and exercises a license or permit from the Town under the provisions of this
Article and thereby agrees to assume all risk of and responsibility for injuries to his person, or for his death,
while on or as a result of his having been on said lot, from any cause whatever, and that neither he nor any of
his heirs, executors, administrators or assigns will make any claim or demand whatever against the Town or
any of its officers, officials or employees for or because of such injuries or death.
50.5. Maintenance of Meters. The Board of Selectmen or its designee shall be responsible for the
maintenance and repair of all parking meters installed in municipal parking lots. (Amended ATM 2002)
50.6. Permitted Parking Periods. The maximum periods of time vehicles will be permitted to park in
the several municipal parking lots of the Town and in the various parking meter spaces therein shall be
established by policies and procedures adopted by the Selectmen.
No person shall park a vehicle in a municipal parking lot or in a parking meter space therein for
longer than the maximum parking period established for said lot or space.
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in a parking meter any coin for the purposes of
permitting a vehicle to remain in a parking meter space beyond the maximum period of time established for
that space.
50.7. Parking Fees. The fees for parking vehicles in municipal parking lots and in parking meter
spaces for such lots shall be established by policies adopted by the Selectmen.
The Selectmen may by such policies establish lower or different fees for residents than those which
are payable by nonresidents or exempt such residents from the payment of such fees. If the Selectmen shall
so establish more favorable parking privileges for residents they may by such policies provide for the issuance
to such residents of plates, stickers or other insignia to be affixed to their vehicles to show that they are
entitled to residents' privileges.
The owner or operator of a vehicle parking the same in a parking meter space shall immediately
deposit in the parking meter for that space the required coin or coins of the United States for the maximum
parking time established for said space, or for any permitted subdivision thereof, as shown on the meter; and
if so required, he shall set the mechanism in motion.
50.8. Safety Precautions. The ignition keys shall be removed and the hand brake or emergency brake
shall be set by the owner or operator of every vehicle parked in a municipal parking lot.
50.9. Animals. No animals or pets shall be left in or upon any vehicle parked in a municipal parking
lot.
50.10. Prohibited Parking. No person shall park a vehicle in a parking meter space, or in any other
portion of a municipal parking lot where parking fees are payable, without paying the fees established by
policies adopted by the Selectmen under this article, unless he shall have been exempted from payment of
said fees by such policies because he is a resident.
No person shall park a vehicle in the portion of any municipal parking lot where parking meters have
been installed unless such vehicle is wholly within a parking meter space adjacent to such a meter.
50.11. Interference with Meters. No unauthorized person shall open, break, injure, destroy or tamper
with any parking meter.
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in such a meter any slug, device or metal substance,
or any other substitute for a coin required for the operation of such a meter, or do any other act or thing which
will cause such a meter not to operate properly.
50.12. Collection of Fees. The Board of Selectmen or its designee shall be responsible for the
collection of all fees payable for parking in the municipal parking lots.(Amended ATM 2002) Monies
deposited in parking meters shall be collected at such intervals as the Selectmen shall direct. All monies
collected under this section shall be deposited forthwith with the Town Treasurer in the special account
known as the Wellesley Parking Meter Account.
50.13. Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department, under the direction
and supervision of the Chief of Police, to enforce the provisions of this Article and the policies adopted by the
Selectmen under it.
50.14. Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article, or of the policies adopted
by the Selectmen under it, shall be subject to a fine of not more than twenty dollars ($20.00) for each offense.
50.15. Policies and Procedures. The Selectmen shall adopt, amend and repeal policies and procedures
under the provisions of this Article. Policies and procedures under Section 50.6. are traffic regulations and
shall be published in accordance with Section 22, Chapter 40 of the General Laws.
50.16. Partial Invalidity. If any provision of this article is for any reason declared to be
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this article.
ARTICLE 51. USE OF PESTICIDES
51.1. Definition of "Pesticides". All chemicals defined under the Massachusetts Pesticide Control
Act, Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 132B, and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
51.2. Registration of Applicators. All commercial pesticide applicators operating within the Town
of Wellesley must register with the Town of Wellesley Health Department. Prior to the application of any
pesticides within the Town of Wellesley the applicator must provide proof of licensure for each employee
who will be applying pesticides within the Town of Wellesley.
51.2.1. Each commercial applicator who registers with the Town shall be given one or more
sticker(s) or decal(s) that indicate that the applicator is registered with the Town. The sticker or decal shall be
plainly visible on the driver's side of the vehicle.
51.2.2. Each applicator who registers shall be given a copy of this bylaw and a map of the Town's
Water Supply Protection Districts.
51.2.3. A fee sufficient to cover the costs of registration and decal(s) may be levied by the Health
Department.
51.3. State Posting/Flagging Requirements. Commercial applicators shall fully comply with state
posting and flagging requirements.
51.4. Penalties for Failure to Comply. Any commercial pesticide applicator who fails to register
with the Health Department and who dispenses or uses pesticides in the Town without being registered shall
be subject to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the failure to register.
51.4.l. A second failure to register shall be punishable by a fine of two hundred dollars ($200).
51.4.2. A subsequent failure to register shall be punishable by denial of the right to apply pesticides
in the Town for one year.
51.4.3. Any commercial applicator who fails to comply with state posting and flagging requirements
shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Section 51.4.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
ARTICLE 52.
BYLAW, RULE OR REGULATION VIOLATIONS; NON-CRIMINAL DISPOSITION
(Amended/Replaced ATM 2018.)
A. Criminal complaint. Whoever violates any provision of these bylaws may be penalized by indictment or
on complaint brought in the District Court. Except as may be otherwise provided by law and as the District
Court may see fit to impose, the maximum penalty for each violation or offense brought in such manner shall
be three hundred dollars ($300).
B. Noncriminal disposition. Whoever violates any provision of these bylaws, the violation of which is subject
to a specific penalty, may be penalized by a noncriminal disposition as provided in MGL C. 40, § 21D. The
noncriminal method of disposition may also be used for violations of any rule or regulation of any municipal
officer, board or department which is subject to a specific penalty.
Without intending to limit the generality of the foregoing, it is the intention of this provision that the
following bylaws and sections of bylaws are to be included within the scope of this subsection, that the specific
penalties, as listed herein, shall apply in such cases and that in addition to police officers, who shall in all cases
be considered enforcing persons for the purpose of this provision, the municipal personnel listed for each
section, if any, shall also be enforcing persons for such section. Each day on which any violations exist shall
be deemed to be a separate offense.
(1) General provisions subject to enforcement under M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D:
(a) Consumption of Marijuana (Article 49.19A).
[1] Enforcement agents: police officers.
[2] Fine schedule: first and subsequent offenses, three hundred dollars ($300).
(b) Regulation of Utility Poles Bylaw (Article 49.11A).
[1] Enforcement agents: Board of Selectmen.
[2] Fine schedule: first and subsequent offenses, three hundred dollars ($300).
(c) Water Supply Restrictions (Article 49.12b).
[1] Enforcement agents: police officers.
[2] Fine schedule: first offense, fifty dollars ($50); second and subsequent offenses, one
hundred dollars ($100).
(d) Mechanical Protection Devices (Article 49.28).
[1] Enforcement agents: Board of Fire Engineers and Board of Selectmen.
[2] Fine schedule: first and subsequent offenses, twenty dollars ($20).
(e) Temporary and Transient Vendor Bylaw (Article 49.33).
[1] Enforcement agents: Board of Selectmen.
[2] Fine schedule: first offense, one hundred fifty dollars ($150); second and subsequent
offenses, three hundred dollars ($300).
(f) Police Regulations (Article 49) not otherwise specified herein.
[1] Enforcement agents: police officers.
[2] Fine schedule: first and subsequent offenses, fifty dollars ($50).
(g) Animal Control (Article 47).
[1] Enforcement agents: Animal Control Officer.
[2] Fine schedule:
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
i. For violations of the requirements proof of a current rabies vaccination or a
certification of exemption from the vaccination requirement: first and
subsequent offenses, one hundred dollars ($100).
ii. For violations of the licensing requirements of individual dogs: fifty dollars
($50) for each unlicensed dog.
iii. For violations of Articles 47.6.b and 47.6.c: first offense, fifty dollars ($50);
second offense, one hundred dollars ($100); third and subsequent offenses,
three hundred dollars ($300).
iv. All other violations of Article 47, not described in i. through iii., above: first
offense, one hundred dollars ($100); second offense, two hundred dollars
($200); third and subsequent offenses, three hundred dollars ($300).
(2) Rules and regulations of the Board of Health subject to enforcement under M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D:
(a) Abrasive Blasting Regulations (Chapter XVII).
[1] Enforcement agents: Board of Health agents.
[2] Fine schedule: first offense, two hundred dollars ($200); second and subsequent
offenses, three hundred dollars ($300).
(b) Animal Regulations (Chapter XVI) – keeping a feral animal.
[1] Enforcement agents: Board of Health agents.
[2] Fine schedule: first and subsequent offenses, fifty dollars ($50).
(c) Animal Regulations (Chapter XVI) – general.
[1] Enforcement agents: Board of Health agents.
[2] Fine schedule: first and subsequent offenses, twenty-five dollars ($25).
(d) Food Service Regulations (Chapter I) - general.
[1] Enforcement agents: Board of Health agents.
[2] Fine schedule: first offense, fifty dollars ($50); second offense, one hundred dollars
($100); third offence, two hundred dollars ($200); fourth and subsequent offenses,
three hundred dollars ($300).
(e) Food Service Regulations (Chapter I) – Remodeling without a permit.
[1] Enforcement agents: Board of Health agents.
[2] Fine schedule: first and subsequent offenses, two hundred dollars ($200).
(f) Food Service Regulations – Addition of food service operation.
[1] Enforcement agents: Board of Health agents.
[2] Fine schedule: first and subsequent offenses, one hundred fifty dollars ($150).
(g) Housing Regulations (Chapter II) – General.
[1] Enforcement agents: Board of Health agents.
[2] Fine schedule: first and subsequent offenses, one hundred fifty dollars ($150).
(h) Nuisance Regulations (Chapter III).
[1] Enforcement agents: Board of Health agents.
[2] Fine schedule: first offense, fifty dollars ($50); second offense, one hundred dollars
($100); third offence, two hundred dollars ($200); fourth and subsequent offenses,
three hundred dollars ($300).
(i) Pool Regulations (Chapter XII).
[1] Enforcement agents: Board of Health agents.
[2] Fine schedule: first and subsequent offenses, two hundred dollars ($200).
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
(j) Rubbish Regulations (Chapter VI).
[1] Enforcement agents: Board of Health agents.
[2] Fine schedule: first and subsequent offenses, two hundred dollars ($200).
(k) Hazardous Waste Regulations.
[1] Enforcement agents: Board of Health agents.
[2] Fine schedule: first and subsequent offenses, two hundred dollars ($200).
(l) Tobacco Regulations (Chapter XVIII).
[1] Enforcement agents: Board of Health agents.
[2] Fine schedule: first offense, one hundred dollars ($100); second offence, two hundred
dollars ($200); third and subsequent offenses, three hundred dollars ($300).
(m) Sewage Regulations (Chapter V) - general.
[1] Enforcement agents: Board of Health agents.
[2] Fine schedule: first offense, one hundred dollars ($100); second offence, two hundred
dollars ($200); third and subsequent offenses, three hundred dollars ($300).
(n) Sewage Regulations (Chapter V) – Installing well without a permit.
[1] Enforcement agents: Board of Health agents.
[2] Fine schedule: first and subsequent offenses, two hundred dollars ($200).
(o) Sewage Regulations (Chapter V) – Installing well without an installer’s permit.
[1] Enforcement agents: Board of Health agents.
[2] Fine schedule: first and subsequent offenses, two hundred dollars ($200).
(p) Sewage Regulations (Chapter V) – Use of unauthorized chemicals.
[1] Enforcement agents: Board of Health agents.
[2] Fine schedule: first and subsequent offenses, two hundred dollars ($200).
(q) Operation without a required permit or license.
[1] Enforcement agents: Board of Health agents.
[2] Fine schedule: first offense, two hundred dollars ($200); subsequent days on which
the violation continues, fifty dollars ($50).
(r) Well drilling without a permit (Chapter X).
[1] Enforcement agents: Board of Health agents.
[2] Fine schedule: first offense and subsequent offenses, three hundred dollars ($300).
(s) Illegal Dumping (Chapter VII).
[1] Enforcement agents: Board of Health agents.
[2] Fine schedule: first offense and subsequent offenses, three hundred dollars ($300).
(t) Disposal of Refuse Violations (Chapter VI).
[1] Enforcement agents: Board of Health agents.
[2] Fine schedule: first offense and subsequent offenses, two hundred dollars ($200).
(u) Lead Paint Removal Violations (Chapter XV).
[1] Enforcement agents: Board of Health agents.
[2] Fine schedule: first offense and subsequent offenses, one hundred dollars ($100).
(v) Body Art (Chapter XIX).
[1] Enforcement agents: Board of Health agents.
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through ATM 2018)
[2] Fine schedule: first offense and subsequent offenses, one hundred dollars ($100).
(w) Plastic Bag Bylaw (Article 34.5C).
[1] Enforcement agents: Board of Health agents.
[2] Fine schedule: first offense, fifty dollars ($50); second and subsequent offenses, one
hundred dollars ($100).
(x) Rules and regulations of the Board of Health - not otherwise specified herein.
[1] Enforcement agents: Board of Health agents.
[2] Fine schedule: first offense, twenty-five dollars ($25); second offense, fifty dollars
($50); third and subsequent offenses, one hundred dollars ($100).
ARTICLE 53.
PUBLIC NUISANCE
a. No owner or tenant shall keep in the public view, on any lot, in any residential district, any
substantial amount of junk or debris for more than a reasonable amount of time.
b. Definitions
1. “Junk and Debris” includes, but is not limited to, scrap metal, construction materials,
unsafe and dilapidated accessory buildings, rags, plastics, batteries, paper, trash,
furniture, which is not in active for any purpose authorized in a residential district.
2. “A Substantial Amount” shall mean a quantity of material which occupies more than 375
cubic feet in the aggregate on any lot.
3. Reasonable Amount of Time” shall mean ninety (90)days.
c. Conditions existing at the date of the Bylaw enactment, which meet the definition of substantial
amounts of junk or debris must be brought into compliance within six months of the date of approval
of this Bylaw.
d. Enforcement
1. The Building Inspector shall be charged with the interpretation and enforcement of this
Bylaw.
2. Anyone found in violation may be fined $25.00 for each day the violation persists beginning
thirty (30) days after notice of violation.
e. Action under this Bylaw shall not bar any separate action initiated by any other Town department
for health, fire safety or other violations.
ARTICLE 54. AMENDMENT AND REPEAL
54.1. Amendment. "Amendment" includes modification and repeal of these bylaws and the addition
of new provisions.
54.2 Procedure. A motion to amend or repeal these bylaws or any portion of them shall be made
to Town Meeting in accordance with the usual procedure for placing an item in the warrant for any Annual or
Special Town Meeting.
54.3 Majority Vote. No bylaw shall be adopted, amended, or repealed unless approved by a
majority of those voting on the question.
1 | P a g e
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through STM 2019)
ARTICLE 55. REVOLVING FUNDS
(NEW ATM 2017. Amended ATM 2019.)
55.1 Establishment of Revolving Funds
Pursuant to Section 53E1/2 of Chapter 44 of the General Laws, the following individual revolving
funds shall be authorized:
a. Street Opening Maintenance Fund.
Funds held in the Street Opening Maintenance Fund shall be expended under the direction of
the Department of Public Works for administrative services related to issuing permits for
work conducted in the public way and for inspection of that work to ensure compliance with
town standards. Receipts credited to this fund shall include permit fees collected for work
conducted in the public way.
b. DPW Field Use Fund.
Funds held in the DPW Field Use Fund shall be expended for maintenance of the Town’s
playing fields and track and Playing Fields Task Force administrative costs, under the
direction of the Department of Public Works. Receipts credited to this fund shall include fees
charged to field and/or track users.
c. Turf Field Fund.
Funds held in the Turf Field Fund shall be expended for repairs to and replacement of the
artificial turf at Sprague Field and Hunnewell Field, under the direction of the Department of
Public Works. Receipts credited to this fund shall include fees charged to field users.
d. Tree Bank Fund.
Funds held in the Tree Bank Fund shall be expended for buying, planting, and maintaining
trees under the direction of the Department of Public Works. Receipts credited to this fund
shall include contributions in lieu of tree replanting.
e. Baler, Compacters and other RDF Equipment Repair Fund.
Funds held in the Baler, Compacters and other RDF Equipment Repair Fund shall be
expended for repairs to the Recycling and Disposal Facility (RDF) baler, compactors, and
other RDF equipment under the direction of the Department of Public Works. Receipts
credited to this fund shall include revenue from the sale of Metal at the RDFs.
f. Council on Aging Social and Cultural Programs Fund.
Funds held in the Council on Aging Social and Cultural Programs shall be expended for
senior programs under the direction of the Council on Aging. Receipts credited to this fund
shall include participant fees.
g. Teen Center Program Revenues Fund.
Funds held in the Teen Center Program Revenues Fund shall be expended for Teen Center
program and its accompanying activities under the direction of the Recreation
Department. Receipts credited to this fund shall include donations and user fees.
h. Library Room Rental Fund.
Funds held in the Library Room Rental Fund shall be expended for personnel, services,
cleaning, repairs, improvements, reimbursements and equipment under the direction of the
Library Department. Receipts credited to this fund shall include room rental fees and
reimbursements.
i. Lost/Damaged Library Materials Replacement Fund.
2 | P a g e
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through STM 2019)
Funds held in the Lost/Damaged Library Materials Replacement Fund shall be expended
for library materials under the direction of the Library Department. Receipts credited to this
fund shall include lost and damaged fees.
j. Brookside Community Gardens Fund.
Funds held in the Brookside Community Gardens Fund shall be expended for maintenance,
utility payments, and improvements under the direction of the Department of Natural
Resources. Receipts credited to this fund shall include user permit fees.
k. Weston Road Gardens Fund.
Funds held in the Weston Road Gardens Fund shall be expended for maintenance, utility
payments, and improvements under the direction of the Department of Natural Resources.
Receipts credited to this fund shall include user permit fees.
l. Library Copier Fees Fund.
Funds held in the Library Copier Fees Fund shall be expended for equipment, maintenance,
and supplies under the direction of the Library Department. Receipts credited to this fund
shall include copy, print, equipment and other related fees.
m. Cultural Council Revenues Fund.Funds held in the Cultural Council Revenues Fund shall
be expended for Cultural Council programs under the direction of the Cultural Council.
Receipts credited to this fund shall include user fees from Cultural Council programs.
And
(2) set the limit on the total amount that may be spent from each revolving fund for Fiscal
Year 2020 as follows:
a. Street Opening Maintenance Fund: $225,000.00
b. DPW Field Use Fund: $200,000.00
c. Turf Field Fund: $500,000.00
d. Tree Bank Fund: $75,000.00
e. Baler, Compacters and other RDF Equipment Repair Fund: $50,000.00
f. Council on Aging Social and Cultural Programs Fund: $140,000.00
g. Teen Center Program Revenues Fund: $50,000.00
h. Library Room Rental Fund: $35,000.00
i. Lost/Damaged Library Materials Replacement Fund: $20,000.00
j. Brookside Community Gardens Fund: $3,000.00
k. Weston Road Gardens Fund: $7,000.00
l. Library Copier Fees Fund: $20,000.00
3 | P a g e
Wellesley Town Bylaws (as amended through STM 2019)
m. Cultural Council Revenues Fund: $6,500.00
(Amended ATM 2019. Approved by Attorney General July 2, 2019; effective date July 3, 2019
pending 90 day waiting period.)
Chapter 268A: Section 23
Supplemental provisions; standards of conduct
(a) In addition to the other provisions of this chapter, and in supplement thereto, standards of conduct, as
hereinafter set forth, are hereby established for all state, county, and municipal employees.
(b) No current officer or employee of a state, county or municipal agency shall knowingly, or with reason to know:
(1) accept other employment involving compensation of substantial value, the responsibilities of which are
inherently incompatible with the responsibilities of his public office;
(2) use or attempt to use his official position to secure for himself or others unwarranted privileges or exemptions
which are of substantial value and which are not properly available to similarly situated individuals;
(3) act in a manner which would cause a reasonable person, having knowledge of the relevant circumstances, to
conclude that any person can improperly influence or unduly enjoy his favor in the performance of his official duties,
or that he is likely to act or fail to act as a result of kinship, rank, position or undue influence of any party or person.
It shall be unreasonable to so conclude if such officer or employee has disclosed in writing to his appointing
authority or, if no appointing authority exists, discloses in a manner which is public in nature, the facts which would
otherwise lead to such a conclusion.
(c) No current or former officer or employee of a state, county or municipal agency shall knowingly, or with reason
to know:
(1) accept employment or engage in any business or professional activity which will require him to disclose
confidential information which he has gained by reason of his official position or authority;
(2) improperly disclose materials or data within the exemptions to the definition of public records as defined by
section seven of chapter four, and were acquired by him in the course of his official duties nor use such information
to further his personal interest.
(d) Any activity specifically exempted from any of the prohibitions in any other section of this chapter shall also be
exempt from the provisions of this section. The state ethics commission, established by chapter two hundred and
sixty-eight B, shall not enforce the provisions of this section with respect to any such exempted activity.
(e) Where a current employee is found to have violated the provisions of this section, appropriate administrative
action as is warranted may also be taken by the appropriate constitutional officer, by the head of a state, county or
municipal agency. Nothing in this section shall preclude any such constitutional officer or head of such agency from
establishing and enforcing additional standards of conduct.
(f) Upon qualification for office following an appointment or election to a municipal agency, such appointed or
elected person shall be furnished by the city or town clerk with a copy of this section. Each such person shall sign a
written acknowledgement that he has been provided with such copy.
APPENDIX
CHAP. 202 OF THE ACTS OF 1932, AS AMENDED
AN ACT ESTABLISHING IN THE TOWN OF WELLESLEY
REPRESENTATIVE TOWN GOVERNMENT BY LIMITED TOWN MEETINGS.
Be it enacted, etc., as follows:
Representative SECTION 1. There is hereby established in the own of Wellesley the form
Town Government of representative town government by limited town meetings, hereinafter set forth.
Town Meeting SECTION 2. The registered voters of each precinct in said town shall, at
Members the next ensuing annual town election held after the acceptance of this act, and the
registered voters of any precinct affected by any revision of precincts shall at the first
annual town election following such revision, and conformably to the laws relative to
elections not inconsistent with this act, elect by ballot from residents of the precinct
town meeting members, to the largest number which is divisible by three and which will
make the representation of such precinct in the approximate proportion which the
number of registered voters therein bears to the total number of registered voters in the
town, and which will cause the total elected membership to be as nearly two hundred
240 Members and forty as may be but not more than two hundred and forty. The first third in the order
of votes received of members so elected shall serve three years, the second third in such
order shall serve two years and the remaining third in such order shall serve one year
from the day of such election; and thereafter except as herein provided, at each annual
town election the registered voters of each precinct shall, in like manner, elect as town
meeting members for the term of three years, such number of elected town meeting
Terms members as are necessary to provide for such precinct the total number of elected town
meeting members to which it is then entitled, and shall, at such election, fill for the
unexpired term or terms any vacancies then existing in the number of town meeting
members in such precinct.
Tie Vote In the case of a tie vote which affects the election of town meeting members in
any precinct and not in the case where a vacancy is involved as set forth in Section 8A,
the Town Clerk shall call a special meeting of the town meeting members of the pre
cinct in which such tie vote occurred. The members from the affected precinct shall
determine which of the candidates receiving such tie vote shall serve as town meeting
member from such precinct, or they shall determine which member receiving such tie
vote shall serve for the longer and which for the shorter term, as the case may be. The
procedures to be followed at said special meeting shall be the same as those pre scribed
for the special meeting provided for in Section 8.
Notice to The Town Clerk shall, after every election of town meeting members, forthwith
Members Elected notify each member, by mail, of his election.
Proportionate The number of elected town meeting members to which each precinct is entitled
Representation for the ensuing year shall be determined by the Town Clerk by January 1s of each year
and shall be proportionate to the number of residents in each precinct as of December 15th
of the prior year.
Establishment At such time the Town Clerk shall also establish how many of the vacancies in
of Terms any precinct shall be for three-year terms, two-year terms and one-year terms, so that,
insofar as possible, one-third of the town meeting members from each precinct shall be
elected in each year. In any such election there shall not be separate contests for
three-year terms, two-year terms, and one-year terms, but members elected at such
election shall be assigned terms of office on the basis of the number of votes they
received, those receiving the highest number of votes being assigned three-year terms,
and then in descending order two-year terms and one-year terms.
Order of SECTION 2A. Notwithstanding any provisions of general or special law to the
Candidates on contrary the order in which names of candidates for each Town office, including the
the Ballot office of Town meeting member, appear on the ballot in any Town election in the Town
of Wellesley shall be determined by a drawing by lot conducted by the Town Clerk.
Each candidate shall have an opportunity to be present in person or to be represented by
a designee at the drawing.
Revision of SECTION 3. After the acceptance of this act, the boundaries of the precincts
Precincts shall be reviewed, and, if need be, wholly or partly revised, by the Selectmen in
Effective Date December once in five years, or in December of any year when so directed by a vote of a
representative town meeting held not later than November twentieth of that year, but no
precinct shall contain less than four hundred registered voters.
The Selectmen shall, within ten days after any revision of the precincts, file a
report of their doings with the Town Clerk, the registrars of voters and the assessors,
with a map or maps or description of the precincts and the names and residences of the
registered voters therein. The Selectmen shall also cause to be posted in the town hall a
map or maps or description of the precincts as revised from time to time, with the names
and residences of the registered voters therein; and they shall also cause to be posted in
at least one public place in each precinct a map or description of that precinct, with the
names and residences of the registered voters therein. Any revision of the voting
Town Clerk to precincts shall take effect upon the date of the filing of the report thereof by the
Give Written Selectmen with the Town Clerk. Whenever the precincts are revised, the Town Clerk
Notice to shall forthwith give written notice thereof to the state secretary, stating the number and
State Secretary designation of the precincts. Meetings of the registered voters of the several pre cincts
for elections, for primaries, and for voting upon any question to be submitted to all the
Meetings of registered voters of the town, shall be held on the same day at the same hour and at such
Voters, When and place or places within the town as the Selectmen shall in the warrant for such meeting
Where to be Held direct. The provisions of chapters fifty to fifty-six, inclusive, of the General Laws, relating
to precinct voting at elections, so far as the same are not inconsistent with this
Certain Provisions chapter, shall apply to all elections and primaries in the town.
Of General Laws to
Apply
When Terms Of The terms of office of all elected town meeting members from every precinct
Office of Town revised as aforesaid shall cease upon the election, as herein provided, of their
Meeting Members successors.
Shall Cease
Town Meetings SECTION 4. Any representative town meeting held under the provisions of
Limited this act, except as otherwise provided herein, shall be limited to the town meeting
Ex Officiis Members members elected under section two, together with such town meeting members ex
officiis as may be provided for by the bylaws of the town, and authority to adopt such
bylaws is hereby conferred.
Notice of Meetings The Town Clerk shall notify the town meeting members of the time and place at
which representative town meetings are to held, the notices to be sent by mail at least
five days before the meeting. The representative town meeting shall be the judges of the
election and qualifications of the elected members thereof. A majority of the town
Quorum meeting members shall constitute a quorum for doing business; but a less number may
organize temporarily and may adjourn from time to time, but no town meeting shall
adjourn over the date of an election of town meeting members. All town meetings
Meetings Public shall be public. The town meeting members as such shall receive no compensation.
No Compensation Subject to such conditions as may be determined from time to time by the members of
the rep resentative town meeting, any registered voter of the town who is not a town
meeting member may speak at any representative town meeting, but shall not vote.
Resignations A town meeting member may resign by filing a written resignation with the Town
Clerk, and such resignation shall take effect on the date of such filing. Any elected town
meeting member who becomes by appointment or election one of the officers
Ex officiis Member designated as town meeting member ex officiis shall thereupon cease to be an elected
town meeting member. A town meeting member who removes from the town shall
Removal From cease to be a town meeting member, and a town meeting member who removes from
Town or Precinct the precinct from which he was elected to another precinct may serve only until the next
Effect annual town meeting.
Nomination Of SECTION 5. Nomination of candidates for town meeting members to be
Candidates for elected under this act shall be made by nomination papers, which shall bear no political
Town Meeting designation, shall be signed by not less than ten voters of the precinct in which the
Members, candidate resides, and shall be filed with the board of registrars at least thirty-five days
How Made before the election and with the Town Clerk at least twenty-eight days before the
election; provided, that any town meeting member may become a candidate for
Proviso re-election by giving written notice thereof to the Town Clerk at least forty-two days
before the election. No nomination papers shall be valid in respect to any candidate
whose written acceptance is not thereon or attached thereto when filed.
Warrant Articles SECTION 6. The articles in the warrant for every town meeting, so far as
How Acted Upon they relate to the election of the moderator, town officers, and town meeting members,
and, as herein provided, to referenda, and all matters to be acted upon and determined by
ballot, shall be so acted upon and determined by the registered voters of the town in their
respective precincts. All other articles in the warrant for any town meeting shall be
acted upon and determined exclusively by town meeting members at a meeting to be
held at such time and place as shall be set forth by the Selectmen in the warrant for the
meeting, subject to the referendum provided by Section Nine.
Moderator, SECTION 7. A moderator shall be elected by ballot at each annual town
Election, Etc. election, and shall serve as moderator of all town meetings, except as otherwise
provided by law, until a successor is elected and qualified. Nominations for an election
of moderator shall be as in the case of other elective town officers, and any vacancy in
the office shall be filled by town meeting members at a meeting held for that purpose.
Moderator If a moderator is absent, a moderator pro tempore shall be elected by the town meeting
Pro Tempore members.
Vacancies in SECTION 8. In the event of any vacancy in the full number of town meeting
Full Number of Town members of any precinct arising from the failure of registered voters thereof to elect,
Meeting Members it shall be filled, until the next annual election, by the remaining town meeting members
Failure to Elect of the precinct from the registered voters thereof. In the event the Town Clerk shall
Filling, etc. promptly call a special meeting of the town meeting members of the precinct in which
the vacancy or vacancies exists for the purpose of filling the vacancy or vacancies. He
shall cause to be mailed to every such member, not less than fourteen days before the
time set for the meeting, a notice specifying the object, time and place of the meeting.
At the said meeting a majority of the members from such precinct shall constitute a
quorum. The choice to fill the vacancy or vacancies shall be by ballot, and a majority of
Choice by Ballot the votes cast shall be required for a choice. The Town Clerk shall preside at said
Certificate of meeting, count the ballots, make a certificate of the choice for his records and notify the
Choice, Etc. person so chosen; and, upon receipt by the Town Clerk of a written acceptance by the
person so chosen, that person shall be deemed elected and qualified as town meeting
Acceptance member, subject to the right of all town meeting members to judge of the election and
qualifications of the members as set forth in Section Four.
Vacancies Other SECTION 8A. In the event of any vacancy in the full number of town
Than Failure to meeting members of any precinct from any cause other than the failure of the registered
Elect, Filling of, Etc. voters thereof to elect, said vacancy shall be filled, until the next annual election, by the
Town Clerk, if there are available one or more candidates for the office of town meeting
member of said precinct at the preceding Annual Town Electionwho failed of election
but received not less than twenty (20) votes. In such event the Town Clerk shall choose
the person who received the highest number of votes as such a defeated candidate in
said precinct, notifying said person of his or her election as a town meeting member and
securing his or her written acceptance thereof. If for any reason the person so chosen
Failure of Acceptance cannot accept the office, the Town Clerk, shall in like manner choose and notify the
defeated candidate in said precinct receiving the next highest number of votes, but no
less than twenty (20), and so on until all vacancies are filled. The Town Clerk shall call
a special meeting of the town meeting members of the precinct in which the vacancy
Special Meeting or vacancies exist for the purpose of filling the vacancy or vacancies, until the next
annual town meeting election, if at the preceding election: (a) no defeated candidate
received at least twenty (20) votes; (b) the highest vote received by any defeated
candidate was at least twenty (20) votes and such vote was a tie vote; or (c) there is no
such defeated candidate who can or will accept the office. The special election shall be
Special Election among those having the tie votes or, if no tie is involved, from among the registered
voters of the precinct. The Town Clerk shall cause to be mailed to every such member,
not less than fourteen days before the time set for the meeting, a notice specifying the
object, time and place of the meeting. The procedures to be followed at said special
meeting shall be the same as those prescribed for the special meeting provided for in
Section Eight.
Votes, When SECTION 9. A vote passed at any representative town meeting authorizing the
Operative, Etc. expenditure of one hundred thousand dollars or more for the acquisition of land, or for
the construction, alteration or enlargement of any building, or for other than the usual
departmental appropriations, or authorizing the incurring of debt, except temporary
loans in anticipation of revenue or reimbursement from the commonwealth or the
county of Norfolk, or establishing a new board or office or abolishing an old board or
office or merging two or more boards or offices, or fixing the term of office of town
officers, where such term is optional, or increasing or reducing the number of members
of a board, or adopting a new bylaw, or amending or repealing an existing bylaw, shall
not be operative until after the expiration of seven days, exclusive of Sundays and
holidays, from the dissolution of the meeting. If, within said seven days, a petition,
signed by not less than five percent of the registered voters of the town, containing their
names and addresses as they appear on the list of registered voters, is filed as hereinafter
provided asking that the question or questions involved in such a vote be submitted to
the registered voters of the town at large, its operation shall be further suspended and the
Selectmen, after receiving the certificate of the registrars of voters as hereinafter
provided shall call a special meeting not less than twenty-eight days nor more than forty
five days after the certification by the registrars of voters hereinafter provided for the
sole purpose of presenting to the registered voters at large the question or questions so
involved.
Referendum The petition shall be termed a referendum petition. It shall be filed in the office
Filing, Etc. of the Town Clerk before five o'clock in the afternoon of the seventh day, exclusive of
Sundays and holidays, after the dissolution of the meeting. If the seventh day falls on a
Saturday, Sunday, or a holiday, the petition shall be filed before ten o'clock in the
morning on the next business day. Signatures thereto need not be all on one paper but
all such papers relating to one vote shall be fastened securely together and filed as one
instrument with the endorsement thereon of the person or persons filing the same and
the time of filing shall be immediately noted thereon by the Town Clerk. Immediately
after the expiration of the time within which referendum petitions may be filed, the
Town Clerk shall notify the registrars of voters, who shall examine any such petition
seasonably filed, and within five days determine by what number of registered voters it
is signed in conformity with the provisions of this section and what percentage that
number is of the total number of registered voters of the town and certify their findings
to the Selectmen, and at the same time send a copy of the same to the person or to one of
the persons who filed the petition.
Questions Each question so submitted shall be in the form of the following question,
How Stated which shall be placed upon the official ballot: - - "Shall the town vote to approve the
Upon Ballot, Etc. action of the representative town meeting whereby it was voted (brief description of the
substance of the vote)?"
Opening And The polls at such special meeting shall be opened not later than seven o'clock in
Closing of Polls the morning and shall be closed not earlier than eight o'clock in the evening. All votes
upon any questions so submitted shall be taken in the several precinct meetings by
ballot, and the check list shall be used in the same manner as in the election of town
Negative Vote officers. For the action of the representative town meeting to be null and void the
following two conditions must be satisfied: 1) at least twenty percent of all registered
Affirmative Vote voters in the town must vote in the negative on the referendum; and 2) a majority of
those who vote on the referendum must vote in the negative. Otherwise, the action of
Vote, When the representative town meeting shall take effect immediately upon the declaration by
Operative, if No the Selectmen of the vote upon the referendum.
Petition Filed
Powers of Town SECTION 10. The town of Wellesley, after the acceptance of this chapter,
And Its Meeting shall have the capacity to act through and to be bound by its town meeting members
Members, Etc. ,who shall, when convened from time to time as herein provided, constitute
representative town meetings; and the representative town meetings shall exercise
exclusively, so far as will conform to the provisions of this act, all powers vested in the
municipal corporation. Action in conformity with all provisions of law now or hereafter
applicable to the transaction of town affairs in town meeting, shall, when taken by any
representative town meeting in accordance with the provisions of this act, have the same
force and effect as if such action had been taken in a town meeting open to all the voters
of the town as organized and conducted before the establishment in said town of
representative town meeting government.
Certain Rights Section 11. This act shall not abridge the right of the inhabitants of the town to
Not Abridged, Etc. hold general meetings, as secured to them by the constitution of this commonwealth; nor
shall this act confer upon any representative town meeting in said Town the power
finally to commit the town to any measure affecting its municipal existence or
substantially changing its form of government without action thereon by the voters of
the town at large, using the ballot and the check list therefor.
Submission to Section 12. This act shall be submitted to the registered voters of the Town of
Voters of Town Wellesley for acceptance at its annual town election in the year nineteen hundred and
Of Wellesley, etc. thirty-three. The vote shall be taken by ballot in accordance with the provisions of the
general laws, so far as the same shall be applicable, in answer to the question, which
shall be placed upon the official ballot to be used in the several precincts in said town at
said election: "Shall an act passed by the general court in the year nineteen hundred and
thirty-two, entitled 'An Act Establishing in the Town of Wellesley Representative Town
Government by Limited Town Meetings', be accepted by this town?" If accepted by a
majority of the voters voting thereon, this act shall thereupon take effect for all purposes
incidental to the annual town election in said town in the year nineteen hundred and
thirty-four, and shall take full effect beginning with said election.
Resubmission After Section 13. If this act is rejected by the registered voters of said town when
Rejection, Etc. submitted to said voters under Section Twelve, it may be submitted for acceptance in like
manner to such voters at any annual town election in said town not later than the annual
town election in the year nineteen hundred and thirty-six, and, if accepted by a majority
of the voters voting thereon at such an election, shall thereupon take effect for all purposes
incidental to the next annual town election in said town, and shall take effect beginning
with said election.
Approved May 4, 1932
Accepted Town Meeting, March 2, 1936
Amended, 1936, 1938, 1958,1975,1978,1988
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 1 of 265
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION PAGE
Section 1 General Provisions 3
Section 1A Establishment of Districts 5
Section 1B Definitions 7
Section 2 Single Residence Districts 13
Section 3 Single Residence Districts A 21
Section 3A Town House Districts 23
Section 4 General Residence Districts 25
Section 5 General Residence Districts A 27
Section 5A Multi-Family Residence Districts 29
Section 6 Limited Residence Districts 31
Section 6A Limited Apartment Districts 33
Section 7 Educational Districts 37
Section 8 Educational Districts A 39
Section 8A Educational Districts B 41
Section 9 Administrative and Professional Districts 43
Section 9A Planned Development Districts 47
Section 9B Lower Falls Village Commercial District 53
Section 9C Wellesley Square Commercial District 55
Section 10 Limited Business Districts 59
Section 11 Business Districts 61
Section 12 Business Districts A 65
Section 13 Industrial Districts 67
Section 14 Industrial Districts A 69
Section 14A Transportation Districts 71
Section 14B Flood Plain or Watershed Protection Districts 73
Section 14C Parks, Recreation, and Conservation Districts 79
Section 14D Historic Districts 81
Section 14E Water Supply Protection Districts 87
Section 14F Residential Incentive Overlay (RIO) 91
Section 14G Linden Street Corridor Overlay District (LSCOD) 95
Section 14H Large-Scale Solar Overlay District 101
Section 14I Commercial Recreation Overlay District 105
Section 14J Smart Growth Overlay Districts 109
Section 14J.1 Wellesley Park Smart Growth Overlay District 125
Section 15 Public Service Corporations 131
Section 16 Restrictions Affecting All Districts 133
Section 16A Project Approval 135
Section 16B Inclusionary Zoning 143
Section 16C Drainage Review 147
Section 16D Large House Review 149
Section 16E Tree Protection & Preservation 155
Section 16F Natural Resource Protection (NRP) Development 163
Section 16G Outdoor Lighting 173
Section 17 Pre-Existing Non-Conforming Uses, Structures and Lots 179
Section 18 Area Regulations 181
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 2 of 265
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION PAGE
Section 19 Yard Regulations 185
Section 20 Heights of Buildings or Structures 191
Section 21 Off-Street Parking 193
Section 22 Design Review 203
Section 22A Signs 205
Section 22B Swimming Pools 229
Section 22C Antennas 231
Section 22D Retaining Walls 237
Section 22E Temporary Moratorium on Marijuana Establishments 241
Section 23 Enforcement and Penalties 243
Section 24 Permit Granting Authority 245
Section 25 Special Permit Granting Authority 251
Section 26 Notice of Public Hearings 263
Section 27 Interpretation 265
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 3 of 265
ZONING BYLAWS
SECTION 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. Title
This Bylaw is and shall be known as “the Zoning Bylaw of the Town of Wellesley,
Massachusetts,” and may be referred to or cited as, including throughout this document,
“this Zoning Bylaw” or “the Zoning Bylaw.”
B. Scope of Authority
The Zoning Bylaw of the Town of Wellesley, Massachusetts, is enacted in accordance
with the provisions of the Zoning Act, Massachusetts General Laws (M.G.L.), c. 40A,
and any and all amendments thereto.
C. Purpose
This Zoning Bylaw is enacted for the following intended purposes, as authorized by, but
not limited to, the provisions of the Zoning Act, M.G.L., c. 40A, as amended, Section 2A
of 1975 Mass. Acts 808, and Article 89 of the Amendments to the Constitution of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts:
1. To lessen congestion in the streets;
2. To conserve health;
3. To secure safety from fire, flood, panic, and other dangers;
4. To provide adequate light and air;
5. To prevent overcrowding of land;
6. To avoid undue concentration of population;
7. To encourage housing for persons of all income levels;
8. To facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, water supply, drainage,
sewerage, schools, parks, open space, and other public requirements;
9. To conserve the value of land and buildings, including the conservation of natural
resources and the prevention of blight and pollution of the environment;
10. To encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the Town, consistent with
the goals and policies of the Town of Wellesley Comprehensive Plan; and
11. To preserve and increase amenities by the promulgation of regulations to fulfill said
objectives.
D. Applicability
All buildings or structures hereinafter erected, reconstructed, altered, enlarged, or moved,
the use of all premises in the Town, and any applicable permitting, shall be in conformity
with the provisions of this Zoning Bylaw. No building, structure or land shall be used for
any purpose or in any manner other than as expressly permitted within the district in
which such building, structure or land is located. Where the application of this Zoning
Bylaw imposes greater restrictions than those imposed by any other regulations, permits,
restrictions, easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this Zoning Bylaw
shall control.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 4 of 265
E. Other Laws and Regulations
Nothing contained in this Zoning Bylaw shall be construed as repealing or modifying any
existing bylaw or regulation of the Town, but it shall be in addition thereto. Furthermore,
this Zoning Bylaw shall not be construed to authorize the use of any land or structure for
any purpose that is prohibited by any other provision of the General Laws or by any other
bylaw, rule, or regulation of the Town of Wellesley; nor shall compliance with any such
provision authorize the use of any land or structure in any manner inconsistent with this
Zoning Bylaw, except as required by the Massachusetts General Laws.
F. Amendment
This Zoning Bylaw may from time to time be changed by amendment, addition, or repeal
by the Town Meeting in the manner provided for in M.G.L., c. 40A, § 5, and as required
by M.G.L., c. 40, § 32, and any amendment(s) thereto.
G. Severability
The invalidity of any section or provision of this Zoning Bylaw shall not invalidate any
other section or provision herein.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 5 of 265
SECTION 1A. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
A. For the purpose of this Zoning Bylaw, the Town of Wellesley is hereby divided into
classes of districts as shown on the "Zoning Map of the Town of Wellesley,
Massachusetts", prepared under the direction of the Planning Board, Scale 1"=500', dated
December 20, 2002 as amended, on file with the Town Clerk, which map together with
all boundary lines and designations thereon, is hereby declared to be part of the Bylaw.
The classes of districts are respectively:
1. Single Residence Districts (Section 2)
2. Single Residence Districts A (Section 3)
3. Town House Districts (Section 3A)
4. General Residence Districts (Section 4)
5. General Residence Districts A (Section 5)
6. Multi-Family Residence Districts (Section 5A)
7. Limited Residence Districts (Section 6)
8. Limited Apartment Districts (Section 6A)
9. Educational Districts (Section 7)
10. Educational Districts A (Section 8)
11. Educational Districts B (Section 8A)
12. Administrative & Professional Districts (Section 9)
13. Planned Development Districts (Section 9A)
14. Lower Falls Village Commercial District (Section 9B)
15. Wellesley Square Commercial District (Section 9C)
16. Limited Business Districts (Section 10)
17. Business Districts (Section 11)
18. Business Districts A (Section 12)
19. Industrial Districts (Section 13)
20. Industrial Districts A (Section 14)
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 6 of 265
21. Transportation Districts (Section 14A)
22. Flood Plain or Watershed Protection Districts (overlay district - zoning map
reference) (Section 14B)
23. Parks, Recreation, and Conservation Districts (Section 14C)
24. Historic Districts (overlay district) (Section 14D)
25. Water Supply Protection Districts (overlay district) (Section 14E)
26. Residential Incentive Overlay (RIO) District (Section 14F)
27. Linden Street Corridor Overlay District (Section 14G)
28. Commercial Recreation Overlay District (Section 14I)
29. Smart Growth Overlay Districts (Section 14J)
30. Wellesley Park Smart Growth Overlay District (Section 14J.1)
B. District Boundaries
The location on the land of the boundary lines shown upon the Zoning Map shall be
determined as follows:
1. Where the boundary lines are shown upon the map within the street lines of public or
private streets or ways, the center lines of such streets or ways shall be the boundary
lines.
2. Where the boundary lines are shown upon the map outside of street lines and
apparently parallel thereto, they shall be considered to be parallel to such street lines;
and figures placed upon the map between such boundary lines and the street lines
shall be the distances in feet of such boundary lines from the street lines, said
distances being measured at right angles to the street lines unless otherwise indicated.
3. Where the boundary lines are shown apparently on the location of existing property
or lot lines, and the exact location of the boundary lines is not indicated by means of
figures, distances, or otherwise, then the property or lot lines shall be the boundary
lines.
4. In all cases which are not covered by the provisions of paragraphs 1, 2 or 3, the
locations of boundary lines shall be determined by the distances in feet, if given, from
the other lines upon the map, or, if distances are not given, then by the scale of the
map.
5. Wherever any uncertainty exists as to the exact location of a boundary line, the
location of such a line shall be determined by the Inspector of Buildings.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 7 of 265
SECTION 1B. DEFINITIONS
As used in the Zoning Bylaws, the following words and terms shall have and include the
following respective meanings:
Accessory Use – A use incidental to and customarily associated with a specific principal
use, located on the same lot or parcel.
Adult Bookstore - An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its
stock in trade, books, magazines and/or other matter which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis depicting, describing or relating to sexual conduct or
sexual excitement as defined in G.L. Chapter 272, Section 31.
Adult Dance Club - An establishment which, as its principal form of entertainment,
permits a person or persons to perform in a state of nudity as defined in G.L. Chapter
272, Section 31.
Adult Motion Picture Theater - An enclosed building used for presenting material
distinguished by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to sexual
conduct or sexual excitement as defined in G.L. Chapter 272, Section 31.
Adult Paraphernalia Store - An establishment having as a substantial or significant
portion of its stock devices, objects, tools or toys which are distinguished or characterized
by their association with sexual activity, including sexual conduct or sexual excitement as
defined in G.L. Chapter 272, Section 31.
Adult Use - Adult Bookstore, Adult Dance Club, Adult Motion Picture Theater, Adult
Paraphernalia Store, and/or Adult Video Store as herein defined.
Adult Video Store - An establishment having as substantial or significant portion of its
stock in trade, videos, movies or other film material which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis depicting, describing or relating to sexual conduct or
sexual excitement as defined in G.L. Chapter 272, Section 31.
Assisted Elderly Housing - A building or group of buildings that have on site medical,
convalescent and nursing facilities for the residents but in all other manners is consistent
with the definition and uses permitted for independent elderly housing projects.
Assisted Units - Dwelling Units which qualify for enumeration under Chapter 40B,
Sections 20-23 M.G.L. (Chapter 774 of the Acts of 1969). In the case of units to be sold
there shall be deed restrictions to enforce the funding agencies' requirements for the long
term eligibility of the unit for enumeration, and which require that the seller give a 90-
day right of first refusal to the Wellesley Housing Authority. The deed restrictions shall
be reviewed and approved by the Wellesley Housing Authority and Town Counsel prior
to sale.
Commercial Trailer - A vehicular, portable unit without independent motive power
designed and/or used for any commercial purpose whether used with or without a
permanent foundation, including but not necessarily limited to the following:
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 8 of 265
1. hauling and storing of products or materials, or
2. retail sales, or
3. business or office use
whether or not there is affixed thereto any advertisement or indication of a business or
professional use or affiliation.
Community Group Residence - A boarding house, halfway house, home for adjustment
or rehabilitation center for persons with physical or social disabilities which make
functioning in society difficult and who require the protection of a group setting.
Conventional Units - Dwelling Units available to the general public on the open market
without price restrictions or consumer income limitations.
Days - This term shall refer to calendar days unless otherwise noted.
Detached Dwelling - A building containing only dwelling units and private garage having
open space on all sides.
Development Area - A parcel or contiguous parcels which are under one ownership.
Drainage and Storm Water Drainage – surface water runoff and the removal of surface
water runoff by a system which may include catch basins, leaching basins, manholes,
pipes, retention and/or detention basins, swales, drainage ditches, headwalls and other
components which meet best management practices and are consistent with the Clean
Water Act, Massachusetts Water Quality Standards, the Phase II Regulations of National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System of U.S. EPA, the Massachusetts Wetlands
Protection Act and the Wellesley Wetlands Protection Bylaw (Article 44 of the Town
Bylaws); the Erosion and Sedimentation Control Regulations and the Municipal
Stormwater Drainage System Rules and Regulations adopted by the Board of Public
Works.
Dwelling - A building which is designed for or redesigned and/or used for human
habitation.
Dwelling Unit - A room, group of rooms, or dwelling forming a habitable unit for one
family with facilities for living, sleeping, food storage and/or preparation and eating, and
which is directly accessible from the outside or through a common hall without passing
through any other dwelling unit.
Family - (A) One (1) or more persons related by blood, adoption or marriage and not
more than two (2) additional persons all residing together as a single housekeeping unit;
(B) A number of persons but not exceeding three (3) residing together as a single
housekeeping unit where such persons are not related to one another by blood, adoption
or marriage.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 9 of 265
Floor Area Ratio - The floor area of building divided by the commercially zoned lot area.
Floor area shall be the sum of the horizontal areas of the several floors of a building as
measured from the exterior surface of the exterior walls. Parking garages, interior
portions of building devoted to off-street parking, and deck or rooftop parking shall not
be considered as floor area. The floor area devoted to a child care facility (defined to
mean a "day care center" or a "school age child care program," as those terms are defined
in Section 9 of Chapter 28A M.G.L.) as an accessory use to an allowed use, shall not be
considered as floor area for the purposes of the calculation of Floor Area Ratio except
that the building floor area shall not exceed 110% of the building floor area otherwise
allowed without a child care facility. The floor area devoted to dwelling units developed
in accordance with and under the provisions of Section 16B shall not be considered as
floor area for the purposes of the calculation of Floor Area Ratio provided that Assisted
Units sufficient to satisfy Section 16B are provided on the same Development Area.
Home Occupation - A non-residential use of a dwelling unit, by the resident or residents,
for gainful employment, that is subordinate but compatible to residential use.
The term Home Occupation shall include a "family day care home" as defined in Chapter
28A of the General Laws, for not more than six children, including participating children
living in the residence, where the provider is licensed by the Office for Children under
said Chapter 28A.
Independent Elderly Housing - A building or group of buildings containing dwellings
where the occupancy of the dwellings is restricted to persons 62 years of age or older or
couples where either the husband or wife is 62 years of age or older. Independent elderly
housing may include support services such as central dining, cleaning, linen, laundry and
other personal support services. Further they may provide convenience retail services if
said facilities do not have any exterior signs and comprise not more than 2% of the total
floor area of the development. Independent Elderly Housing may include a medical
service station for a house physician but not on site convalescent or nursing facilities.
However, this definition shall not prevent independent elderly housing units from being
developed as a distinct element in a larger development that includes assisted elderly
housing units are on separate floors or separate buildings.
Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installation - A solar photovoltaic
system that is structurally mounted on the ground (i.e. not roof-mounted) and has a
minimum output of electric power production in Direct Current (i.e. Rated Nameplate
Capacity) of 250 kW DC.
Marijuana Establishment - A marijuana cultivator, marijuana testing facility, marijuana
product manufacturer, marijuana retailer, craft marijuana cultivator cooperative, or any
other type of marijuana-related business, subject to regulation under Chapter 94G of the
Massachusetts General Laws; provided, however, that a Registered Marijuana Dispensary
shall not be deemed to be a Marijuana Establishment.
Mobile Home or House Trailer - A dwelling designated as year-round living quarters, and
built on a chassis to be moved from site to site, whether used with or without a permanent
foundation.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 10 of 265
Nursing Homes and Skilled Nursing Facility - A building housing a facility licensed to
provide full time long term accommodation and a combination of personal and health
care services in a supervised environment. Said facilities shall provide long term
intensive, skilled and supportive nursing care, convalescent or chronic care to individuals
who, by reason of advanced age, chronic illness, or infirmity, are unable to care for
themselves. The facilities may contain common areas for therapy, recreation and dining;
further the facilities may also include on-premise medical offices and treatment facilities
related to the care of the tenants. For the purposes of this Bylaw, it includes: extended
care facility, intermediate care facility, convalescent home and rest home.
One-Family Dwelling - A detached dwelling containing not more than one dwelling unit.
Open Space - The portion of a lot not covered by buildings, garages or other accessory
buildings or structures, canopies, off-street parking areas, maneuvering aisles, loading
areas or driveways. The portions of a lot devoted to lawn; landscaping; swimming pools
constructed at or below grade; at grade terraces, patios, walks, tennis or other play courts;
and woodland or wetland shall be considered as open space. Open space shall be free of
automotive traffic, or parking.
Original Grade - The grade of the lot before development begins. If an existing structure
is to be demolished, the original grade shall be the grade determined prior to demolition
of the structure. If there is no existing structure on the property, the natural grade of the
property, prior to any modification, shall be considered the original grade; except in new
subdivisions where the original grade shall mean the approved and recorded grade.
Permit Granting Authority - The Zoning Board of Appeals.
Recreational Trailer or Vehicle - A vehicular, portable unit designed for travel, camping
or recreational use, including but not limited to the following:
1. Travel Trailer - A vehicular, portable dwelling unit built on a chassis, being of any
length provided its gross weight does not exceed forty-five hundred (4500) pounds,
or being of any weight provided its overall length does not exceed twenty eight (28)
feet.
2. Pick-Up Camper - A portable dwelling unit designed to be mounted on a pick-up
truck or chassis, whether or not so mounted.
3. Motorized Camper - A portable dwelling designed and constructed as an integral
part of a self-propelled vehicle.
4. Tent Trailer - A folding structure, constructed of canvas, plastic or similar water
repellent material, designed to be mounted on wheels to be used as a temporary
dwelling.
5 Boat Trailer - A vehicle without motive power, designed to be drawn by a motor
vehicle and designed for the hauling or storage of a boat, aircraft, snowmobile or
other recreational vehicle.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 11 of 265
Registered Marijuana Dispensary - A not-for-profit entity and use registered under 105
CMR 725.100, and previously known as a Medical Marijuana Treatment Center, which
may acquire, cultivate, possess, process (including development of related products such
as edible Marijuana-Infused Products (“MIPs”), tinctures, aerosols, oils, or ointments),
transfer, transport, sell, distribute, dispense, and/or administer marijuana, products
containing marijuana, related supplies, and/or educational materials to registered
qualifying patients or their personal caregivers. Also referred to herein as “RMD” or
“RMDs”. Not to include non-medical dispensaries.
Retaining Wall - A wall or terraced combination of walls used at a grade change to hold
soil and other earth material at a higher position. Retaining walls may be attached to or
independent from other structures. The exposed side of a retaining wall shall be known as
a “face”. The area between a lower wall and a successive higher wall shall be known as a
“terrace”.
Special Permit Granting Authority - Zoning Board of Appeals except as otherwise
designated by this Zoning Bylaw for the granting of special permits. For the review and
issuance of special permits for Registered Marijuana Dispensaries, as allowed by this
Bylaw and established in Section 25.B.5.b., the Board of Selectmen shall act as the
Special Permit Granting Authority. For the purposes of Section 14B, Section 14E, and
Section 16A, the Planning Board shall act as the Special Permit Granting Authority for
subdivision applications processed under the provisions of the Subdivision Control Law
(Chapter 41, Sections 81K - GG M.G.L.) and for approval of projects of significant
impact. When the Planning Board is acting as Special Permit Granting Authority, the
chairman may call upon the associate member to sit on the Board for the purposes of
acting on an application, in the case of absence, inability to act, or conflict of interest on
the part of any member, or in the event of a vacancy on the Board. The provisions for
filling the position of associate member shall be governed by Article 45 of the Town
Bylaws.
Town House - A dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, each sharing one or more
party walls with another dwelling unit, and each having at least one floor at ground level
with direct access to open space on two or more sides.
Two Family Dwelling - A detached dwelling other than a Town House containing two
dwelling units.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 12 of 265
Editor’s Note: Page intentionally left blank
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 13 of 265
SECTION 2. SINGLE RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
(Editor’s Note: Amended 7/9/2014 to reflect amendments approved under Article 34 at 2014 ATM)
A. In Single Residence Districts, no new building or structure shall be constructed or used,
in whole or in part, and no building or structure, or part thereof, shall be altered, enlarged,
reconstructed or used, and no land shall be used, for any purpose except one or more of
the following specified uses:
1. One-Family Dwelling
2. Religious Purposes;
3. Educational purposes on land owned or leased by the Commonwealth or any of its
agencies, subdivisions or bodies politic or by a religious sect or denomination or by a
non-profit educational corporation, provided, however, that all lots, structures or uses
shall be subject to the following dimensional criteria:
a. Maximum height as defined in Section 20 shall be three stories or 40 feet;
b. Minimum frontage as defined in Section 19 shall be 100 feet;
c. Minimum lot area as defined in Section 18 shall be as indicated on the Zoning
Map as referenced in this Zoning Bylaw;
d. Minimum side yard as defined in Section 19 shall be 50 feet;
e. Minimum front yard as defined in Section 19 shall have a width of 100 feet and a
depth of 50 feet, or such greater distances as may be required by Section 19;
f. Minimum open space as defined in Section 1B shall be 75% of the lot area;
g. Sufficient off-street parking shall be provided so that no vehicle will be required
to park on any street, the provisions of Section 21.D.3. shall apply to any parking
lot constructed;
Other provisions of the Zoning Bylaw notwithstanding the above regulations
apply to uses permitted under this Clause 3.
3A. Child Care Facility (defined to mean a "day care center" or a "school age child care
program," as those terms are defined in Section 9 of Chapter 28A M.G.L.) provided
that:
a. The structure containing such facility and the lot containing such facility shall
meet the dimensional zoning requirements for the district in which the structure is
located unless the structure is a legally pre-existing, non-conforming building or
structure;
b. The structure containing such facility and the facility itself shall meet all
applicable local, state and federal requirements;
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 14 of 265
c. The fire alarm system shall be installed and tested by a qualified electrician or alarm
company pursuant to National Fire Protection Association standards; test certification
shall be submitted to the Inspector of Buildings and the Fire Chief with periodic testing
done at intervals specified by the Fire Chief;
d. Fenced outdoor play area, set back a minimum of 10 feet from any abutting land
in single residence use, shall be provided at a ratio of not less than 75 square feet
for every child at play, exclusive of the area occupied by play equipment;
e. One off-street parking space shall be provided for every paid and unpaid
employee, not resident on the premises, so that there is no on-street parking by
employees;
f. Off-street drop off and pick up area shall be provided at a ratio of one space for
every 3 children, unless drop off and pick up area can lawfully be provided on a
street abutting the lot;
g. Off-street parking areas devoted to the parking of 5 or more vehicles shall comply
with the Screening requirements contained in Section 21.D.3. and;
h. A child care facility located within a Single Residence District shall not exceed a
floor area of 2,500 square feet.
4. Club, except a club the chief activity of which is a service customarily carried on as a
business;
5. Agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, including the use of the premises for the sale of
natural products raised thereon except as follows:
a. A farm devoted principally to the raising of poultry, horses, domestic animals or
other livestock for sale is prohibited unless it meets the minimum acreage
requirement as provided in Chapter 40A Massachusetts General Laws, as
amended;
b. The use of any premises for the sale of loam is prohibited.
6. Home Occupations being lawfully conducted prior to October 24, 1977, subject to
any and all restrictions or conditions in effect on said date; and other home
occupations provided, however, that as the result of the home occupation:
a. There shall be no activity, and no equipment or process shall be used, in the
conduct or as the result of the conduct of a home occupation, which disrupts or
disturbs the customary character of a residential neighborhood;
b. There shall be no employees not resident on the premises;
c. There shall be no pickup or delivery of products and/or articles at the premises
that is not customary in a residential area;
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 15 of 265
d. No sign advertising, or incidental to the home occupation shall be displayed on
the property;
e. There shall be no outdoor storage of products or materials;
f. There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the premises, including
building and grounds;
g. There shall be no additional parking permitted;
Upon receipt by the Inspector of Buildings of Notification, in form acceptable to
the Inspector of Buildings, from the person or persons wishing to conduct a home
occupation, of the intention to conduct said home occupation, home occupations
complying with the above standards are permitted as a matter of right.
7. Such accessory uses as are customary in connection with the uses enumerated in
clauses 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6, and are incidental thereto, including a private garage and a
private stable.
8. Any of the following additional uses upon the granting of a special permit as provided
in Section 25:
a. Residence for not more than two families, or boarding or lodging house, but not a
restaurant; provided, however, that the building so used was in existence when
this Bylaw took effect; and provided further that the Board of Appeals make a
written finding that the original building can no longer be used or adapted at a
reasonable expense and with a fair financial return for a use regularly permitted in
the district.
b. Educational purposes in addition to those permitted under clause 3. hereof, and
any non-profit purpose, not to include Registered Marijuana Dispensaries,
provided that:
i. Sufficient off-street parking shall be provided so that no vehicle will be
required to park on any street, the provisions of Section 21.D.3. shall apply
to any parking lot constructed;
ii. No sign identifying the premises shall be displayed on the property except in
accordance with Section 22A.C.1.a.4. of this Zoning Bylaw;
iii. There shall be no disturbance or disruption to any residential neighborhood
caused by or as the result of any use permitted under this subclause.
c. Public, semi-public institution of a Philanthropic, Charitable or Religious
character.
d. Community Group Residence in an existing building having a single kitchen
facility subject to the following conditions, limitations and dimensional criteria:
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 16 of 265
i. There shall be no disturbance or disruption to any residential neighborhood
caused by the Community Group Residence or as a result of the operation of
the Community Group Residence;
ii. The Special Permit Granting Authority shall not grant a special permit for a
Community Group Residence where there is another similar facility located
within a one half mile radius;
iii. The number of persons residing on the premises shall not exceed the limits
contained in Section 424 of the State Building Code;
iv. Minimum lot area as defined in Section 18 shall be as referenced in this
Zoning Bylaw;
v. Minimum side yard as defined in Section 19 shall be 30 feet;
vi. Minimum front yard as defined in Section 19 shall be 30 feet or such greater
distance as may be required by Section 19;
vii. Minimum open space as defined in Section 6A shall be 50% of the lot area;
viii. Sufficient off-street parking shall be provided so that no vehicle will be
required to park on any street; the provisions of Section 21.D.3. shall apply
to any parking lot constructed;
ix. There shall be provided a minimum of one bedroom for every two persons
residing on the premises;
x. No permit shall be issued or renewed for periods of more than 2 years.
e. Telephone exchange provided there is no service yard or garage; unless otherwise
provided for under Section 15 of this Zoning Bylaw.
f. Removal of sand, gravel, rock, clay, loam or sod there from; except that no such
permission shall be required for the removal of such materials incidental to
excavation necessary for the construction of a building in accordance with a
permit which has been issued by the Building Inspector or for the construction of
a private way in accordance with a subdivision plan which has been approved by
the Planning Board and recorded with Norfolk Deeds or filed in the Land Court if
the land is registered.
g. Residence where more than three (3) persons reside together as a single
housekeeping unit and where such persons are not related to one another by
blood, adoption or marriage.
h. Home occupations in addition to those permitted under clause 6 hereof, provided,
however, that as the result of the home occupation:
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 17 of 265
i. There shall be no activity, and no equipment or process shall be used, in the
conduct or as the result of the conduct of a home occupation, which disrupts
or disturbs the customary character of a residential neighborhood;
ii. There shall be no pickup or delivery of products and/or articles that is not
customary in a residential area;
iii. No sign advertising, or incidental to the home occupation shall be displayed
on the property except in accordance with Section 22A of this Zoning
Bylaw;
iv. There shall be no outdoor storage of products or materials;
v. There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the premises,
including buildings and grounds, that is not in keeping with the residential
character and appearance;
vi. There shall be provision for parking on the premises so that no vehicle will
be required to park on any street. The required parking area shall retain the
character of the residential neighborhood. No substantial enlargement of the
width of the residential driveway or other alteration of the driveway within
the front yard setback shall be allowed in order to meet this requirement.
vii. There shall not be more than the equivalent of two full-time non-resident
employees;
and provided, further, that no permit shall be issued for more than three years or
renewed for periods of more than three years;
i. Municipally owned or operated public parking lot or other public use.
j. Off-street parking as a non-accessory use subject to the following criteria:
i. The non-accessory use parking shall not cause a significant disturbance or
disruption of any residential neighborhood, in terms of safety, noise, traffic,
appearance, or noxious odors;
ii. The non-accessory use parking shall not cause there to be fewer than the
number of parking spaces available for accessory use parking as are required
under Section 21.D.2.;
iii. There shall be no reduction in area devoted to landscaping and screening as
required by Section 21.D.3.;
iv. The non-accessory use parking will not detract from the use of the parking
lot for the accessory use; and
v. Special Permits issued under this paragraph shall be subject to annual
renewal.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 18 of 265
k. Such accessory uses as are customary in connection with any of the above
subclauses and are incidental thereto.
9. Air Navigation Facility as defined in Massachusetts General Laws; if permission is,
in each case, obtained by a two-thirds vote at a Town Meeting duly called for the
purpose and if the Special Permit Granting Authority subsequently issues a special
permit in accordance with Section 16A and Section 25, subject to the following:
a. All requirements, rules and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA) and the Massachusetts Aeronautics Commission (MAC) shall be satisfied,
and certification and approval by the FAA and the MAC shall be maintained;
b. Special permit submissions shall be accompanied by a report which contains:
a noise assessment indicating the anticipated noise levels at the nearest residences,
streets and roads and any noise mitigation measures;
nature and frequency of use;
a report on lighting and prevailing wind direction including approach and
departure patterns showing any existing structures within the glide paths; and
a report on proposed air navigation facility maintenance programs.
c. Air Navigation Facilities shall not be located less than 500 feet of any Wellesley
residential street, residence, public school or playground;
d. Air Navigation Facilities shall not create noise levels greater 65 db at any
property line of a Wellesley residence;
e. Air Navigation Facilities shall be subject to other requirements and conditions as
may be determined by the Special Permit Granting Authority on a case by case
basis; and
f. A special permit for an Air Navigation Facility shall be subject to annual renewal.
The Special Permit Granting Authority may establish a standard format and
content for the submission of applications for approval for an Air Navigation
Facility.
The requirements of this paragraph 9. do not override, supersede or replace any
FAA or MAC requirements which may be more restrictive. FAA and MAC
requirements shall govern in such instances in the event of a conflict.
9A. Any of the following additional uses, if the location of the lands intended for such use
has been approved in writing by the Board of Health and if permission in each case is
obtained by a majority vote at a Town Meeting:
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 19 of 265
a. Cemetery (burial use), provided, however, that where a cemetery is hereafter
approved and permitted under this Section and is contiguous to land used or
zoned for residential use, the use of the land for a distance of not less than twenty
(20) feet into such cemetery land from the border line with such contiguous
residential property shall be subject to the following conditions:
i. Structures or buildings or portions thereof shall not be erected within said
twenty (20) foot area;
ii. Burials shall not be made therein;
iii. Natural growth of trees and shrubs shall be maintained within said twenty
(20) feet.
10. Use by the Town of a building, structure or land for its Municipal Light Plant or its
Water Works Plant if, upon application by the Board of Public Works, the Special
Permit Granting Authority shall grant a special permit in accordance with Section 25
of this Zoning Bylaw.
11. Conversion of a building and site previously used for a municipal purpose to a use
permitted in residential districts provided, such use shall have been recommended to
the Town Meeting by the Board of Selectmen as being in the Town's best interest;
and provided, further, such use shall be approved by a two-thirds vote of a Town
Meeting and be subject to a special permit as hereinafter provided.
In addition to said recommendation of the Board of Selectmen, the Planning Board
shall hold a public hearing and make a report to the Town Meeting as to whether
there is a need for the use in the Town and whether the use is consistent with the
Town's Comprehensive Plan and compatible with surrounding uses. Failure of the
Planning Board to make such a report shall not invalidate Town Meeting approval.
Plans of the proposed use shall be made available for public review in the offices of
the Board of Selectmen and the Planning Board for at least two weeks prior to the
public hearing. Said plans shall conform to the specifications for preliminary plans
contained in the adopted Design Review Procedures and any additional procedures
that may be adopted by the Board of Selectmen.
Following the dissolution of the Town Meeting, the Zoning Board of Appeals may
grant a special permit in accordance with Section 25 which shall include the plans and
conditions approved by said Town Meeting vote and any further conditions which the
Planning Board shall deem consistent with said Town Meeting approval and the
public safety and convenience.
B. Project Approval
The provisions of Section 16A shall apply.
C. Inclusionary Zoning
The provisions of Section 16B shall apply.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 20 of 265
Editor’s Note: Page intentionally left blank
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 21 of 265
SECTION 3. SINGLE RESIDENCE DISTRICTS A
A. In Single Residence Districts A, no new building or structure shall be constructed or
used, in whole or in part, and no building or structure, or part thereof, shall be altered,
enlarged, reconstructed or used, and no land shall be used, for any purpose except:
1. Any purpose authorized in a Single Residence District in accordance with and subject
to the provisions of Section 2; or for
2. The temporary open surface parking of passenger cars of persons residing within four
hundred (400) feet of such land, and the guests of such persons; or for
3. The temporary open surface parking of passenger cars of employees, customers or
guests of establishments which constitute a use permitted by this Bylaw in the district
(a) in which such land is situated or, (b) on which it abuts or from which it is
separated by a way, provided said cars are not serviced or held for sale or lease on
such land.
4. Any of the following additional uses upon the granting of a special permit as provided
in Section 25:
a) Temporary or seasonal outdoor sales of farm produce or natural products.
B. Off-street parking
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 21.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 22 of 265
Editor’s Note: Page intentionally left blank
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 23 of 265
SECTION 3A. TOWN HOUSE DISTRICTS
A. In Town House Districts, no new building or structure shall be constructed or used, in
whole or in part, and no building or structure, or part thereof, shall be altered, enlarged,
reconstructed or used, and no land shall be used, for any purpose except one or more of
the following specified uses:
1. One-family dwelling and with respect thereto any of the purposes authorized in
accordance with and subject to the provisions of Section 2; in addition, with regard to
the multi-family uses hereinafter provided, the Special Permit Granting Authority
may grant a special permit in this district for any other purpose authorized by right or
by special permit in Single Residence Districts.
2. Town houses and, in connection therewith, the parking of motor vehicles and other
accessory uses as are customary, all subject to conformity with the following
requirements:
a. Minimum Lot or Building Site Area: No such building or group of buildings or
other structures shall be erected or placed on a lot containing less than twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet in area.
b. Minimum Open Space: There shall be provided for each lot a minimum open
space of not less than 55%, 65% or 75% of the lot area in accordance with c.
below.
c. Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit: There shall be provided for each dwelling
unit contained in the building or buildings a lot area of not less than 6,000 square
feet, 5,000 square feet or 4,000 square feet as follows:
A development having not less than 6,000 square feet per dwelling unit shall
have not less than 55% open space in accordance with b. above,
A development having not less than 5,000 square feet per unit shall have not
less than 65% open space in accordance with b. above,
A development having not less than 4,000 square feet per unit shall have not
less than 75% open space in accordance with b. above.
d. Maximum Lot Coverage: No building or addition to any building, including
accessory buildings, shall be erected or placed on a lot which will result in the
covering by buildings or more than twenty five percent (25%) of the lot area.
e. Height of Building or Structure: No building shall exceed a maximum of three
stories or forty (40) feet in height.
f. Yards: No building or structure shall be located within thirty (30) feet of any
property boundary line abutting a Single Residence District or within twenty (20)
feet of any other property boundary line.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 24 of 265
g. Separation Between Buildings: No building or structure shall be located within
thirty (30) feet of any other building or structure on the same lot.
h. Length of Row: No building or structure shall contain less than four (4) or more
than eight (8) dwelling units.
i. Frontage: No such building or structure shall be erected on a lot with less than one
hundred (l00) feet of frontage on a public way or a way shown on a plan approved
in accordance with the Subdivision Control Law or otherwise qualifying a lot for
frontage under the Subdivision Control Law.
j. Parking: Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 21.
k. Project Approval: The provisions of Section 16A shall apply.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 25 of 265
SECTION 4. GENERAL RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
A. In General Residence Districts, no new building or structure shall be constructed or used,
in whole or in part, and no building or structure, or part thereof, shall be altered, enlarged,
reconstructed or used, and no land shall be used, for any purpose except one or more of
the following specified uses:
1. Any purpose authorized in Single Residence Districts;
2. Two-family dwelling;
3. Town house of three or more units subject to the following:
CATEGORY A
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
(with or without assisted units
not qualifying as Category B)
CATEGORY B
CONVENTIONAL
& 25% ASSISTED
UNITS*
CATEGORY C
100% ASSISTED
UNITS*
MAXIMUM
RESIDENTIAL
DENSITY (sq. ft. unit)
7,000 6,000 5,000
MINIMUM LOT OR
BLDG. SITE (sq. ft.)
21,000 18,000 15,000
MINIMUM OPEN
SPACE
65% 65% 65%
MAXIMUM LOT
COVERAGE BY
BUILDING
20% 20% 20%
MAXIMUM BLDG.
HEIGHT (feet)
40 40 40
MINIMUM LOT
FRONTAGE (feet)
120 100 100
MINIMUM BLDG.
SETBACKS (ft. from
property boundary lines)
FRONT (STREET
SETBACK)
35 30 30
SIDES AND REAR
ABUTTING SINGLE
RESIDENCE ZONING
35 30 30
ABUTTING OTHER
ZONING
25 20 20
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 26 of 265
CATEGORY A
CONVENTIONAL UNITS
(with or without assisted units
not qualifying as Category B)
CATEGORY B
CONVENTIONAL
& 25% ASSISTED
UNITS*
CATEGORY C
100% ASSISTED
UNITS*
MINIMUM BLDG.
SEPARATION (feet)
30 30 30
MINIMUM &
MAXIMUM LENGTH
OF ROW (units)
3-6 3-8 3-8
*To qualify for Category B a minimum of 25% of the dwelling units or 1 unit, whichever is greater, shall be
assisted units. To qualify for Category C 100% of the units shall be assisted.
Off-street Parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 21.
4. Boarding or lodging house, but not a restaurant;
5. Such accessory uses as are customary in connection with any of the above subclauses
and are incidental thereto, including a private garage and a private stable.
B. Project Approval
The provisions of Section 16A shall apply.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 27 of 265
SECTION 5. GENERAL RESIDENCE DISTRICTS A
A. In General Residence Districts A, no new building or structure shall be constructed or
used, in whole or in part, and no building or structure, or part thereof, shall be altered,
enlarged, reconstructed or used, and no land shall be used, for any purpose except:
1. Any purpose authorized in a General Residence District in accordance with and
subject to the provisions of Section 4;
2. The temporary parking of motor vehicles.
B. Off-street Parking
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 21.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 28 of 265
Editor’s Note: Page intentionally left blank
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 29 of 265
SECTION 5A. MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
A. In Multi-Family Residence Districts, no new building or structure shall be constructed or
used, in whole or in part, and no building or structure, or part thereof, shall be altered,
enlarged, reconstructed or used, and no land shall be used, for any purpose except one or
more of the following:
1. One-family dwelling and with respect thereto any of the purposes authorized in
accordance with and subject to the provisions of Section 2; in addition, with regard to
the multi-family uses hereinafter provided, the Special Permit Granting Authority
may grant a special permit in this district for any other purpose authorized by right or
by special permit in Single Residence Districts.
2. Any purpose authorized in a Limited Residence District in accordance with and
subject to the provisions of Section 6 and all other sections applicable to buildings in
Limited Residence Districts.
3. A building or group of buildings containing four or more independent dwelling units
each having a room or suite of rooms with bathroom and kitchen facilities for such
dwelling units, and, in connection therewith, the parking of automobiles and such
other accessory uses as are customary; all subject to conformity with the following
requirements:
a. Minimum Lot or Building Site Area: No such building or group of buildings or
other structures shall be erected on a lot containing less than twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet.
b. Minimum Open Space: There shall be provided for each lot or building site area a
minimum open space of not less than 40 percent of the lot area.
c. Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit: There shall be provided for each dwelling
unit contained in the building or buildings a lot area of not less than three
thousand (3,000) square feet.
d. Maximum Lot Coverage: No building or addition to any building, including
accessory buildings, shall be erected or placed on a lot which will result in the
covering by buildings of more than thirty per cent (30%) of the lot or building site
area.
e. Maximum Height of Building or Structure: No building shall exceed a maximum
of three (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet in height.
f. Yards: No building or structure shall be placed within thirty (30) feet of any
property line abutting a public or private way or within twenty (20) feet of any
other property boundary line.
g. Frontage: No such building or structure shall be erected on a lot with less than
eighty (80) feet of frontage on a public way or a way approved in accordance with
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 30 of 265
the Subdivision Control Law or otherwise qualifying a lot for frontage under the
Subdivision Control Law.
h. Off-Street Parking:
i. There shall be provided a permanent off-street parking area or areas, surface
and/or underground, of sufficient size to provide not less than one and 5/10
(l.5) automobile spaces for each dwelling unit providing two bedrooms or
less and two (2) automobile spaces for each dwelling unit providing three
(3) bedrooms or more to be accommodated on the lot.
ii. All off-street parking facilities shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the provisions of Section 21.
i. Project Approval: The provisions of Section 16A shall apply.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 31 of 265
SECTION 6. LIMITED RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
A. In Limited Residence Districts, no new building or structure shall be constructed or used,
in whole or in part, and no building or structure, or part thereof, shall be altered, enlarged,
reconstructed or used, and no land shall be used, for any purpose except one or more of
the following:
1. One-family dwelling and with respect thereto any of the purposes authorized in
accordance with and subject to the provisions of Section 2; in addition, with regard to
the multi-family uses hereinafter provided, the Special Permit Granting Authority
may grant a special permit in this district for any other purpose authorized by right or
by special permit in Single Residence Districts.
2. A building or group of buildings operated by a non-profit organization and having
three or more independent dwelling units each having a room or suite of rooms with
its own bathroom and toilet facilities for occupancy by a family unit consisting of one
or more persons at least one-half of whom are 62 years of age or older, such building
or group of buildings having separate kitchen facilities for such dwelling units and/or
central kitchen and dining facilities for the preparation and serving of meals to
residents thereof (but not to the public), and at the option of the owner, lounge rooms
for the common use of the residents thereof, also in connection therewith, the parking
of automobiles and such other accessory uses as are customary; all subject to
conformity with the requirements of the following sub-paragraphs (a) through (h) of
this paragraph. For the purposes of this Section the term "non-profit organization"
shall mean a corporation foundation or other organization not organized for profit, no
part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or
individual, and which shall pay real estate taxes on its property, or make equivalent
payment in lieu thereof to the Town.
a. Minimum Lot or Building Site Area: No such building or group of buildings or
other structures shall be erected or placed on a lot containing less than forty
thousand (40,000) square feet in area.
b. Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit: There shall be provided a lot area of not
less than twenty-five hundred (2,500) square feet for each dwelling unit.
c. Maximum Building Area (Lot Coverage): No building or addition to any building,
including accessory buildings, shall be erected or placed on a lot which will result
in the covering by buildings of more than twenty percent (20%) of the lot area.
d. Height of Building or Structure: No building shall exceed a maximum of two and
one-half (2 1/2) stories of thirty (30) feet in height.
e. Front Yard, Side Yard, and Rear Yard: No building or structure shall be located
within thirty (30) feet of any property boundary line abutting a public or private
way or within twenty (20) feet of any other property boundary line.
f. Parking: Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 21.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 32 of 265
g. Conversion: No conversion of an existing building shall be made without a
special permit as provided in Section 25.
h. Project Approval: The provisions of Section 16A shall apply.
3. A building or group of buildings operated as public housing for the elderly, and in
connection therewith, the parking of automobiles and such other accessory uses as are
customary; all subject to conformity with the following:
a. Front Yard, Side Yard, and Rear Yard: No building or structure shall be located
within thirty (30) feet of any property boundary line abutting a public or private
way or within twenty (20) feet of any other property boundary line.
b. Parking: Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 21.
c. Conversion: No conversion of an existing building shall be made without a
special permit as provided in Section 25.
d. Project Approval: The provisions of Section 16A shall apply.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 33 of 265
SECTION 6A. LIMITED APARTMENT DISTRICTS
A. In Limited Apartment Districts, no new building or structure shall be constructed or used,
in whole or in part, and no building or structure, or part thereof, shall be altered, enlarged,
reconstructed or used, and no land shall be used, for any purpose except one or more of
the following:
1. One-family dwelling and with respect thereto any of the purposes authorized in
accordance with and subject to the provisions of Section 2, in addition, with regard to
the multi-family uses hereinafter provided, the Special Permit Granting Authority
may grant a special permit in this district for any other purpose authorized by right or
by special permit in Single Residence Districts.
2. Any purpose authorized in an Educational District in accordance with and subject to
the provisions of Section 7 and all other sections applicable to buildings in
Educational Districts;
3. A building or group of buildings containing twenty or more independent dwelling
units each having a room or suite of rooms with bathroom and kitchen facilities for
such dwelling units, and, in connection therewith, the parking of automobiles and
such other accessory uses as are customary; all subject to conformity with the
requirements of the following subparagraphs (a) through (i) of this paragraph.
a. Minimum Lot or Building Site Area: No such building or group of buildings or
other structures shall be erected or placed on a lot containing less than eighty
thousand (80,000) square feet in area.
b. Minimum Open Space: There shall be provided for each lot or building site area a
minimum open space of not less than 75 percent of the lot area.
c. Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit: There shall be provided for each
independent dwelling unit contained in the building or buildings a lot area of not
less than eighteen hundred (1,800) square feet.
d. Elevation of Building or Structure:
i. No exterior wall of any building shall exceed a height of forty-five (45) feet
measured from the finished grade elevation of the land adjoining said wall,
exclusive of parapets or cornices.
ii. Vertical projections not designed or used for human occupancy constructed
above the main roof elevation shall be permitted but shall not occupy a total
number of square feet of the roof which shall exceed in aggregate of fifteen
percent (15%) of the total ground coverage of the building and shall not
extend more than fifteen (15) feet above the main roof elevation of the
building.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 34 of 265
iii. For the purpose of this Bylaw, the finished grade shall mean the elevation of
the completed surface of the land, such as lawns, walks, or paving, as
determined by field survey or as shown on official plans.
iv. No building shall contain more than four (4) stories. As used herein, the
term story shall mean a building level designed or used for human
occupancy, but shall not include a level designed or used for occupancy only
by custodial personnel.
e. Yards and Setbacks: No buildings or structures shall be erected or placed above
ground level nearer than sixty (60) feet to any street line, or forty (40) feet to any
public land held or in use for a park, playground or recreational purpose, or fifty
(50) feet to any area in the Single residence or General Residence District, or
twenty-five (25) feet to any area in any other District.
f. Screening: Shall be provided in accordance with Section 21.
g. Parking: There shall be provided a permanent off-street parking area or areas,
surface and/or underground, of sufficient size to provide not less than one and
5/10 (1.5) car spaces for each dwelling unit providing two bedrooms or less and
two (2) car spaces for each dwelling unit providing three (3) bedrooms or more to
be accommodated on the lot. All off-street parking facilities shall be designed
with appropriate maneuvering area and with appropriate vehicular access to a
street or way. Access to and from such facilities shall be through a single
driveway (or not more than two (2) driveways where the lot concerned exceeds
ten (10) acres in size) not over twenty-four (24) feet in width, and having an
opening or curb cut at the street line suitable and appropriate to the driveway
width. The area devoted to parking and the area devoted to roadways, drives, and
maneuverability of vehicles thereto shall be suitably graded, provided and
maintained with a permanent dust free surface, shall be provided with adequate
drainage and shall have bumper guards where needed for safety. If lighting is
provided, the source of light shall be so arranged and shielded as to prevent direct
glare from the light source into any public street, private way, or onto adjacent
property. Surface parking areas shall be adequately screened from view, as
provided under subparagraph (f) above.
In any surface parking area, where there is a continuous row of more than fifteen
(15) parking spaces, a landscaped open space, not less than five (5) feet in width
shall be provided, so that there are no more than fifteen (15) spaces in a
continuous row which are not interrupted by such landscaped open space. Where
abutting the perimeter of the surface parking area, such space shall extend from
the maneuvering aisle to the perimeter of the area; where in the interior portion,
such space shall extend from the aisle serving one row of parking spaces in an
open space parallel to such spaces to the aisle serving the row of spaces facing the
first row. At least one tree shall be maintained in such space within ten (10) feet
of the aisle. Any surface parking area which abuts or faces a lot in a Residential
District shall be screened in accordance with Subparagraph (f) hereabove in a
manner to protect abutting lots from the glare of headlights, noise and other
nuisance factors. The location and design of entrances, exits, surfacing,
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 35 of 265
landscaping, parking, drainage, maneuverability of vehicles, and lighting shall be
subject to the approval of the Board of Appeals to insure adequate relation to
traffic safety and protection of adjacent properties.
h. Project Approval: The provisions of Section 16A shall apply.
i. Conflict With Any Other Provisions: In case of any conflict between explicit
provisions of this Section 6A. and other sections of this Bylaw, the provisions of
this Section shall control.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 36 of 265
Editor’s Note: Page intentionally left blank
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 37 of 265
SECTION 7. EDUCATIONAL DISTRICTS
Editor’s Note: Updated March 27, 2018 to reflect amendments under Article 32 at 2017 ATM)
A. In Educational Districts, no new building or structure shall be constructed or used, in
whole or in part, and no building or structure, or part thereto, shall be altered, enlarged,
reconstructed or used, and no land shall be used, for any purpose except one or more of
the following specified uses:
1. Permitted Uses
a. Educational purposes on land owned or leased by the Commonwealth or any of its
agencies, subdivisions or bodies politic, or by a religious sect or denomination, or
by a non-profit educational corporation, including, but not limited to, classrooms,
libraries, auditoriums, educational buildings, dormitories and/or residence halls
(not limited to occupancy by related or unrelated persons, as defined in Section
1B under the term “Family”), recreational and competitive sports fields and
facilities, dining facilities, performing arts centers and theatres, campus centers,
conference centers, chapels, floriculture, horticulture and agriculture related to an
educational use, and other such accessory uses as are customary;
b. One-Family Dwellings, Two-Family Dwellings, Town Houses, and Multi-Family
Dwellings for the housing of faculty, staff and/or employees of the educational
institution and such accessory uses as are customary, not limited to occupancy by
related or unrelated persons, as defined in Section 1B under the term “Family”;
provided, however, that Town Houses shall conform in all respects, with the
exception of off-street parking, to the provisions of Section 3A.A.2., and Multi-
Family Dwellings shall conform in all respects, with the exception of off-street
parking, to the provisions of Section 6A.A.3.;
c. One-Family Dwellings, the use of which is not associated with an educational
institution, so long as such dwelling existed prior to January 1, 2017;
d. Religious purposes;
e. Child Care Facility (defined to mean a "day care center" or a "school age child
care program," as those terms are defined in Section 9 of Chapter 28A M.G.L.) as
stipulated in Section 2.A.3A.a.-h.; and
f. Club, except a club the chief activity of which is a service customarily carried on
as a business.
2. Uses Requiring a Special Permit
The following additional uses may be allowed if a special permit is obtained as
hereinafter provided in Section 25:
a. Public or semi-public institution of a philanthropic, charitable, or religious
character;
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 38 of 265
b. Municipally owned or operated public parking lot or other public use;
c. Off-street parking as a non-accessory use, as stipulated in Section 2.A.8.j.i.-v.;
d. Use by the Town of a building, structure or land for its Municipal Light Plant or
its Water Works Plant; and
e. Such accessory uses as are customary in connection with any of the above uses
and which are incidental to such uses.
B. Project Approval
The provisions of Section 16A shall apply.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 39 of 265
SECTION 8. EDUCATIONAL DISTRICTS A
A. In Educational Districts A, no new building or structure shall be constructed or used, in
whole or in part, and no building or structure, or part thereof, shall be altered, enlarged,
reconstructed or used, and no land shall be used, for any purpose except one or more of
the following:
1. Any purpose authorized in an Educational District in accordance with and subject to
the provisions of Section 7; or for
2. The temporary parking of motor vehicles.
B. Off-street Parking
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 21.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 40 of 265
Editor’s Note: Page intentionally left blank
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 41 of 265
SECTION 8A. EDUCATIONAL DISTRICTS B
A. In Educational Districts B, no new building or structure shall be constructed or used, in
whole or in part, and no building or structure, or part thereof, shall be altered, enlarged,
reconstructed or used, and no land shall be used, for any purpose except one or more of
the following:
1. Any purpose authorized in an Educational District in accordance with and subject to
the provisions of Section 7.
2. Buildings, equipment and other facilities for ice skating, curling, tennis, squash,
handball and swimming, for participants and spectators, whether public or private,
and whether or not operated for profit, also in connection therewith, the parking of
motor vehicles; and also such other accessory uses as are customary when contained
within or attached to the physical education or physical recreation buildings; all
subject to conformity with the following requirements:
a. No building or other structure shall be erected or placed on a lot containing less
than eighty thousand (80,000) square feet in area.
b. Minimum Open Space: There shall be provided for each lot a minimum open
space of not less than 60 percent of the lot area.
c. No building or structure, or addition to any building, shall be erected or placed on
a lot which will result in the covering by buildings or structures of more than
twenty percent (20%) of the lot area.
d. No building or structure other than accessory buildings shall be located within one
hundred (100) feet of any property boundary line abutting a public or private way
or within one hundred (100) feet of any other property boundary line. No
accessory buildings may be erected within fifty (50) feet of such property
boundary lines.
e. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 21 but no such
off-street parking shall be within one hundred (100) feet of any lot line of any
land in residential districts or used for residential purposes.
f. Project Approval: The provisions of Section 16A shall apply.
g. For the purposes of this Section 8A.A.2., the terms "structure" shall include an
uncovered tennis court or an uncovered swimming pool.
h. No more than one thousand six hundred (1600) permanent spectator seats shall be
provided.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 42 of 265
Editor’s Note: Page intentionally left blank
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 43 of 265
SECTION 9. ADMINISTRATIVE AND PROFESSIONAL DISTRICTS
(Editor’s Note: Amended 7/9/2014 to reflect amendments approved under Article 34 at 2014 ATM)
A. In Administrative and Professional Districts, no new building or structure shall be
constructed or used, in whole or in part, and no building or structure, or part thereof, shall
be altered, enlarged, reconstructed or used, and no land shall be used, for any purpose
except one or more of the following:
1. Any purpose authorized in the Single Residence Districts;
2. Administrative offices, clerical offices, statistical offices, professional offices,
establishments for research and development, including light manufacturing
incidental to such research and development, and any additional use for which a
special permit may be obtained in accordance with Section 25 after the determination
by the Special Permit Granting Authority that the proposed use is similar to one or
more of the uses specifically authorized by this Section 9. Also, in connection
therewith, the parking of motor vehicles and such other accessory uses as are
customary. Registered Marijuana Dispensaries shall be allowed with the issuance of a
special permit in accordance with Section 25 and subject to additional provisions
included therein.
B. As to any project proposed to be built on land within the Administrative and Professional
District containing at least fourteen (14) contiguous acres within such District and having
its principal driveway within 1,000 feet of an access ramp to or from a road which is part of
the interstate highway system, the Planning Board shall, upon a finding that the following
requirements have been satisfied, grant a special permit allowing (i) an increase in the
maximum Floor Area Ratio above 0.3 (but not in excess of 0.4) as provided below, and (ii)
an increase in the maximum number of stories to four:
1. Setbacks:
From residential land:
The minimum setback of buildings from property boundary lines of land used for
residential purposes shall be 100 feet.
From non-residential land:
The minimum setback of buildings from property boundary lines of land used for
purposes other than residential purposes shall be 50 feet.
2. Screening: The setback areas abutting land used for residential purposes shall be
landscaped and screened by way of berms and plantings sufficient to substantially
shield abutting land from parking areas and buildings, all in accordance with a plan
drawn by a registered landscape architect. This plan shall be reviewed and approved by
the Design Review Board. The approved screening plan shall be incorporated into the
required Project Approval under Section 16A.
3. Lighting: An exterior lighting plan showing the location and design of light posts and
luminaries for all exterior lighting shall be reviewed and approved by the Design
Review Board. Unless specifically otherwise approved, no light posts shall exceed 18
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 44 of 265
feet in height from the applicable surface grade, and luminaries shall be of a type
having a total cutoff of less than 90 degrees, and shall direct the light onto the site. The
approved lighting plan shall be incorporated into the required Project Approval under
Section 16A.
4. Minimum Open Space: Open space, as defined in Section 1B, shall be at least thirty
percent (30%) of the lot area, and open space equal to at least fifteen percent (15%) of
the lot area shall be contiguous.
5. Site Security: The petitioner shall present to the Planning Board a certification by the
Chief of Police to the effect that the petitioner has proposed a written plan for site
security, which plan has been approved by the Chief of Police.
6. Traffic Management: The Board of Selectmen shall have approved a Traffic Demand
Management ("TDM") program. The goal of the TDM program shall be to promote
the efficient management and reduction of vehicle trips to and from the site, through the
use of practices that may include (but shall not be limited to) car pooling, van pooling,
ride sharing, flexible/staggered work hours, four day work weeks, membership and
participation in programs of a transportation management agency, shuttle services to
and from public transportation, and the use of on-site services, such as food service,
banking and fitness facilities for occupants of the project and their guests.
Upon a finding by the Planning Board that the proposed plan and project description (i)
satisfies the foregoing requirements, and (ii) shows that the total open space exceeds thirty
percent (30%) of the lot area, and (iii) shows that at least ten percent (10%) of the lot area
is Enhanced Open Space (as defined below), the Planning Board shall grant a special
permit allowing an increase in floor area ratio (as defined in Section 1B) above 0.30 (but in
no event in excess of 0.40), as follows: there shall be allowed an increase in FAR of 0.01
for each percent of open space over thirty percent (30%). If the Planning Board is unable
to make the findings described in clauses (i)-(iii) above, the Planning Board shall not issue
any such special permit.
The term "Enhanced Open Space" shall mean open space that enhances the quality of the
community, such as (i) so-called "fitness trails" or walking/jogging paths, that may be
made available to the public for passive recreational uses, or (ii) open space that enriches
the local environmental and aesthetic and visual quality of the town, such as large (in
excess of one acre) wooded or other open areas that are visible from public ways, or (iii)
significant areas of contiguous open space that enhance the efficient absorption and
drainage of storm water. With respect to open space that is made available for use by the
public, the availability of such areas to the public may be limited or otherwise regulated
(such as with respect to hours of availability) in a manner that is consistent with the
operation, security and management of corporate office facilities.
C. All uses shall be subject to conformity with the following requirements:
1. No building or other structure shall be erected or placed on a lot containing less than
forty thousand (40,000) square feet in area.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 45 of 265
2. No building or addition to any building shall be erected or placed on a lot which will
result in the covering by buildings of more than 20% of the lot area.
3. No building or structure other than accessory buildings shall be located within fifty
(50) feet of any property boundary line abutting a public or private way or within fifty
(50) feet of any other property boundary line. No accessory buildings may be erected
within thirty (30) feet of any such property boundary lines.
4. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 21.
5. Project Approval. The provisions of Section 16A shall apply.
6. Floor Area Ratio: The maximum floor area ratio as defined in Section 1B shall be
0.30.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 46 of 265
Editor’s Note: Page intentionally left blank
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 47 of 265
SECTION 9A. PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS
A. In Planned Development Districts, no new building or structure shall be constructed or
used, in whole or in part, and no building or structure, or part thereof, shall be altered,
enlarged, reconstructed or used, and no land shall be used, for any purpose except as
follows:
1. Uses Permitted
a. Residential
i. Town houses;
ii. Apartment houses.
b. Commercial Entertainment
i. Hotel, motel or inn;
ii. Restaurant, tea room or other eating place;
iii. Theater, hall, club, or other indoor places of amusement or assembly.
c. Commercial Retail/Office
i. Store, sales room, or showroom for the conduct of retail business, excluding
facilities for the sales of motor vehicles, mobile homes, house trailers, or
recreational trailers or vehicles;
ii. Personal services;
iii. Bank or other financial institution;
iv. Business or professional offices.
d. Parking
i. Public or private parking lots, garages or structures for the temporary
parking of motor vehicles.
e. Such accessory uses as are customary in connection with the uses enumerated in
subparagraphs a., b., and c. above.
f. Any of the following uses upon the granting of a special permit in accordance
with Section 25 provided, however, that the use requested was in existence within
the Planned Development District when this Zoning Bylaw took effect, and
provided that parking is provided in accordance with the provisions of Section 25:
i. Gasoline filling station;
ii. Printing Plant.
2. Minimum Lot or Development Site Area
No building or group of buildings shall be erected on a lot or development site area
containing less than ten (10) acres.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 48 of 265
3. Density and Design Standards
a. Mix of land uses
i. A maximum of fifty percent (50%) of the total lot or development site area
shall be devoted to residential use.
ii. A maximum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the total lot or development
site area shall be devoted to commercial entertainment use.
iii. A maximum of fifty percent (50%) of the total lot or development site area
shall be devoted to commercial retail and/or office use.
iv. A maximum of ten percent (10%) of the total lot or development site area
shall be devoted to uses permitted in accordance with Paragraph 1.,
Subparagraph f. above.
Parking required to serve each of the uses specified above shall be considered
within that portion of the lot or development site devoted to that particular use.
Uses permitted in accordance with Section 9A.1.c.i.-iii. shall be restricted to
ground floor locations provided that the Special Permit Granting Authority may,
subject to a determination that adequate provisions are made for pedestrian
circulation, grant a special permit for other locations of such use.
b. Residential Density
The density of residential development within that portion of the site devoted to
residential use shall not exceed the following:
i. Town Houses 1/4,000 square feet
ii. Apartments 1/1,800 square feet
c. Minimum Open Space: There shall be provided for each lot or development site
area a minimum open space of not less than the following:
i. 60 percent of the area devoted to residential use.
ii. 30 percent of the area devoted to commercial entertainment, commercial
retail or office use.
Should residential and non-residential uses be contained within a single structure,
the percentage of gross floor area associated with each use shall be used for the
purpose of determining said minimum open space.
d. Elevation of Buildings or Structures
i. No exterior wall of any building shall exceed a height of forty-five (45) feet
measured from the finished grade elevation of the land adjoining said wall,
exclusive of parapets or cornices, provided, however, that where the Planned
Development District abuts land zoned for residential purposes or a street,
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 49 of 265
the area opposite which is zoned for residential purposes, the maximum
height of any building shall not exceed that of any structure within one
hundred (100) feet of the boundary of the Planned Development District for
a depth of eighty (80) feet within the Planned Development District.
ii. Vertical projections not designed or used for human occupancy constructed
above the main roof elevation shall be permitted but shall not occupy a total
number of square feet of the roof which shall exceed an aggregate of fifteen
percent (15%) of the total ground coverage of the building and shall not
extend more than fifteen (15) feet above the main roof elevation of the
building.
iii. For the purpose of this Bylaw, the finished grade shall mean the elevation of
the completed surface of the land, such as lawns, walks, or paving, as
determined by field survey or as shown on official plans.
iv. No building shall contain more than four (4) stories. As used herein, the
term story shall mean a building level designed or used for human
occupancy, but shall not include a level designed or used for occupancy only
by custodial personnel.
e. Yards and Setbacks
No buildings or structures shall be erected or placed above ground level nearer to
any street or Zoning District boundary line than the following:
Use:
Zoning Boundary (1)
Single Residence or General
Residence
Zoning Boundary (1)
Other Than S.R. or G.R.
Residential:
Town Houses 30’
60’
Apartments 40’
Commercial Entertainment:
Hotel, etc.
50’
30’
Restaurant, etc. 0’
Theater, etc. 0’
Commercial Retail/Office:
Store, etc.
50’ 0’
Bank, etc.
Business/Professional
Office
Personal Service
i. Measurement shall be made from the zoning district boundary or from the
street line where the land opposite the Planned Development District but
having frontage on the same street as the Planned Development is not within
a Planned Development District.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 50 of 265
f. Parking
i. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the following:
Use Number of Spaces
Residential 1.5 per one or two bedroom unit; 2.0 per
three bedroom unit
Commercial Entertainment
Hotel, etc. 1 per 1 guest room
Restaurant, etc. 1 per 100 square feet of area in which
food is served
Theater, etc. 1 per each 4 seats
Commercial Retail
Store, etc. 1 per 150 square feet of floor area
Personal Services 1 per 300 square feet of floor area
Bank, etc. 1 per 300 square feet of floor area
Offices 1 per 300 square feet of floor area
ii. The design, construction and screening of off-street parking, except that
provided within underground garages or elevated parking structures, shall be
in accordance with the provisions of SECTION XXI.
iii. All parking required to serve a building or use shall be located within a
walking distance of six hundred (600) feet of that building or use.
iv. In any Planned Development District the required number of parking spaces
shall be reduced by ten percent (10%) when at least some portion of the lot
or development site area is devoted to each of the following uses:
? Residential
? Theater, or other use which, in the opinion of the Board of Appeals, would
require off-street parking at times different from the other uses included
within the lot or development site area.
? Commercial Retail or Office.
g. Lighting
All artificial lighting used to illuminate a parking or storage area, maneuvering
space, driveway, walkway, or pedestrian plaza or mall shall be arranged and
shielded so as to prevent direct glare from the light source into any public street or
private way or onto adjacent property.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 51 of 265
h. Location of Activities
All commercial entertainment, commercial retail and/or office activities, with the
exception of those accessory to uses permitted by Section 9A.1.b.i. and ii., shall
be carried on within a building or structure.
4. Project Approval: The provisions of Section 16A shall apply.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 52 of 265
Editor’s Note: Page intentionally left blank
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 53 of 265
SECTION 9B. LOWER FALLS VILLAGE COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
(Editor’s Note: Amended 7/9/2014 to reflect amendments approved under Article 34 at 2014 ATM)
A. Purpose
To establish a commercial zoning district for Lower Falls that allows for commercial
reinvestment and improvements, while protecting the quality of the immediately
surrounding residential neighborhoods.
B. In Lower Falls Village Commercial Districts, no new building or structure shall be
constructed or used, in whole or in part, and no building or structure, or part thereof, shall
be altered, enlarged, reconstructed or used, and no land shall be used, for any purpose
except one or more of the following specified uses:
1. Residence for more than two families, apartment house, apartment hotel, hotel or inn;
2. Restaurant, cafe, outside dining area, or other eating place for the sale of any food or
beverage; drive through windows where food or beverage is purchased by customers in
vehicles are not allowed;
3. Retail store having less than 10,000 square feet of floor area where all items for sale or
rent are kept inside a building; including artisan shops for the creation of pottery,
jewelry, clothing, sculpture, and similar artistic and craft activities;
4. Theater, hall, club, or other place of assembly;
5. Office, bank or other monetary institution; drive through windows where transactions
are made by customers in vehicles are not allowed;
6. Public or semi-public building;
7. Such accessory uses as are customary in connection with any of the uses enumerated in
clauses 1,2,3,4,5 and 6 are incidental thereto; such as the temporary parking of motor
vehicles of customers and clients patronizing a use allowed in the district; drive through
windows where business is conducted from vehicles shall not be considered as
customary accessory use;
8. Any additional use for which a special permit may be obtained in a specific case, as
hereinafter provided in Section 25 after the determination by the Special Permit
Granting Authority that the proposed uses is similar to one or more of the uses
specifically authorized by this section.
9. Any of the following uses upon granting of a special permit as provided in Section 25:
a. Sale or rental of tools and/or equipment involving outdoor storage.
b. Retail store having 10,000 or more square feet of floor area.
c. Registered Marijuana Dispensaries
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 54 of 265
C. Project Approval
The provisions of Section 16A shall apply.
D. Off-street Parking
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 21.
E. Floor Area Ratio
The maximum floor area ratio as defined in Section 1B shall be 0.30 except that the floor
area ratio may be increased above 0.30 (but not in excess of 1.0) subject to the terms of a
special permit granted by the Planning Board in accordance with the following:
1. A report shall have been received from the Design Review Board finding that:
a. the proposed project is consistent with the Wellesley Lower Falls Plan, Zoning,
Urban Design and Landscape Guidelines ("Lower Falls Guidelines") adopted by the
Planning Board which guidelines encourage retail activities at the street edge,
pedestrian-oriented uses, improvement of building facades to enhance the
pedestrian experience, improving the landscape and facilitating pedestrian access to
and use of the river-front;
b. the proposed project is consistent with the design criteria listed in Section 22;
2. The proposed project shall provide and/or contribute toward pedestrian and bicycle
amenities and shall, as applicable, accommodate pedestrian and bicycle circulation and
safety in accordance with the Lower Falls Guidelines and nationally recognized and
accepted standards;
3. The proposed project shall provide and/or contribute toward the improvement of
pedestrian access to the river; and
4. The proposed project shall provide and/or contribute toward the creation of a village
center, town green or mini-park to further enhance the pedestrian experience in Lower
Falls.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 55 of 265
SECTION 9C. WELLESLEY SQUARE COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
(Editor’s Note: Updated 7/9/2014 to reflect amendments approved under Article 34 at 2014 ATM; updated
9/10/2015 to reflect amendments approved under Article 31 at 2015 ATM))
A. In Wellesley Square Commercial Districts, no new building or structure shall be
constructed or used, in whole or in part, and no building or structure, or part thereof, shall
be altered, enlarged, reconstructed or used, and no land shall be used, for any purpose
except one or more of the following specified uses:
1. Any purpose authorized in Single Residence, General Residence or Educational
Districts;
2. Residence for more than two families, apartment house, apartment hotel, hotel, or inn;
3. Restaurant, tea room, or other eating place;
4. Retail store having less than 50,000 square feet of floor area where all items for sale
or rent are kept inside a building.
Drive through windows where items or services are provided to customers in vehicles
and retail stores having 50,000 or more square feet of floor area are not allowed
except by special permit under clause 13. hereof;
5. Theater, hall, club or other place of assembly;
6. Office, bank or other monetary institution; drive through windows where transactions
are made by customers in vehicles are not allowed except by special permit under
clause 13. hereof;
7. Public or semi-public building;
8. Storage or parking of motor vehicles, gasoline filling station, motor vehicle repair
shop, printing plant or telephone exchange; but not including auto body repair and
painting shop or automated or mechanical car wash;
9. Veterinary hospital or other medical institution for the care of animals and in
connection therewith a boarding kennel and pound, provided that all activities shall
be within a building except for exercise runs which may be maintained outside a
building as an accessory use thereto, provided that such runs shall not occupy a total
area in excess of four hundred (400) square feet or be located within one hundred
(100) feet of any business or residential use; and that approval has been received from
the Director of Public Health of the Town, and a license has been secured in
accordance with Section 137A, Chapter 140, of the Massachusetts General Laws as
amended;
10. Light manufacturing of products, the major portion of which is to be sold at retail on
the premises by the manufacturer to the consumer; provided that no light
manufacturing shall be carried on in a Business District which is prohibited or not
authorized in the Industrial Districts or which is prohibited in Section 16 and
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 56 of 265
provided further, that the total floor space used for such light manufacturing on any
one lot or on adjoining lots, if part of the same establishment, does not exceed an area
of fifteen hundred square feet, unless a special permit is obtained as hereinafter
provided in Section 25 for the use of an additional specified amount of floor space if
the Special Permit Granting Authority finds that such additional floor space is
reasonably necessary in the conduct of the business, and that the use of such
additional floor space would not violate this Section or Section 16 hereof;
11. Such accessory uses as are customary in connection with any of the uses enumerated
in clauses 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9, and are incidental thereto; such as the temporary
parking of motor vehicles of customers and clients patronizing a use allowed in the
district; drive through windows where business is conducted from vehicles shall not
be considered as a customary accessory use;
12. Any additional use for which a special permit may be obtained in a specific case, as
hereinafter provided in Section 25 after the determination by the Special Permit
Granting Authority that the proposed use is similar to one or more of the uses
specifically authorized by this Section.
13. Any of the following uses upon the granting of a special permit as provided in
Section 25:
a. Automated or mechanical car wash;
b. Dry cleaning establishment where chemical solvents are used on the premises;
c. Motor vehicle sales;
d. Motor vehicle body repair and/or painting shop;
e. Sale or rental of trailers, boats or recreational vehicles;
f. Sale or rental of tools and/or equipment involving outdoor storage;
g. Retail sales where one or more items for sale or rent are kept outside a building;
h. Sale of products or items from trailers and vehicles
i. Drive through windows where business is transacted from the vehicles of
customers or patrons;
j. Retail store having 50,000 or more square feet of floor area.
k. Registered Marijuana Dispensaries
l. Outside dining accessory to a restaurant use, whether with or without service from
waitstaff
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 57 of 265
B. Project Approval
The provisions of Section 16A shall apply.
C. Off-street Parking
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 21.
D. Floor Area Ratio
The maximum floor area ratio as defined in Section 1B shall be the greater of 0.30 or the
floor area of the building or buildings on a lot on March 22, 2004 said floor area to be
certified by the applicant in conjunction with a project submission.
E. Inclusionary Zoning
The provisions of Section 16B shall apply.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 58 of 265
Editor’s Note: Page intentionally left blank
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 59 of 265
SECTION 10. LIMITED BUSINESS DISTRICTS
A. In Limited Business Districts, no new building or structure shall be constructed or used,
in whole or in part, and no building or structure, or part thereof, shall be altered, enlarged,
reconstructed or used, and no land shall be used, for any purpose except one or more of
the following:
1. Any purpose authorized in Single Residence Districts;
2. Any purpose authorized in Administrative and Professional Districts in accordance
with and subject to the provisions of Section 9;
3. Hotel, motel, inn and a restaurant operated in conjunction with such hotel, motel or
inn and any additional use for which a special permit may be obtained in accordance
with Section 25, after the determination by the Special Permit Granting Authority that
the proposed use is similar to one or more of the uses specifically authorized by this
Section 10; also, in connection therewith, the parking of automobiles and such other
accessory uses as are customary, all subject to conformity with the following
requirements:
a. No building or other structure shall be erected or placed on a lot containing less
than forty thousand (40,000) square feet in area.
b. No building or addition to any building shall be erected or placed on a lot which
will result in the covering by buildings of more than twenty per cent (20%) of the
lot area.
c. No building or structure other than accessory buildings shall be located within
fifty (50) feet of any property boundary line abutting a public or private way or
within thirty (30) feet of any other property boundary line. No accessory buildings
shall be located within thirty (30) feet of any such property boundary lines.
d. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 21.
e. No facilities for the preparation of food shall be permitted in individual guest
rooms or suites.
f. Project Approval: The provisions of Section 16A shall apply.
g. Floor Area Ratio: The maximum floor area ratio as defined in Section 1B shall be
0.30.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 60 of 265
Editor’s Note: Page intentionally left blank
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 61 of 265
SECTION 11. BUSINESS DISTRICTS
(Editor’s Note: Updated 7/9/2014 to reflect amendments approved under Article 34 at 2014 ATM;
updated 9/10/2015 to reflect amendments approved under Article 31 at 2015 ATM)
A. In Business Districts, no new building or structure shall be constructed or used, in whole
or in part, and no building or structure, or part thereof, shall be altered, enlarged,
reconstructed or used, and no land shall be used, for any purpose except one or more of
the following specified uses:
1. Any purpose authorized in Single Residence, General Residence or Educational
Districts;
2. Residence for more than two families, apartment house, apartment hotel, hotel, or inn;
3. Restaurant, tea room, or other eating place;
4. Retail store having less than 50,000 square feet of floor area where all items for sale
or rent are kept inside a building.
Drive through windows where items or services are provided to customers in vehicles
and retail stores having 50,000 or more square feet of floor area are not allowed
except by special permit under clause 13. hereof;
5. Theater, hall, club or other place of assembly;
6. Office, bank or other monetary institution; drive through windows where transactions
are made by customers in vehicles are not allowed except by special permit under
clause 13. hereof;
7. Public or semi-public building;
8. Storage or parking of motor vehicles, gasoline filling station, motor vehicle repair
shop, printing plant or telephone exchange; but not including auto body repair and
painting shop or automated or mechanical car wash;
9. Veterinary hospital or other medical institution for the care of animals and in
connection therewith a boarding kennel and pound, provided that all activities shall
be within a building except for exercise runs which may be maintained outside a
building as an accessory use thereto, provided that such runs shall not occupy a total
area in excess of four hundred (400) square feet or be located within one hundred
(100) feet of any business or residential use; and that approval has been received from
the Director of Public Health of the Town, and a license has been secured in
accordance with Section 137A, Chapter 140, of the Massachusetts General Laws as
amended;
10. Light manufacturing of products, the major portion of which is to be sold at retail on
the premises by the manufacturer to the consumer; provided that no light
manufacturing shall be carried on in a Business District which is prohibited or not
authorized in the Industrial Districts or which is prohibited in Section 16 and
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 62 of 265
provided further, that the total floor space used for such light manufacturing on any
one lot or on adjoining lots, if part of the same establishment, does not exceed an area
of fifteen hundred square feet, unless a special permit is obtained as hereinafter
provided in Section 25 for the use of an additional specified amount of floor space if
the Special Permit Granting Authority finds that such additional floor space is
reasonably necessary in the conduct of the business, and that the use of such
additional floor space would not violate this Section or Section 16 hereof;
11. Such accessory uses as are customary in connection with any of the uses enumerated
in clauses 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9, and are incidental thereto; such as the temporary
parking of motor vehicles of customers and clients patronizing a use allowed in the
district; drive through windows where business is conducted from vehicles shall not
be considered as a customary accessory use;
12. Any additional use for which a special permit may be obtained in a specific case, as
hereinafter provided in Section 25 after the determination by the Special Permit
Granting Authority that the proposed use is similar to one or more of the uses
specifically authorized by this Section.
13. Any of the following uses upon the granting of a special permit as provided in
Section 25:
a. Automated or mechanical car wash;
b. Dry cleaning establishment where chemical solvents are used on the premises;
c. Motor vehicle sales;
d. Motor vehicle body repair and/or painting shop;
e. Sale or rental of trailers, boats or recreational vehicles;
f. Sale or rental of tools and/or equipment involving outdoor storage;
g. Retail sales where one or more items for sale or rent are kept outside a building;
h. Sale of products or items from trailers and vehicles;
i. Drive through windows where business is transacted from the vehicles of
customers or patrons;
j. Retail store having 50,000 or more square feet of floor area.
k. Registered Marijuana Dispensaries
l. Outside dining accessory to a restaurant use, whether with or without service from
waitstaff
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 63 of 265
B. Project Approval
The provisions of Section 16A shall apply.
C. Off-street Parking
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 21.
D. Floor Area Ratio
The maximum floor area ratio as defined in Section 1B shall be 0.30.
E. Inclusionary Zoning
The provisions of Section 16B shall apply.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 64 of 265
Editor’s Note: Page intentionally left blank
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 65 of 265
SECTION 12. BUSINESS DISTRICTS A
A. In Business Districts A, no new building or structure shall be constructed or used, in
whole or in part, and no building or structure, or part thereof, shall be altered, enlarged,
reconstructed or used, and no land shall be used, for any purpose except one or more of
the purposes authorized in a Business District.
B. Off-street Parking
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 21.
C. Project Approval
The provisions of Section 16A shall apply.
D. Floor Area Ratio
The maximum floor area ratio as defined in Section 1B shall be 0.30.
E. Inclusionary Zoning
The provisions of Section 16B shall apply.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 66 of 265
Editor’s Note: Page intentionally left blank
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 67 of 265
SECTION 13. INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
(Editor’s Note: Amended 7/9/2014 to reflect amendments approved under Article 34 at 2014 ATM)
A. In Industrial Districts, no new building or structure shall be constructed or used, in whole
or in part, and no building or structure, or part thereof, shall be altered, enlarged,
reconstructed or used, and no land shall be used, for any purpose except:
1. Any purpose or accessory use which is authorized in Single Residence, General
Residence, Educational or Business Districts;
2. Light manufacturing and assembly;
3. Dry cleaning establishment where chemical solvents are used on the premises;
4. Motor vehicle sales and service;
5. Motor vehicle body repair and/or painting shop;
6. Sale or rental of trailers, boats or recreational vehicles;
7. Sale or rental of tools and/or equipment involving outdoor storage;
8. Retail sales where one or more items for sale or rent are kept outside a building;
9. Sale of products or items from trailers and vehicles subject to the provisions of
Section 16.D.
10. Such accessory uses as are customary in connection with any of the uses enumerated
in clauses 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 are incidental thereto; such as the temporary
parking of motor vehicles of customers and clients patronizing a use allowed in the
district; drive through windows where business is conducted from vehicles shall not
be considered as a customary accessory use;
11. Any of the following uses upon the granting of a special permit as provided in
Section 25:
a. Automated or mechanical car wash;
b. Drive through windows where business is transacted from the vehicles of
customers or patrons.
c. Registered Marijuana Dispensaries
12. Any additional use for which a special permit may be obtained in a specific case, as
hereinafter provided in Section 25 after the determination by the Special Permit
Granting Authority that the proposed use is similar to one or more of the uses
specifically authorized by this Section.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 68 of 265
B. Project Approval
The provisions of Section 16A shall apply.
C. Off-street Parking
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 21.
D. Floor Area Ratio
The maximum floor area ratio as defined in Section 1B shall be 0.30.
E. Inclusionary Zoning
The provisions of Section 16B shall apply.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 69 of 265
SECTION 14. INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS A
A. In Industrial Districts A, no new building or structure shall be constructed or used, in
whole or in part, and no building or structure, or part thereof, shall be altered, enlarged,
reconstructed or used, and no land shall be used, for any purpose except one or more of
the purposes authorized in an Industrial District.
B. Off-street Parking
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 21.
C. Project Approval
The provisions of Section 16A shall apply.
D. Floor Area Ratio
The maximum floor area ratio as defined in Section 1B shall be 0.30.
E. Inclusionary Zoning
The provisions of Section 16B shall apply.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 70 of 265
Editor’s Note: Page intentionally left blank
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 71 of 265
SECTION 14A. TRANSPORTATION DISTRICTS
A. In Transportation Districts, no new building or structure shall be constructed or used, in
whole or in part, and no building or structure, or part thereof, shall be altered, enlarged,
reconstructed or used, and no land shall be used, for any purpose except:
1. Facilities and ways for the transportation of persons and property to and/or from
points within and/or without the Town; and
2. Such accessory uses as are customary in connection with the use permitted in clause 1
and are incidental thereto.
B. Project Approval
The provisions of Section 16A shall apply.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 72 of 265
Editor’s Note: Page intentionally left blank
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 73 of 265
SECTION 14B. FLOOD PLAIN OR WATERSHED PROTECTION DISTRICTS
A. Purposes
The purposes of Flood Plain Districts or Watershed Protection Districts are to:
1. Ensure public safety through reducing the threats to life and personal injury;
2. Eliminate new hazards to emergency response officials;
3. Prevent the occurrence of public emergencies resulting from water quality,
contamination, and pollution due to flooding;
4. Avoid the loss of utility services which if damaged by flooding would disrupt or shut
down the utility network and impact regions of the community beyond the site of
flooding;
5. Reduce damage to public and private property resulting from flooding waters by
providing that land subject to seasonal or periodic flooding shall not be used for
residence or for other purposes when such use will endanger the health or safety of
occupants;
6. Assure the continuation of the natural flow pattern of water courses necessary to
provide adequate and safe floodwater storage capacity to protect persons and property
against the hazards of flood inundation; and
7. Protect, preserve, and maintain the water table and water recharge areas so as to
preserve present and potential water supplies.
B. Definitions
For the purposes of this Section the following terms shall be defined as follows:
Development - Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including
but not limited to building or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation or drilling operations.
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) - An agency of the United States
Federal Government that administers the National Flood Insurance Program. FEMA
provides a nationwide flood hazard area mapping study program for communities as well
as regulatory standards for development in the flood hazard areas.
Flood – A temporary rise in river, stream or brook flow that results in its water
overtopping its banks and inundating Floodway areas adjacent to the channel.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) – An official map of a community on which FEMA
has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 74 of 265
Flood Insurance Study Report (FIS Report) - A report which examines, evaluates, and
determines flood hazards, and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or
an examination, evaluation and determination of flood-related erosion hazards.
Flood Plain District - An area subject to danger of periodic flooding, the limits of which
are determined by the Special Flood Hazard Area.
Floodwater Storage Capacity – The quantity of water which can be held within the flood
plain of a wetland.
Floodway - The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that
must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the
water surface elevation.
Natural River Channel - A water course with a definite bed and banks to confine and
conduct the average flow.
Special Flood Hazard Area - The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a
one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year as identified on the FIRM
Map as Zone A and AE.
Watershed Protection District - An area bordering a brook, stream or other water body,
the limits of which are determined by a horizontal distance.
C. Flood Plain District
1. District Boundaries and Base Flood Elevation Data
a. The Flood Plain District is herein established as an overlay district. The District
includes all Special Flood Hazard Areas within the Town of Wellesley as shown
on the Norfolk County Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) issued by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the administration of the National
Flood Insurance Program. The map panels of the Norfolk County FIRM that are
wholly or partially within the Town of Wellesley are panel numbers
25021C0004E, 25021C0008E, 25021C0009E, 25021C0012E, 25021C0014E,
25021C0016E, 25021C0017E, 25021C0018E, 25021C0028E, and 25021C0036E.
The exact boundaries of the District may be defined by the 100-year base flood
elevations shown on the FIRM dated July 17, 2012 and further defined by Norfolk
County Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report dated July 17, 2012 are incorporated
herein by reference and are on file with the Town Clerk, Planning Board,
Inspector of Buildings, and Wetlands Protection Committee.
b. Base Flood Elevation Data. In Zones A and AE, along watercourses that have not
had a regulatory Floodway designated, the best available Federal, State, local, or
other floodway data shall be used to prohibit encroachments in floodways which
would result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 75 of 265
2. Notification of Watercourse Alteration
a. In a riverine situation, the Planning Director shall notify the following of any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse:
i. Abutting communities
ii. The National Flood Insurance Program State Coordinator
iii. The National Flood Insurance Program, Regional Program Specialist
D. Watershed Protection District
1. District Boundaries
2. The Watershed Protection District is herein established as an overlay district.
E. Exemption
To further protect persons and property now subject to flooding, all residential,
commercial, industrial, and business buildings existing in Flood Plain or Watershed
Protection Districts may be repaired, rebuilt, modified or flood-proofed in a manner
which would not increase ground coverage, and any building or structure for which either
a building permit was issued, or a notice of intent under Chapter 131, Section 40 of the
Massachusetts General laws, was filed, prior to March 20, 1974, may be constructed and
built in accordance with plans as lawfully approved and thereafter may be repaired,
rebuilt, modified or flood-proofed in a manner which would not increase ground
coverage.
F. Regulations and Restrictions
1. General Restrictions:
a. In Flood Plain or Watershed Protection Districts, except as provided in Section
14B.E. above, and except as provided in Section 14B.F.2. below, no new building
or structure shall be constructed or used in whole or in part, and no existing
building or structure lying wholly within a designated Flood Plain or Watershed
Protection District shall be altered, enlarged, reconstructed or used in a manner
which would increase ground coverage within the Flood Plain or Watershed
Protection District; no dumping of trash, rubbish garbage, junk or other waste
materials shall be permitted; no filling, dumping, excavating, removal or transfer
of gravel, sand, loam, or other material which will restrict flood water flow or
reduce the flood water storage capacity shall be permitted, except the surfacing or
resurfacing of any existing parking area.
b. All development in the Flood Plain or Watershed Protection District, including
structural and non-structural activities, whether permitted by right or by special
permit must be in compliance with Chapter 131, Section 40 of the Massachusetts
General Laws and the following:
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 76 of 265
i. Sections of the Massachusetts State Building Code (780 CMR) which
address floodplain and coastal high hazard areas;
ii. Wetlands Protection Regulations, Department of Environmental
Protection (310 CMR 10.00);
iii. Inland Wetlands Restriction, Department of Environmental Protection
(310 CMR 13.00); and
iv. Minimum Requirements for the Subsurface Disposal of Sanitary
Sewage, Department of Environmental Protection (310 CMR 15, Title
5).
c. The portion of any lot delineated as being within a Flood Plain or Watershed
Protection District may be used to meet the area and yard requirements for the
district in which the remainder of the lot is situated.
2. Permitted Uses
a. Use of any woodland, grassland, wetland, or agricultural use of land or water, not
requiring filling or excavating shall be permitted such as:
i. Farming, grazing, and horticulture;
ii. Forestry and nursery uses;
iii. Conservation of water, plants, wildlife; and
iv. Wildlife management areas, foot, bicycle, and/or horse paths.
b. The Special Permit Granting Authority may give permission, as hereinafter
provided in Section 25 and subject to the provisions of Section 14B.F.3. below,
for the following uses within Flood Plain or Watershed Protection Districts:
i. Any use, otherwise permitted by the underlying zoning district within which
the land is situated, subject to the provisions of Section 14B.F.3. below;
ii. Construction, operation and maintenance of dams and other water control
devices including temporary alteration of the water level for emergency
purposes;
iii. Bridges and like structures permitting passages between lands of the same
owner, provided that such bridges and structures shall be constructed,
maintained and used at the expense and risk of such owner;
iv. Driveways and walkways ancillary to uses otherwise permitted by this
Section;
v. Recreation, including golf courses, municipal, county or state parks (but not
an amusement park), boating, fishing or any non-commercial open air
recreation use;
vi. Structures ancillary to farms, truck gardens, nurseries, orchards, tree farms
and golf courses.
3. Project Approval
The provisions of Section 16A shall apply.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 77 of 265
Plans submitted in accordance with Section 16A shall make adequate provision for:
a. The protection, preservation and maintenance of the water table and water
recharge areas;
b. The preservation of the natural river channel plus sufficient width of overbank
areas for the passage of flood flows;
c. The retention of existing floodwater storage capacity;
d. The design of proposed construction in a manner which ensures anchoring to
prevent flotation, collapse and/or excessive movement of structures; and
e. The design of public utilities including sewer, water, gas and electrical systems in
a manner which will minimize or eliminate flood damage.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 78 of 265
Editor’s Note: Page intentionally left blank
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 79 of 265
SECTION 14C. PARKS, RECREATION, AND CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
(Editor’s Note: Updated March 27, 2018 to reflect amendments under Article 35 at 2017 ATM)
A. Purpose and Intent
The Parks, Recreation, and Conservation district is intended to encompass land devoted
to parks, recreation, and conservation uses, and closely related uses.
B. Use Regulations
Within the Parks, Recreation, and Conservation district, no land and/or structure shall be
used for any purpose except as follows. Any use not specifically designated as a
permitted use or as a use allowed by a special permit or with Town Meeting approval,
shall be prohibited:
1. Permitted Uses
a. Conservation of soil, water, plants and wildlife, including wildlife management
shelters;
b. Outdoor passive and active recreation, including play and sporting areas, nature
study, boating, fishing, foot bridges, plank walks, foot paths and bicycle paths.
Play areas may include playgrounds and play structures; sporting areas may
include goals, fences, dugouts, and other similar structures commonly associated
with outdoor sports;
c. Dams and other water control devices, including temporary alteration of the water
level for agricultural, emergency or maintenance purposes, or for the propagation
of fish;
d. Forestry, grazing, farming, nurseries, truck gardening and harvesting of crops, and
non-residential buildings or structures used only in conjunction with harvesting or
storage of crops raised on the premises; and
e. Lawns, flower or vegetable gardens.
2. Uses Requiring a Special Permit
The following additional uses may be allowed if a special permit is obtained as
hereinafter provided in Section 25:
a. Driveways and parking areas, as defined by Section 21;
b. Dams, excavations, or changes in watercourses to create ponds, pools for
swimming, fishing, wildlife or other recreational or agricultural uses, scenic
features, or for drainage improvements; and
c. Municipal and public uses other than permitted park, recreation, and conservation
uses.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 80 of 265
C. Project Approval
The provisions of Section XVIA, Project Approval, shall apply to properties and uses in
the Parks, Recreation, and Conservation Districts.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 81 of 265
SECTION 14D. HISTORIC DISTRICTS
A. Purpose
The purpose of the Historic District is to promote the education, cultural, economic and
general welfare of the public through the preservation and protection of the distinctive
characteristics of buildings and places significant in the history of the Town of Wellesley
and the Commonwealth, or their architecture, and through the maintenance and
improvement of settings of such buildings and places and the encouragement of design
compatible therewith.
This Bylaw is not intended to conflict with any other Section of this Zoning Bylaw or
other Bylaws of the Town of Wellesley. The requirements established herein do not
relieve any person from also satisfying any and all applicable Zoning Bylaws or other
applicable rules, regulations and laws.
B. Authority
Historic Districts in the Town of Wellesley shall be created and maintained in every
respect under and according to the provisions of General Laws of the Commonwealth,
Chapter 40C and all amendments thereto, and this Section shall be in every respect
controlled by and subject to the provisions of said Chapter 40C of the General Laws and
all amendments thereto.
C. Definitions
For the purposes of this Section, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
Altered - includes the words "rebuilt", "reconstructed", "restored", "removed" and
"demolished" and the phrase "changed in exterior color".
Building - means a combination of materials forming a shelter for persons, animals or
property.
Commission - means the commission acting as the Historic District Commission.
Constructed - includes the words "built", "erected", "installed", "enlarged", and "moved".
Exterior Architectural Feature - means such portion of the exterior of a building or
structure as is open to view from a public street, public way, public park or public body
of water, including but not limited to the architectural style and general arrangement and
setting thereof, the kind, color and texture of exterior building materials, the color of
paint or other materials applied to exterior surfaces and the type and style of windows,
doors, lights, signs and other appurtenant exterior fixtures.
Structure - means a combination of materials other than a building, including a sign,
fence, wall, terrace, walk, or driveway.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 82 of 265
D. Applicability
1. The boundaries of the Historic District are shown on a map of the Historic District
which is filed with the Town Clerk of the Town of Wellesley and recorded in the
Registry of Deeds. The Historic District is indicated on the Zoning Map of the Town
of Wellesley.
2. Historic Districts shall be considered as overlapping other zoning districts.
E. Certification
1. Except as this Section may otherwise provide under Section 14D.G., no building or
structure within an Historic District shall be constructed or altered in any way that
effects exterior architectural features unless the Commission shall first have issued a
certificate of appropriateness, a certificate of non-applicability, or a certificate of
hardship, with respect to such construction or alteration.
2. Any person who desires to obtain a certificate from the Commission shall file with
the Commission an application for a certificate of appropriateness, a certificate of
non-applicability or a certificate of hardship, as the case may be, in such form as the
Commission may reasonably determine, together with such plans, elevations,
specifications, material and other information, including in the case of demolition or
removal a statement of the proposed condition and appearance of the property
thereafter, as may be reasonably deemed necessary by the Commission to enable it to
make a determination on the application.
3. No building permit for construction of a building or structure or for alteration of an
exterior architectural feature within an Historic District and no demolition permit for
demolition or removal of a building or structure within an Historic District shall be
issued by the Zoning Board of Appeals or by the Building Inspector until the
certificate required by this Section has been issued by the Commission.
4. If the Commission determines that the construction or alteration for which an
application for a certificate of appropriateness has been filed will be appropriate for
or compatible with the preservation or protection of the Historic District, the
Commission shall cause a certificate of appropriateness to be issued to the applicant.
In the case of a disapproval of an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the
Commission shall place upon its record the reasons for such determination and shall
forthwith cause a notice of its determination, accompanied by a copy of the reasons
therefor as set forth in the records of the Commission, to be issued to the applicant,
and the Commission may make recommendations to the applicant with respect to
appropriateness of design, arrangement, texture, material and similar features. Prior to
the issuance of any disapproval, the Commission may notify the applicant of its
proposed action accompanied by recommendations of changes in the applicant's
proposal which, if made, would make the application acceptable to the Commission.
If within fourteen days of the receipt of such notice the applicant files a written
modification of his application in conformity with the recommended changes of the
Commission, the Commission shall cause a certificate of appropriateness to be issued
to the applicant.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 83 of 265
5. In case of a determination by the Commission that an application for a certificate of
appropriateness or for a certificate of non-applicability does not involve any exterior
architectural feature, or involves an exterior architectural feature which is not then
subject to review by the Commission in accordance with the provisions of Section
14D.G., the Commission shall cause a certificate of non-applicability to be issued to
the applicant.
6. If the construction or alteration for which an application for a certificate of
appropriateness has been filed shall be determined to be inappropriate, or in the event
of an application for a certificate of hardship, the Commission shall determine
whether owing to conditions especially affecting the building or structure involved,
but not affecting the Historic District generally, failure to approve an application will
involve a substantial hardship, financial or otherwise, to the applicant and whether
such application may be approved without substantial detriment to the public welfare
and without substantial derogation from the intent and purpose of this Bylaw. If the
Commission determines in either such instance that owing to such conditions failure
to approve an application will involve substantial hardship to the applicant and
approval thereof may be made without such substantial detriment or derogation, or if
the Commission fails to make a determination on an application within the time
specified in Section 11 of Chapter 40C of the General Laws, the Commission shall
cause a certificate of hardship to be issued to the applicant.
7. Each certificate issued by the Commission shall be dated and signed by its chairman,
vice-chairman, secretary of such other person designated by the Commission to sign
such certificates on its behalf.
8. The Commission shall file with the Town Clerk and with the Building Inspector,
Zoning Board of Appeals, and the Planning Board a copy of all certificates and
determination of disapproval issued by it.
9. The Commission shall determine promptly, and in all events within fourteen days
after the filing of an application for a certificate of appropriateness, a certificate of
non-applicability or a certificate of hardship, as the case may be, whether the
application involves any exterior architectural features which are subject to approval
by the Commission. If the Commission determines that such application involves any
such features which are subject to approval by the Commission, the Commission shall
hold a public hearing on such application unless such hearing is dispensed with as
hereinafter provided. The Commission shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing on
any application and shall give public notice of the time, place and purposes thereof at
least fourteen days before said hearing in such manner as it may determine, and by
mailing, postage prepaid, a copy of said notice to the applicant, to the owners of all
adjoining property and other property deemed by the Commission to be materially
affected thereby as they appear on the most recent real estate tax list, to the Building
Inspector, to the Planning Board of the Town, and to any person filing written request
for notice of hearings, such request to be renewed yearly in December, and to such
other persons as the Commission shall deem entitled to notice.*
*See also Section 26.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 84 of 265
10. As soon as convenient after such public hearing but in any event within sixty days
after the filing of the application, or within such further time as the applicant may
allow in writing, the Commission shall make a determination of the application. If the
Commission shall fail to make a determination within such period of time the
Commission shall thereupon issue a certificate of hardship.
11. A public hearing on an application need not be held if such hearing is waived in
writing by all persons entitled to notice thereof. In addition, a public hearing on an
application may be waived by the Commission if the Commission determines that the
exterior architectural feature involved is so insubstantial in its effect on the Historic
District that it may be reviewed by the Commission without public hearing on the
application, provided, however, that if the Commission dispenses with a public
hearing on an application a notice of the application shall be given to the owners of
all adjoining property and other property deemed by the Commission to be materially
affected thereby as above provided, and ten days shall elapse after the mailing of such
notice before the Commission may act upon such application.
F. Guidelines.
1. In passing upon matters before it the Commission shall consider, among other things,
the historic and architectural value and significance of the site, building or structure,
the general design arrangement, texture, and material of the features involved, and the
relation of such features to similar features of buildings and structures in the
surrounding area. In the case of new construction or additions to existing buildings or
structures, the Commission shall consider the appropriateness of the size and shape of
the building or structure, both in relation to the land area upon which the building or
structure is situated and to buildings and structures in the vicinity, and the
Commission may in appropriate cases impose dimensional and set-back requirements
in addition to those required by other applicable Bylaws. The Commission shall not
consider interior arrangements or architectural features not subject to public view.
2. The Commission shall not make any recommendation or requirement except for the
purpose of preventing developments incongruous to the historic aspects or the
architectural characteristics of the surroundings and of the Historic District.
3. The Commission may after public hearing set forth in such manner as it may
determine the various designs of certain appurtenances, such as light fixtures, which
will meet the requirements of an Historic District and a roster of certain colors of
paint and roofing materials which will meet the requirements of an Historic District,
but no such determination shall limit the right of an applicant to present other designs
or colors to the Commission for its approval.
G. Exceptions.
1. The authority of the Commission shall not extend to the review of the following
categories of buildings or structures or exterior architectural features in the Historic
District, and the buildings or structures or exterior architectural features so excluded
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 85 of 265
may be constructed or altered within the Historic District without review by the
Commission:
a. Temporary structures or signs, subject however, to the other applicable sections of
this Zoning Bylaw.
b. Terraces, walks, sidewalks and similar structures, or and one or more of them,
provided that any such structure is substantially at grade level.
c. One antenna per building, storm doors and windows, screens, window air
conditioners, lighting fixtures and similar appurtenances.
d. The color of paint, provided that the paint color does not cause substantial
derogation from the intent and purpose of the Bylaw and is in keeping with
accepted aesthetic standards.
e. The color or materials used on roofs.
f. Signs of not more than one square foot in area in connection with use of a
residence for a customary home occupation, or for professional purposes,
provided only one such sign is displayed in connection with each residence and if
illuminated is illuminated only indirectly.
g. The reconstruction, substantially similar in exterior design, of a building, structure
or exterior architectural feature damaged or destroyed by fire, storm or other
disaster, provided that the exterior design is substantially similar to the original
and that such reconstruction is begun within one year thereafter and carried
forward with due diligence.
2. The Commission may determine from time to time after public hearing that certain
categories of exterior architectural features, colors, structures or signs, including
without limitation, any of those enumerated under paragraph 1., may be constructed
or altered without review by the Commission without causing substantial derogation
from the intent and purpose of this Bylaw.
3. Upon request the Commission shall issue a certificate of non-applicability with
respect to construction or alteration in any category then not subject to review by the
Commission in accordance with the provisions of paragraphs 1. and 2.
H. Ordinary Maintenance, Repairs or Replacement.
Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance, repair or
replacement of any exterior architectural feature within an Historic District which does
not involve a change in design, material, color or the outward appearance thereof, nor to
prevent the landscaping with plants, trees or shrubs, nor construed to prevent the meeting
of requirements certified by a duly authorized public officer to be necessary for public
safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition, nor construed to prevent any
construction or alteration under a permit duly issued prior to the adoption of this Section.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 86 of 265
I. Further Review and Rights of Appeal.
Any applicant aggrieved by a determination of the Historic District Commission may
within twenty days after the filing of the notice of such determination with the Town
Clerk, file a written request with the Commission for a review by a person or person of
competence and experience in such matters, designated by the Metropolitan Area
Planning Council.
The finding of the person or persons making such review shall be filed with the Town
Clerk within forty-five days after the request, and shall be binding on the applicant and
the Commission, unless a further appeal is sought in the Superior Court as provided in
Section 12A of Chapter 40C of the General Laws.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 87 of 265
SECTION 14E. WATER SUPPLY PROTECTION DISTRICTS
A. Purpose
The Water Supply Protection Districts are intended to protect the public health, safety,
and welfare by preventing contamination of and preserving the quantity of ground and
surface water which provides existing or potential water supply for the town's residents,
institutions, and businesses.
B. Definitions
For the purposes of this Section, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
Hazardous Waste - Materials as defined and regulated by 310 CMR 30.00 (Massachusetts
Hazardous Waste Management regulations).
Impervious Surface - Material covering the ground, including but not limited to
macadam, cement, concrete, pavement, and buildings, that does not allow surface water
to penetrate into the soil.
Maximum Groundwater Elevation - The seasonal high level of the groundwater table.
This level shall be the same as the maximum groundwater elevation defined and
determined in 310 CMR 15.00 (Title 5, State Environmental Code).
Mining of Land - The removal of geologic materials such as topsoil, sand and gravel,
metallic ores or bedrock.
Solid Waste - Unwanted or discarded solid material within sufficient liquid content to be
free flowing, including without limitation rubbish, garbage, junk, refuse. The term does
not include vegetative compost, tree stumps, and brush.
Toxic or Hazardous Materials - Any substance or mixture of such physical, chemical or
infectious characteristics as to pose a significant, actual or potential hazard to water
supplies and to human health, if such substance or mixture were discharged to land or
waters of this town. Toxic or hazardous materials include, without limitation, petroleum
products, heavy metals, radioactive materials, virulent infectious wastes, pesticides,
herbicides, solvents, thinners and other materials which are listed as U.S. EPA Priority
Pollutants.
C. Applicability
1. Water Supply Protection Districts shall be considered as overlying other zoning
districts.
2. The applicability of this Section to existing uses or structures and to projects legally
begun at the time of adoption, shall be governed by Section 17.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 88 of 265
3. The provisions of Section 14E.D.1. and Section 14E.D.2. shall not apply to the
installation, operation, or maintenance of necessary public water, public waste water,
public stormwater, and public electric facilities and devices.
D. Use Regulations
Within Water Supply Protection Districts the requirements of the underlying districts
continue to apply, except that uses are prohibited as indicated in Section 14E.D.1. and
require a Special Permit where indicated in Section 14E.D.2., even where underlying
district requirements are more permissive. Within Water Supply Protection Districts,
these regulations shall apply:
1. The following uses are prohibited:
a. Solid waste disposal facilities, including without limitation landfills and junk and
salvage yards, that require a site assignment from the Board of Health under
M.G.L., Ch.111, s.150A (the landfill site assignment law) and regulations adopted
by the Department of Environmental Quality Engineering, 310 CMR 19.00;
b. Storage of petroleum and other refined petroleum products, including without
limitation gasoline, waste oil, and diesel fuel, except within buildings which it
will heat or where it currently exists or for in-kind replacement or in quantities for
normal household use, provided there is compliance with all local, state, and
federal laws;
c. Storage of road salt or other de-icing chemicals in quantities greater than for
normal household use;
d. Storage of hazardous wastes, including without limitation chemical wastes,
radioactive wastes, and waste oil in quantities greater than resulting from normal
household activities;
e. Manufacture, use, storage, or disposal of toxic or hazardous materials as an
integral part of a principal activity, but excluding domestic activities and pesticide
applications;
f. Motor vehicle service stations, repair garages, car washes, truck or bus terminals,
heliports, airports, electronic manufacturing, metal plating, commercial chemical
and bacteriological laboratories, and dry cleaning establishments using toxic or
hazardous materials on site;
g. Disposal of hazardous wastes.
2. If, in the judgment of the Special Permit Granting Authority, the Design and
Operation Standards in Section 14E.F. are adequately satisfied and not otherwise
prohibited in Section 14E.D.1., the following uses may be allowed upon issuance of a
Special Permit and subject to such conditions as the SPGA may impose. Failure to
comply with the terms and conditions of a Special Permit shall be grounds for
revocation of said permit.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 89 of 265
a. Commercial mining of land;
b. Major construction projects which are defined in Section 16A, and which are
subject to site plan review.
c. Parking lots, vehicle rental agencies, photographic processing establishments, or
printing establishments;
d. Any uses where more than 10,000 square feet of any lot would be rendered
impervious.
E. Project Approval
The provisions of Section 16A shall apply.
F. Design and Operation Standards
1. Safeguards. Provision shall be made to adequately protect against toxic or hazardous
materials discharge or loss through corrosion, accidental damage, spillage, or
vandalism through such measures as provision for spill control in the vicinity of
chemical or fuel delivery points, secure storage areas for toxic or hazardous materials,
and indoor storage provisions for corrodible or dissolvable materials.
2. Disposal. No disposal of hazardous wastes within Water Supply Protection Districts
shall occur. All provisions of M.G.L., Ch.111, s.150A (the landfill site assignment
law), and M.G.L., Ch. 21C (the Massachusetts Hazardous Waste Management Act)
shall be adequately satisfied.
3. Fill. Fill material used in a Water Supply Protection District shall contain no solid
waste, toxic or hazardous materials, or hazardous waste. Adequate documentation
shall be provided to ensure proper condition of the fill. The SPGA may require soils
testing by a certified laboratory at the applicant's expense.
4. Spill Containment. For industrial and commercial uses, an emergency response plan
to prevent contamination of soil or water in the event of accidental spills or the
release of toxic or hazardous materials shall be submitted to the SPGA, if deemed
necessary, for approval prior to granting of a Special Permit. Recommendations of
the Fire Department on said plan shall be sought.
5. Monitoring. Periodic monitoring shall be required when the site location and land use
activities indicate a significant risk of contamination to the water supply as
determined by the SPGA based upon recommendations of the Department of Public
Works, Board of Health, and Wetlands Protection Committee. Such monitoring may
include analyses of water for appropriate substances and the installation of
groundwater monitoring wells constructed and located as specified by the Department
of Public Works. All costs shall be borne by the owner of the premises.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 90 of 265
6. On-site Recharge. All storm water runoff from impervious surfaces shall be
recharged on-site unless in conducting site plan review it is determined that either
recharge is not feasible because of site conditions or is undesirable because of
uncontrollable risks to water quality from such recharge. Such recharge shall be by
surface infiltration through vegetated surfaces unless otherwise approved by the
SPGA during site plan review. If dry wells or leaching basins are approved for use,
they shall be preceded by oil, grease, and sediment traps. Drainage from loading
areas for toxic or hazardous materials shall be separately collected for safe disposal.
7. Grade Reduction. Soil overburden shall not be lowered to finished exterior grades
less than five (5) feet above maximum groundwater elevation, unless technical
evidence can be provided showing to the SPGA's satisfaction that groundwater
quantity or quality will not be detrimentally affected. Technical evidence may
include without limitation a determination of soil and geologic conditions where low
permeability will mitigate leachate penetration and evaporation transpiration.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 91 of 265
SECTION 14F. RESIDENTIAL INCENTIVE OVERLAY (RIO)
A. Purpose
To provide a residential reuse incentive for a parcel or parcels greater than one acre
located in close proximity to the Town’s commercial districts and public transportation.
B. Applicability
The RIO shall be considered as overlaying other zoning districts.
C. Underlying Zoning Districts
The RIO confers additional development options to be employed at the discretion of the
property owner. The RIO does not in any manner remove or alter the zoning rights
permitted by the underlying zoning district. However, use of one or more of the RIO
development options requires consistency with all RIO requirements.
D. Permitted Uses
Conventional multi-family dwelling units, assisted elderly living, independent elderly
housing, nursing homes and skilled nursing facilities.
E. Minimum Lot or Building Site Area
No building or group of buildings shall be constructed on a lot or development site
containing less than 45,000 square feet. No building conversion shall be approved on a
lot or development site containing less than 25,000 square feet.
F. Minimum Open Space
There shall be provided a minimum open space as defined in Section 1B of 30 percent of
the lot or development site area, one half of which shall be Enhanced Open Space as
defined in Section 9, provided, however, that the amount of open space required for
conversion projects shall be determined by the Planning Board under O. Project
Approval/Special Permit paragraph below.
G. Floor Area Ratio
Building floor area devoted to residential uses including conventional market-rate
housing, assisted elderly living, independent elderly housing, nursing home and/or skilled
nursing facilities shall not be subject to floor area ratio requirements notwithstanding
other provisions of this Zoning Bylaw to the contrary.
H. Maximum Development Density
There shall be provided for each dwelling unit of assisted elderly living or independent
elderly living a lot area of not less than fourteen hundred (1,400) square feet and the
number of dwelling units on a lot or development site shall not exceed 150 units. There
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 92 of 265
shall be provided for each dwelling unit of conventional multifamily housing a lot area of
not less than eighteen hundred (1,800) square feet. A nursing home or skilled nursing
facility on a lot or development site shall not exceed 250 beds.
I. Building Setbacks
Yard definitions shall be as specified in Section 19. RIO projects involving new
construction shall provide the following:
Minimum Front Yard Depth: 25 feet
Minimum Side Yard Depth: 10 feet
Minimum Rear Yard Depth: 10feet
However, where the housing is not located in a residential zoning district but abuts a
residential zoning district, the setback shall be 60 feet and a buffer of natural material
and/or an earthen berm shall be installed to provide screening on a year-round basis.
J. Building Height
Maximum building height as defined in Section 20 for new construction shall be 4 stories
and 45 feet for buildings used for assisted elderly living, independent elderly housing,
and conventional multi-family housing located in Business, Business A, Industrial,
Industrial A, or Lower Falls Village Commercial Districts; new construction shall be 36
feet for buildings located in Single Residence Districts and General Residence Districts.
The maximum building height for nursing homes and skilled nursing facilities shall be
three stories and 36 feet. See Building Conversion paragraph below for height restrictions
for conversion of existing buildings to these uses.
K. Signs
Signs shall comply with the sign requirements of Section 22A. For the purposes of Table
22A.1 of Section 22A, RIO projects shall comply with the signage allowances of
Commercial Districts Fronting Streets Other Than Worcester Street, except that RIO
projects located in underlying Single Residence or General Residence zoning districts
shall comply with the following:
Number of Signs of Total Permanent Signage: 2 permanent signs per lot, consisting of no
more than 1 wall sign or 1 standing sign
Maximum Total Area of Total Permanent Signage: 25 sq.ft.
Maximum Area of Standing Signs: 16 sq.ft.
Maximum Area of Wall Signs: 9 sq.ft.
Window Signs shall not be permitted
Awning Signs shall not be permitted
L. Off-Street Parking
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 21.
M. Building Conversion
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 93 of 265
An existing building may be converted to uses allowed in the RIO subject to the terms of
a special permit granted by the Planning Board. In no instance shall the building be
expanded to exceed the height limitations specified below or the current height of the
building if said height is greater than 45 feet. There shall be no maximum residential
density. However, if the building proposed for conversion presently does not conform to
the requirements of the underlying zoning district the provisions of Section 17 shall apply
to the conversion project. In this instance application shall not be made to the Zoning
Board of Appeals under Section 17 prior to the issuance of a special permit by the
Planning Board under this Section.
N. Mixed Use Projects
Any combination of conventional housing types is permitted up to a maximum density of
24 units per acre. Further, up to 75 conventional units of any type of housing shall be
permitted in conjunction with development of a facility providing at least 100 nursing
home beds, 100 beds associated with a skilled nursing facility, or at least 80 assisted
living or independent elderly housing units. A mix of residential units comprising
independent elderly housing, assisted elderly living, skilled nursing, nursing homes, and
any type of conventional housing shall also be allowed, consistent with the dimensional
regulations of the RIO.
In RIO projects that provide at least 100 elderly dwelling units of any type, including
skilled nursing facilities, or at least 50 conventional housing units of any type, up to
10,000 sq. ft. of retail space in a structure or structures separate from the residential units
or nursing facility shall be permitted. All such developments shall be consistent with the
dimensional and parking requirements of the underlying district as applicable.
O. Project Approval/Special Permits
The provisions of Section 16A shall apply in all respects to projects in the RIO.
Application shall not be made under Section 16A prior to the issuance of a special use
permit by the Planning Board under this section. A special use permit shall be required
from the Planning Board in conjunction with all projects employing RIO development
options for building conversion or new construction and the Planning Board may waive
specific dimensional requirements in accordance with the following:
1. The Planning Board shall receive a report from the Design Review Board finding
that the proposed project is consistent with the Design Criteria listed in Section 22
and, for projects located in the Lower Falls RIO District, that the proposed project
is consistent with the Wellesley Lower Falls Plan, Zoning, Urban Design and
Landscape Guidelines (“Lower Falls Guidelines”) adopted, and from time to time
amended, by the Planning Board.
2. The proposed project shall provide and/or contribute toward pedestrian and
bicycle amenities and shall, as applicable, accommodate pedestrian and bicycle
circulation and safety in accordance with nationally recognized and accepted
standards.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 94 of 265
3. The proposed project shall provide and/or contribute toward the improvement of
pedestrian or public transit, and access to a river, open space, public trails or other
public amenities.
4. The proposed project shall provide and/or contribute toward the creation of a
village center, town green, or mini-park within or adjacent to the RIO.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 95 of 265
SECTION 14G. LINDEN STREET CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT(“LSCOD”)
A. Purpose
In recognition of the unique location, function, and character of land uses along the
Linden Street commercial corridor, the Linden Street Corridor Overlay District (LSCOD)
is intended to encourage the redevelopment of unsightly and inefficient properties in a
coordinated and well-planned manner in order to promote:
? More efficient and organized layout of buildings, parking areas, vehicular circulation
aisles, and pedestrian walkways.
? Orderly master planning of the Linden Street corridor.
? Improved facilities and circulation for the safety, comfort, ease of movement, and
convenience of pedestrians.
? Enhanced aesthetic quality and architectural compatibility of new and existing
buildings.
? Enhanced quality of landscape, including features such as trees, shrubs, lawns, and
other plantings, as well as features such as walkways, plazas, street furnishings,
lighting, and perimeter fencing.
? Consolidation, improved organization, and safe design of site access points.
? Improved overall traffic safety and operations along Linden Street.
? Enhanced property values along the corridor, including adjacent residential and
commercial neighborhoods.
? Improved watershed conditions and drainage and improvement of existing flooding
conditions on private property.
? Decreased peak stormwater drainage rates into downstream receiving bodies by
increasing open space.
B. Applicability
The LSCOD is shown on the Zoning Map and shall be considered as overlaying other
existing zoning districts.
C. Underlying Zoning Districts
The LSCOD confers additional development options to be employed at the discretion of
the property owner. The LSCOD does not in any manner remove or alter the zoning
rights permitted by the underlying zoning district. However, use of one or more of the
LSCOD development options requires consistency with all LSCOD requirements. If two
or more lots are (i) contiguous to each other, and (ii) owned by the same person or entity,
such lots may be combined as a single “Development Site.” The limits of any
Development Site shall be identified by the Applicant and endorsed by the land owner or
owners at the time of project submission. Lots that would be contiguous to each other but
for a street or right of way shall be considered to be contiguous for the purposes of
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 96 of 265
assembling a Development Site. One or more lots may be added to an existing
Development Site, but only if such addition would not cause the Development Site, as so
enlarged, to be out of conformance with the provisions hereof.
D. Permitted Uses
Any use or uses that are permitted in the underlying zoning district are permitted,
provided that if, in the underlying zoning district, a special permit would be required for
any particular use, the same special permit shall be required for such use in the LSCOD.
Any non-conforming uses or structures will continue to be governed by General Laws
Chapter 40A Section 6, and by Section 17 of this Bylaw.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following uses shall not be permitted on any
Development Site:
1. any use that would not be permitted in a Business District (provided that any use that
would be permitted in a Business District with a special permit or other appropriate
relief shall similarly be permitted in the LSCOD with a special permit or such other
relief);
2. sale or rentals of trailers, boats or recreational vehicles;
3. sale of items or products out of trailers;
4. hotel or motel;
5. automobile dealership (new or used);
6. storage of oil or petroleum products (other than as accessory to another permitted use
and then only in accordance with applicable state and federal laws), provided that this
clause shall not prohibit use for a gasoline service station with associated repair
facilities;
7. laundry establishments with on-premises dry cleaning facilities, provided that the
foregoing will not restrict laundry establishments with dry cleaning pick-up and dropoff
service;
8. drive-through windows where food or beverage is purchased by customers in vehicles
9. light manufacturing; and
10. “adult uses,” as defined in Section 1B of this Bylaw.
E. Minimum Open Space
There shall be provided for each Development Site minimum open space (as defined in
Section 1B) equal to at least eighteen percent (18%) of the area of the Development Site.
In computing the total open space for the Development Site, open space provided
pursuant to Section 21.D.3. shall be included.
F. Maximum Floor Area Ratio
The maximum floor area ratio, as defined in Section 1B, for a Development Site shall be
0.3. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the maximum floor area ratio for a Development
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 97 of 265
Site may be increased above 0.3 (but not in excess of 0.35), upon and subject to the
issuance of a special permit granted by the Planning Board in accordance with the
following:
1. A report shall have been received from the Design Review Board finding that the
proposed project is consistent with the design criteria listed in Section 22 of this
Bylaw;
2. The Planning Board shall find that the proposed project provides and/or contributes to
and enhances pedestrian access and safety and will accommodate pedestrian and
bicycle circulation (including reasonable bicycle parking areas, suitably separated
from motor vehicle traffic lanes) in accordance with nationally recognized and
accepted standards;
3. The Design Review Board shall find that the proposed project contains architectural
features that enhance the appearance of the Development Site;
4. Newly constructed buildings in the proposed project shall be designed so as to
minimize excessive noise from loading or refuse removal activities and from the
operation of HVAC or mechanical equipment;
5. The Proposed Project includes affordable housing units in excess of those required
under Section 16B of this Bylaw; and
6. The proposed project shall include open space that enhances the local commercial
environment, including (i) at least one park-type area of not less than 6,000 square
feet with amenities such as benches and shade trees; (ii) at least three areas of green
space of at least 1,000 contiguous square feet each, which will enhance the absorption
and drainage of storm water; and (iii) open space that enhances pedestrian safety,
including readily identifiable pathways with appropriate signage or markings. Open
space referred to in clauses (i) and (ii) will be planted and maintained substantially in
accordance with a landscape plan, which will be reviewed and approved by the
Design Review Board and the Town Horticulturalist.
Upon the satisfaction of the foregoing conditions, the Planning Board shall issue a special
permit allowing an increase in the maximum floor area ratio above 0.3, but in no event
shall the maximum Floor Area Ratio for any Development Site exceed 0.35.
G. Inclusionary Zoning
The provisions of Section 16B shall apply.
H. Project Approval
The provisions of Section 16A shall apply.
(a) In connection with an application for any special permit or Project Approval under
Section 16A, a proposed development in the LSCOD shall not degrade the level of
service designation at an impacted intersection or roadway segment to a level below
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 98 of 265
the level of “C” and, if an impacted intersection or roadway segment is projected to
operate at an level of service lower than “C” in a design year no-build alternative,
then the proposed development shall not degrade the level of service designation
below the projected design year no-build levels. An exception shall be for
unsignalized intersections where, for the specific hour in question, fifty (50) trips per
hour or less during the design year no-build peak hour are projected for a minor street
approach. For these locations, the Applicant shall undertake an evaluation to identify
any specific circumstances requiring further action or mitigation, which may be the
subject of negotiated improvements at the discretion of the Planning Board.
(b) In connection with evaluation under Section 16A of the storm drainage system, if the
Planning Board determines that the minimum service standards cannot reasonably be
achieved, but that the proposed project will effect an improvement in the no-build
alternative, the Planning Board may, in its reasonable discretion, modify the
minimum service standard and requirements, which modification may be conditioned
on reasonable and acceptable mitigation measures. Any such mitigation measures
shall be incorporated into the conditions of such special permit or Project Approval.
I. Yards and Setbacks
The provisions of Section 19 are inapplicable to proposed projects under this Section. No
building or structures shall hereafter be erected or placed nearer to any street or property
line of a property abutting the Development Site than the following:
Rear 10 feet
Side 10 feet
Front 15 feet
J. Buffers
A buffer area shall be provided along the property line where the property line of the
Development Site is contiguous to the property line of another lot within an existing
residential district. This buffer shall be landscaped and screened by way of fences, walls
and/or plantings sufficient to reasonably and substantially shield abutting land from
parking and loading areas and buildings. Any such fences or walls may provide openings
to allow safe pedestrian access and egress between the Development Site and the adjacent
neighborhood. A Landscape Plan identifying the location and treatment of said buffer
shall be prepared by a Landscape Architect licensed in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, and approved by the Design Review Board. The foregoing requirement
may be satisfied by (a) a landscaped and planted strip between the Development Site and
the abutting residential district at least ten feet (10’) in width, and/or (b) where existing
conditions do not permit a 10-foot buffer, then a buffer strip between the Development
Site and the abutting residential district, with fencing, walls or plantings at least seven
feet (7’) in average height. The approved buffer plan shall be incorporated into the
required Project Approval under Section 16A. No parking spaces, commercial loading
facilities and maneuvering areas shall hereafter be placed within any buffer area.
K. Lighting
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 99 of 265
An exterior lighting plan showing the location and design of light posts and luminaries
for all exterior lighting shall be reviewed and approved by the Design Review Board.
Unless specifically otherwise approved by the Design Review Board, luminaires shall be
of a type having a total cutoff of less than ninety (90) degrees, and shall direct light onto
the site. The approved lighting plan shall be incorporated into the required Project
Approval under Section 16A.
L. Off-Street Parking
Parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 21. The landscaping and screening
requirements set forth in Section 21 shall apply to any proposed project.
M. No more than two stores having a ground floor area of more than twenty-five thousand
(25,000) square feet each shall be on a Development Site, unless the Planning Board shall
first have granted a special permit.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 100 of 265
Editor’s Note: Page intentionally left blank
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 101 of 265
SECTION 14H. LARGE-SCALE SOLAR OVERLAY DISTRICT
(Editor’s Note: Section XIVH added March 27, 2018 to reflect new provisions adopted under Article 31 at 2017
ATM)
A. Purpose
The purpose of this bylaw is to establish an overlay zoning district which allows for the
creation of Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations by providing
standards for the placement, design, construction, operation, monitoring, modification
and removal of such installations that address public safety, minimize impacts on scenic,
natural and historic resources, and to provide adequate financial assurance for the
eventual decommissioning of such installations.
B. Applicability
The district shall be shown on the Zoning Map of the Town of Wellesley, Massachusetts
and shall be considered as overlaying other existing zoning districts. This overlay zoning
district shall not prohibit the development of uses or property consistent with the
applicable underlying/base zoning district.
C. Use Regulations
In the Large-Scale Solar Overlay District, the following specified uses may be allowed,
as prescribed; such uses may be allowed in conjunction with other uses of the property:
1. Permitted Uses
a. Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installation; such use shall be
subject to the following requirements:
i. Setback/Yard Requirements:
Front yard: The front yard depth shall be at least 25 feet; provided, however,
that where the lot abuts a lot located in the Parks, Recreation, and
Conservation District or Single Residence District zoning district, the front
yard shall not be less than 50 feet.
Side yard: Each side yard shall have a depth at least 25 feet; provided,
however, that where the lot abuts a lot located in the Parks, Recreation, and
Conservation District or Single Residence District zoning district, the side
yard shall not be less than 50 feet.
Rear yard: The rear yard depth shall be at least 25 feet; provided, however,
that where the lot abuts a lot located in the Parks, Recreation, and
Conservation District or Single Residence District zoning district, the rear
yard shall not be less than 50 feet.
ii. Accessory Structures:
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 102 of 265
All appurtenant structures to large- scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installations shall be subject to reasonable regulations concerning the bulk
and height of structures, lot area, setbacks, open space, parking and building
coverage requirements. All such appurtenant structures, including but not
limited to, equipment shelters, storage facilities, transformers, and
substations, shall be architecturally compatible with each other. Whenever
reasonable, structures should be shaded from view by vegetation and/or
joined or clustered to avoid adverse visual impacts.
iii. Lighting:
Lighting of solar photovoltaic installations shall be consistent with local,
state and federal law. Lighting of other parts of the installation, such as
appurtenant structures, shall be limited to that required for safety and
operational purposes, and shall be reasonably shielded from abutting
properties. Where feasible, lighting of the solar photovoltaic installation
shall be directed downward and shall incorporate full cut-off fixtures to
reduce light pollution.
iv. Signage:
Signs on large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations shall
comply with Section 22A, as required. At a minimum, signage shall be
required identifying the owner of the facility and providing a 24-hour
emergency contact phone number.
v. Utility Connections:
All utility connections from the solar photovoltaic installation must be
placed underground. Electrical transformers for utility interconnections may
be above ground if required by the utility provider.
vi. Emergency Services:
The large scale solar photovoltaic installation owner or operator shall
provide a copy of the project summary, electrical schematic, and site plan to
the local fire chief. Upon request the owner or operator shall cooperate with
local emergency services in developing an emergency response plan. All
means of shutting down the solar photovoltaic installation shall be clearly
marked. The owner or operator shall identify a responsible person for public
inquiries throughout the life of the installation.
vii. Land Clearing, Soil Erosion and Habitat Impacts:
Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to what is necessary for the
construction, operation and maintenance of the large-scale ground-mounted
solar photovoltaic installation or otherwise prescribed by applicable laws,
regulations, and bylaws.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 103 of 265
viii. Monitoring and Maintenance:
The large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation owner or
operator shall maintain the facility in good condition. Maintenance shall
include, but not be limited to, painting, structural repairs, and integrity of
security measures. Site access shall be maintained to a level acceptable to
the local Fire Chief and Emergency Medical Services. The owner or
operator shall be responsible for the cost of maintaining the solar
photovoltaic installation and any access road(s), unless accepted as a public
way.
ix. Abandonment or Decommissioning
Any large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation which has
reached the end of its useful life or has been abandoned shall be removed.
The owner or operator shall physically remove the installation no more than
150 days after the date of discontinued operations. The owner or operator
shall notify the Zoning Board of Appeals by certified mail of the proposed
date of discontinued operations and plans for removal. Decommissioning
shall consist of:
1. Physical removal of all large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installations, structures, equipment, security barriers and transmission
lines from the site.
2. Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with local, state,
and federal waste disposal regulations.
3. Stabilization or re-vegetation of the site as necessary to minimize
erosion. The Site Plan Review Authority may allow the owner or
operator to leave landscaping or designated below-grade foundations in
order to minimize erosion and disruption to vegetation.
D. Project Approval
For the purposes of Section 16A, Project Approval, the construction of a Large-Scale
Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installation shall be considered to be a Major
Construction Project, and therefore subject to Site Plan Review as specified in Section
16A. Further, all material modifications to a Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar
Photovoltaic Installation shall require approval by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
In addition to other requirements, applications for Site Plan Review for a Large-Scale
Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installation shall meet the following requirements;
the Zoning Board of Appeals may waive any of these requirements as it deems
appropriate:
1. General: All plans and maps shall be prepared, stamped and signed by a Professional
Engineer licensed to practice in Massachusetts.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 104 of 265
2. Required Documents: Pursuant to the site plan review process, the project proponent
shall provide the following documents:
a. A site plan showing:
i. Property lines and physical features, including roads, for the project site;
ii. Proposed changes to the landscape of the site, grading, vegetation clearing
and planting, exterior lighting, screening vegetation or structures;
iii. Blueprints or drawings of the solar photovoltaic installation signed by a
Professional Engineer licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts showing the proposed layout of the system and any potential
shading from nearby structures
iv. One or three-line electrical diagram detailing the solar photovoltaic
installation, associated components, and electrical interconnection methods,
with all National Electrical Code compliant disconnects and overcurrent
devices;
v. Documentation of the major system components to be used, including the
PV panels, mounting system, and inverter;
vi. Name, address, and contact information for proposed system installer;
vii. Name, address, phone number and signature of the project proponent, as
well as all co-proponents or property owners, if any; and
viii. The name, contact information and signature of any agents representing the
project proponent.
b. Documentation of actual or prospective access and control of the project
sufficient to allow for construction and operation of the proposed solar
photovoltaic installation.
c. An operation and maintenance plan, which shall include measures for maintaining
safe access to the installation, stormwater controls, as well as general procedures
for operational maintenance of the installation.
d. Proof of liability insurance.
e A public outreach plan, including a project development timeline, which indicates
how the project proponent will inform abutters and the community.
f. For interconnected customer-owned generators, evidence that the Wellesley
Municipal Light Plant has been informed of the owner or operator’s intent to
install the facility; off-grid systems are exempt from this requirement.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 105 of 265
SECTION 14I. COMMERCIAL RECREATION OVERLAY DISTRICT
(Editor’s Note: Section XIVI added 3/27/18 to reflect new provisions adopted under Article 2 at 2017 STM)
A. Purpose
The purpose of this bylaw is to establish an overlay zoning district which allows for the
grouping of commercial recreational uses into a planned, integrated facility, including
related services and commercial uses, by establishing standards for the placement, design,
and construction of high quality, planned recreational facilities to enhance the diversity
of recreationally based commercial attractions and the overall quality of life within the
Town of Wellesley.
B. Applicability
The District shall be shown on the Zoning Map of the Town of Wellesley, Massachusetts
and shall be considered as overlaying other existing zoning districts. This overlay zoning
district shall not prohibit the development of uses or property consistent with the
applicable underlying/base zoning district.
C. Use Regulations
In the Commercial Recreation Overlay District, the following specified uses shall be
allowed, as prescribed; such uses shall be allowed in conjunction with other uses of the
property:
1. Permitted Uses
a. Commercial Recreation Facility, a use where recreation activities are conducted
entirely indoors, in one or more buildings, for commercial purposes, with or
without seating for spectators, and providing accommodations for a variety of
individual, organized, or franchised activities and/or sports, including, but not
limited to, ice skating and hockey, swimming and diving, and field sports. Such
facility may also provide other regular organized or franchised events, health and
fitness club facilities, snack and concession facilities, retail sales of related sports,
health or fitness items, and other support facilities. Ancillary office and
conference facilities may be provided, the total floor area of which shall not
exceed 10% of the total gross floor area of the building in which such facilities
are located. A Commercial Recreation Facility shall be subject to the following
requirements, which shall control in the event of conflict between the
requirements set forth below and those set forth in the underlying zoning district
in which the facility(ies) is located and/or in other applicable sections of the
Zoning Bylaw:
i. Minimum Lot or Development Area:
No Commercial Recreation Facility shall be developed or conducted on a lot
or Development Area, as defined in Section 1B, containing less than five (5)
acres.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 106 of 265
ii. Setback/Yard Requirements:
Front Yard: The front yard depth shall be at least 30 feet;
Side Yard: Each side yard shall have a depth of at least 20 feet; provided,
however, that where the lot abuts a lot located in the Parks, Recreation, and
Conservation District or Single Residence District zoning district, the side
yard depth shall not be less than 50 feet.
Rear Yard: The rear yard depth shall be at least 40 feet; provided, however,
that where the lot abuts a lot located in the Parks, Recreation, and
Conservation District or Single Residence District zoning district, the rear
yard depth shall not be less than 50 feet.
iii. Building Height:
Building height, as regulated in Section 20, shall not exceed a maximum of
50 feet.
iv. Floor Area Ratio:
Floor Area Ratio shall not exceed a maximum of 0.39.
v. Open Space/Lot Coverage:
The minimum required Open Space shall be 40%.
vi. Signage:
Signs shall comply with the requirements of Section 22A, Signs, and, for the
purposes of regulation under such section, this District shall be considered
to be a Commercial District Fronting Worcester Street as defined therein.
vii. Off-Street Parking; Required Parking:
Off-street parking shall comply with the requirements of Section 21 except
that within such section there is no required parking established for this
District or use, therefore, the required parking for this use shall be one space
for every 3 permanent spectator seats, which shall include folding bleachers
that are attached to buildings, but not less than one space per 1,000 square
feet of floor area of buildings.
b. Any similar indoor recreational use not listed above may be allowed with the
issuance of a special permit, as hereinafter provided in Section 25 after the
determination by the Special Permit Granting Authority that the proposed use is
similar to one or more of the uses specifically authorized in this Section.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 107 of 265
D. Project Approval
The provisions of Section 16A shall apply.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 108 of 265
Editor’s Note: Page intentionally left blank
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 109 of 265
SECTION 14J. SMART GROWTH OVERLAY DISTRICTS
A. Purpose
The purposes of this Section are:
1. To allow for the establishment of Smart Growth Overlay Districts to promote the
redevelopment of certain areas and properties in a form that meets the objectives of
“smart growth” in accordance with and within the purposes of Mass. Gen. Laws Ch.
40R;
2. To provide for a more diversified housing stock within the Town of Wellesley,
including affordable housing and housing types that meet the needs of the Town’s
population, all as currently identified in the Wellesley Housing Production Plan;
3. To promote advanced site planning, sustainable design, improved transportation
management, and environmental enhancements in the development of projects; and
4. To the extent not in conflict with the purposes of Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40S and the
provisions for As-of-Right development under the Governing Laws, generate positive
tax revenue, and to benefit from the financial incentives provided by Mass. Gen.
Laws Ch. 40R, while providing the opportunity for new business growth and
additional local jobs.
B. Definitions
As used in this Section and in sections associated with any district created under this
Section, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below. Additional terms
and definitions contained in Section 1B that are applicable to the administration of this
Section and any sections associated with any district created under this Section shall have
the meanings ascribed to them by the definitions established as of the date of adoption of
this Section, unless amendments to these definitions are subsequently approved by the
Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community Development. To the extent that
there is any conflict between the definitions set forth below or in Section 1B and the
Governing Laws, the terms of the Governing Laws shall govern.
Administering Agency or Monitoring Agent - The Wellesley Housing Development
Corporation or its designee, subject to the approval of the Department, which shall have
the power to monitor and to enforce compliance with the provisions of this Bylaw related
to Assisted Units, including but not limited to computation of rental and sales prices;
income eligibility of households applying for Assisted Units; administration of an
approved housing marketing and resident selection plan; and recording and enforcement
of an Affordable Housing Restriction for each Assisted Unit in the District.
Affordable Housing - Housing that is affordable to and occupied by Eligible Households.
Affordable Housing Restriction - A deed restriction of Affordable Housing meeting
statutory requirements in Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 184 Section 31 and the requirements of
subsection K., Housing and Housing Affordability, of this Section.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 110 of 265
Affordable Rental Unit - An Affordable Housing Dwelling Unit required to be rented to
an Eligible Household in accordance with the requirements of Section 14J.K.
Affordable Homeownership Unit - An Affordable Housing Dwelling Unit required to be
sold to an Eligible Household in accordance with the requirements of Section 14J.K.
Applicant - A landowner or other petitioner who files a site plan for a Development
Project subject to the provisions of this Section.
Application - A petition for Site Plan Approval filed with the Approving Authority by an
Applicant and inclusive of all required documentation as specified in administrative rules
adopted pursuant to Section 14J.E.
Approving Authority or Plan Approval Authority - The Zoning Board of Appeals of the
Town of Wellesley acting as the authority designated to review projects and issue
approvals under this Section.
As-of-Right Development - To the extent consistent with and subject to the same
meaning as the term As-of-Right in the Governing Laws, a Development Project
allowable under this Section without recourse to a special permit, variance, zoning
amendment, or other form of zoning relief. A Development Project that is subject only to
this Section, including the Site Plan Review requirements, shall be considered an As-of-
Right Development.
Assisted Units - shall have the same meaning as defined in Section 1B to the extent that
such definition means housing that is affordable to and occupied by Eligible Households
and that such definition is not materially inconsistent with, and is nonetheless subject to,
the definitions of Affordable Housing in the 40R Guidelines and Affordable under the
Governing Laws.
Child Care Use - shall have the same meaning as “day care center” or “school age child
care program,” as those terms are defined in Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 28A Section 9.
Conservation Use - Any woodland, grassland, wetland, agricultural, or horticultural use
of land, and/or any use of land for the construction and use of ponds or stormwater
management facilities.
Department - The Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community Development
(“DHCD”), or any successor agency.
Design Guidelines - To the extent approved by DHCD and consistent with and subject to
the same meaning as the term Design Standards in the Governing Laws, the document
entitled Design Guidelines Handbook, as approved by DHCD pursuant to Mass. Gen.
Laws Ch. 40R, Section 10. The Design Guidelines are applicable to all Development
Projects within the District that are subject to Site Plan Review by the Approving
Authority.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 111 of 265
Development Lot - One or more tracts of land defined by metes, bounds or lot lines in a
deed or conveyance on a duly recorded plan which are designated as a Development Lot
on a site plan for a development proposed within the District and for which Site Plan
Approval is required under the provisions of this Section. Where a Development Lot
consists of more than a single lot, such lots (i) in combination, shall be treated as the
Development Lot, (ii) may be contiguous or non-contiguous, (iii) need not be in the
same ownership, and (iv) shall be considered as one lot for all calculation purposes,
including parking requirements and Dwelling Units per acre. Any development
undertaken on a Development Lot is subject to the Design Guidelines established under
Section 14J.I. The owner of any such Development Lot shall be entitled to lawfully
divide such lot without modifying the approved Site Plan and without the need for other
approvals.
Development Project - To the extent consistent with and subject to the same meaning as
the term Project as defined in the Governing Laws, a development comprising any
permitted uses provided for hereunder undertaken under this Section. A Development
Project shall be identified on a Site Plan which is submitted to the Approving Authority
for Site Plan Review.
District - An overlay zoning district adopted pursuant to Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40R, in
accordance with the procedures for zoning adoption and amendment as set forth in Mass.
Gen. Laws Ch. 40A and approved by the Department of Housing and Community
Development pursuant to Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40R and 760 CMR 59.00.
Eligible Household - An individual or household whose annual income is at or below
eighty percent (80%) of the area-wide median income as determined by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development (“HUD”), adjusted for household size,
with income computed using HUD's rules for attribution of income to assets.
Governing Laws - Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40R, 760 CMR 59.00, and DHCD
administrative guidance relating to Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40R.
Gross Floor Area - The floor area of space on all floors inclusive of heated basements,
hallways, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls. Gross floor area does not
include covered walkways, open roofed-over areas, porches, balconies, exterior terraces
or steps, chimneys, roof overhangs, parking garages and unheated basements.
Gross Leasable Floor Area - The Gross Floor Area of a building exclusive of hallways,
mechanical rooms, storage space and other miscellaneous space not exclusively occupied
by a single tenant or occupant.
Multi-Family Dwelling - A residential building containing four or more Dwelling Units.
Office or Office Use - A place for the regular performance of business transactions and
services, generally intended for administrative, professional and clerical activities,
including a medical or dental office or health clinic.
Office High-Tech or Office High-Tech Use - A place for the regular performance of
research and development, high tech, biotechnology, life sciences and/or other related
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 112 of 265
uses, provided that such use does not involve disturbing or offensive noise, vibration,
smoke, gas, fumes, odors, dust or other objectionable or hazardous features.
Principal Use - The main or primary purpose for which a structure, building, or
Development Lot is designed, arranged, licensed, or intended, or for which it may be
used, occupied, or maintained under this Section. More than one Principal Use is
permitted as-of-right on a Development Lot or within a Development Project.
Recreational Accessory Use - A use subordinate to a Principal Residential Use on the
same Development Lot or in the same structure and serving a purpose customarily
incidental to the Principal Residential Use, and which does not, in effect, constitute
conversion of the Principal Use of the Development Lot, site or structure to a use not
otherwise permitted in the District. Recreational Accessory Uses may include, but are not
limited to greenhouse, tool shed, clubhouse, swimming pool, tennis court, basketball
court, and playground.
Recreational Use - The principal use or intended principal use of land or structures for
relaxation, entertainment, amusement, sports, or the like, whether on a fee or non-fee
basis, including fitness clubs, play areas and dog parks.
Restaurant - Any business establishment principally engaged in serving food, drink, or
refreshments, whether prepared on or off the premises.
Small-Scale Retail Establishment - A business establishment, not exceeding 5,000 sq. ft.
of Gross Leasable Floor Area, selling goods and/or services to customers on site,
generally for end-use personal, business, or household consumption. A reasonable
amount of storage of said goods shall also be assumed to be an integral part of smallscale
retail use.
Site Plan - A plan depicting a proposed Development Project for all or a portion of the
District and which is submitted to the Approving Authority for its review and approval in
accordance with the provisions of Section 14J.E of this Bylaw.
Site Plan Approval - To the extent consistent with and subject to the same meaning as the
term Plan Approval under the Governing Laws, the Approving Authority’s authorization
for a proposed Development Project based on a finding of compliance with this Section
of the Bylaw and Design Guidelines after the conduct of a Site Plan Review.
Site Plan Review - To the extent consistent with and subject to the same meaning as the
term Plan Review as defined in the Governing Laws, the review procedure established by
this Section and administered by the Approving Authority. While similar to Site Plan
Review as established in Section 16A, Site Plan Review as used and referenced in this
Section is a separate and distinct process not subject to the provisions of Section 16A.
Underlying Zoning - The zoning requirements adopted pursuant to Mass. Gen. Laws Ch.
40A that are otherwise applicable to the geographic area in which the District is located,
as said requirements may be amended from time to time.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 113 of 265
Unrestricted Unit - A Dwelling Unit that is not restricted as to rent, price or eligibility of
occupants.
C. Establishment and Delineation of Districts
1. Generally
The specific districts established under this Section shall serve as overlay districts, to
be superimposed over the underlying zoning districts. The boundaries of the districts
are delineated on the Zoning Map of the Town of Wellesley, pursuant to Section 1A.
2. Specific Districts
The following are the specific districts established under this Section:
a. Wellesley Park Smart Growth Overlay District; as contained in Section 14J.1.
D. Authority and Applicability
The districts established under this Section are done so pursuant to the authority of Mass.
Gen. Laws Ch. 40R and 760 CMR 59.00. At the option of the Applicant, development of
land within the districts established pursuant to this Section may be undertaken subject to
the zoning controls set forth in this Section, or by complying with all applicable
Underlying Zoning controls set forth in the Zoning Bylaw of the Town of Wellesley.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Zoning Bylaw, Development Projects
proceeding under this Section shall be governed solely by the provisions of this Section
and the standards and/or procedures of the Underlying Zoning shall not apply. Except as
otherwise specifically provided for in this Section, Development Projects proposed
pursuant to this Section shall not be subject to any other provisions of the Zoning Bylaw,
including limitations upon the issuance of building permits for residential uses related to
a rate of development or phased growth limitation or to a local moratorium on the
issuance of such permits, or to other building permit or Dwelling Unit limitations. Where
other provisions of the Zoning Bylaw are specifically referenced as applying to
Development Projects, generally under this Section or within the districts established
under this Section, such provisions shall be administered as established as of the date of
adoption of this Section, unless amendments are subsequently approved the
Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community Development.
E. Site Plan Review
Development Projects within districts established pursuant to this Section shall be subject
to the Site Plan Review process encompassing the following. Development Projects
within such districts shall not be subject to the separate and distinct Site Plan Review
process established under Section 16A.
1. Pre-Application Review
The Applicant is encouraged to participate in a pre-Application review at a regular
meeting of the Approving Authority. The purpose of the pre-Application review is to
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 114 of 265
minimize the Applicant's cost of engineering and other technical experts, and to
obtain the advice and direction of the Approving Authority prior to filing the
Application. Should the Applicant choose to participate in the pre-Application
review, the Applicant shall outline the proposal and seek preliminary feedback from
the Approving Authority, other municipal review entities, and members of the public.
The Applicant is also encouraged to request a site visit by the Approving Authority
and/or its designee in order to facilitate pre-Application review.
2. Application Procedures
a. The Applicant shall file an original of the Application with the Town Clerk for
certification of the date and time of filing. Said filing shall include any required
forms established by the Approving Authority, provided such forms have been
approved by DHCD and are on file with the Town Clerk. A copy of the
Application, including the date and time of filing certified by the Town Clerk, as
well as the required number of copies of the Application, shall be filed forthwith
by the Applicant with the Approving Authority and Building Inspector. As part of
any Application for Site Plan Approval for a Development Project, the Applicant
must submit the following documents to the Approving Authority and the
Administering Agency:
i. Evidence that the Development Project complies with the cost and eligibility
requirements of Section 14J.K.;
ii. Development Project plans and reports that, subject to approval by DHCD,
demonstrate compliance with the design and construction standards of
Section 14J.K.; and
iii. A form of Affordable Housing Restriction that satisfies the requirements of
Section 14J.K.
iv. These documents in combination, to be submitted with an Application for
Site Plan Approval shall include details about construction related to the
provision, within the development, of units that are accessible to the
disabled and appropriate for diverse populations, including households with
children, other households, individuals, households including individuals
with disabilities, and the elderly.
b. Upon receipt by the Approving Authority, Applications shall be distributed to the
Planning Board, Building Inspector, Fire Chief, Police Chief, Health Department,
Wetlands Protection Committee, Design Review Board, the Board of Selectmen,
and the Department of Public Works. Any reports from these parties shall be
submitted to the Approving Authority within thirty (30) days of filing of the
Application; and
c. Within thirty (30) days of filing of an Application with the Approving Authority,
the Approving Authority or its designee shall evaluate the proposal with regard to
its completeness and shall advise the Applicant whether the Application is
complete or whether additional materials are required. If the Application is
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 115 of 265
deemed incomplete, the Approving Authority or its designee will identify with
specificity what additional materials are required. The Approving Authority or its
designee shall forward to the Applicant, with its report, copies of all
recommendations received to date from other boards, commissions or
departments.
3. Public Hearing
The Approving Authority shall hold a public hearing and review all Applications
according to the procedure specified in Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40R Section 11 and 760
CMR 59.04(1)(f).
4. Site Plan Approval Decision
a. The Approving Authority shall make a decision on the Site Plan Application, and
shall file said decision with the Town Clerk, within one hundred twenty (120)
days of the date the Application was received by the Town Clerk. The time limit
for public hearings and taking of action by the Approving Authority may be
extended by written agreement between the Applicant and the Approving
Authority. A copy of such agreement shall be filed with the Town Clerk;
b. Failure of the Approving Authority to take action within one hundred twenty
(120) days or extended time, if applicable, shall be deemed to be an approval of
the Application;
c. The Approving Authority’s findings, including the basis of such findings, shall be
stated in a written decision of approval, conditional approval or denial of the
Application for Site Plan Approval. The written decision shall contain the name
and address of the Applicant, identification of the land affected and its ownership,
and reference by date and title to the plans that were the subject of the decision.
The written decision shall certify that a copy of the decision has been filed with
the Town Clerk and that all plans referred to in the decision are on file with the
Approving Authority;
d. The decision of the Approving Authority, together with the detailed reasons
therefor, shall be filed with the Town Clerk, the Planning Board, and the Building
Inspector. A certified copy of the decision shall be mailed to the owner and to the
Applicant, if other than the owner. A notice of the decision shall be sent to the
parties in interest and to persons who requested a notice at the public hearing; and
e. If twenty (20) days have elapsed after the decision has been filed in the office of
the Town Clerk without an appeal having been filed or if such appeal, having
been filed, is dismissed or denied, the Town Clerk shall so certify on a copy of the
decision. If the Application is approved by reason of the failure of the Approving
Authority to timely act, the Town Clerk shall make such certification on a copy of
the notice of Application. A copy of the decision or notice of Application shall be
recorded with the title of the land in question in the Norfolk County Registry of
Deeds, and indexed in the grantor index under the name of the owner of record or
recorded and noted on the owner’s certificate of title. The responsibility and the
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 116 of 265
cost of said recording and transmittal shall be borne by the owner of the land in
question or the Applicant.
5. Criteria for Approval
The Approving Authority shall approve the Development Project upon the following
findings:
a. The Applicant has submitted the required fees and information as set forth in
applicable regulations;
b. The proposed Development Project as described in the Application meets all of
the requirements and standards set forth in this Section and applicable Design
Guidelines, or a waiver has been granted therefrom; and
c. Any extraordinary adverse potential impacts of the Development Project on
nearby properties can be adequately mitigated.
For a Development Project subject to the Affordability requirements of Section
14J.K., compliance with condition (b) above shall include written confirmation by the
Approving Authority that all requirements of that Section have been satisfied, subject
to approval by DHCD. Prior to the granting of Site Plan Approval for a Project, the
Applicant must demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Administering Agency, that the
method by which such affordable rents or affordable purchase prices are computed
shall be consistent with state or federal guidelines for affordability applicable to the
Town of Wellesley.
6. Criteria for Conditional Approval
The Approving Authority may impose conditions on a Development Project as
necessary to ensure compliance with the District requirements of this Section and
applicable Design Guidelines, or to mitigate any extraordinary adverse impacts of the
Development Project on nearby properties, insofar as such conditions are compliant
with the provisions of Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40R and applicable regulations and do
not unduly restrict (i.e. by adding unreasonable costs or by unreasonably impairing
the economic feasibility of a proposed Development Project) opportunities for
residential development.
7. Criteria for Denial
The Approving Authority may deny an Application for Site Plan Approval pursuant
to this Section of the Bylaw only if the Approving Authority finds one or more of the
following:
a. The Development Project does not meet the requirements and standards set forth
in this Section and applicable Design Guidelines; or
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 117 of 265
b. The Applicant failed to submit information and fees required by this Section and
necessary for an adequate and timely review of the design of the Development
Project or potential Development Project impacts; or
c. The Development Project would result in extraordinary adverse impacts on
nearby properties that cannot be mitigated by means of suitable conditions.
8. Time Limit
A project approval shall remain valid and shall run with the land indefinitely provided
that construction has commenced within two (2) years after the decision issues, which
time shall be extended by the time required to adjudicate any appeal from such
approval. Said time shall also be extended if the project proponent is actively
pursuing other required permits for the project or if there is good cause for the failure
to commence construction, or as may be provided in an approval for a multi-phase
Development Project.
9. Appeals
Pursuant to Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40R Section 11, any person aggrieved by a decision
of the Approving Authority may appeal to the Superior Court, the Land Court, or
other court of competent jurisdiction within twenty (20) days after the Site Plan
decision has been filed in the office of the Town Clerk.
10. Rules and Regulations
The Approving Authority shall adopt administrative rules relative to the Application
requirements and contents for Site Plan Review; such rules shall be filed with the
Town Clerk. Such administrative rules, and any amendment thereto, must be
approved by the Department of Housing and Community Development.
F. Waivers
The Approving Authority may waive the bulk and dimensional, parking, and other
provisions required by any district created pursuant to this Section and may waive
specific requirements or recommendations of applicable Design Guidelines upon a
finding that such waiver will allow the Development Project to achieve the density,
affordability, mix of uses, and/or physical character allowable under this Section or the
specific district.
G. Project Phasing
The Approving Authority, as a condition of any Site Plan Approval, may allow a
Development Project to be constructed in one or more phases.
H. Change in Plans After Approval by the Approving Authority
1. Minor Change
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 118 of 265
After Site Plan Approval, an Applicant may apply to make minor changes in a
Development Project involving minor utility or building orientation adjustments, or
minor adjustments to parking or other site details that do not affect the overall build
out or building envelope (i.e., general massing, height and bulk) of the site, or
provision of open space, number of housing units, or housing need or affordability
features. A change of one percent (1%) or less in the number of housing units in a
Development Project shall constitute a minor change. Such minor changes must be
submitted to the Approving Authority on redlined prints of the approved plan,
reflecting the proposed change, and on application forms provided by the Approving
Authority. The Approving Authority may authorize such changes at any regularly
scheduled meeting, without the need to hold a public hearing. The Approving
Authority shall set forth any decision to approve or deny such minor change by
motion and written decision, and provide a copy to the Applicant for filing with the
Town Clerk.
2. Major Change
Those changes deemed by the Approving Authority to constitute a major change in a
Development Project because of the nature of the change in relation to the prior
approved plan, or because such change cannot be appropriately characterized as a
minor change as described above, shall be processed by the Approving Authority as a
new Application for Site Plan Approval pursuant to this Section.
I. Design Guidelines
To ensure that new development shall be of high quality, and shall meet the standards
envisioned by the Town of Wellesley in adopting this Section and any districts
established under this Section, the Approving Authority shall adopt the Design
Guidelines governing the issuance of Site Plan Approvals for Development Projects
within the districts established under this Section and shall file a copy with the Town
Clerk. Such Design Guidelines and any subsequent amendments to such Design
Guidelines must be approved by DHCD and must be within the scope of Design
Standards under the Governing Laws. In addition to the standards set forth in this Bylaw,
the physical character of Development Projects within the districts shall comply with
such Design Guidelines, unless waived hereunder. In the event of any conflict between
this Bylaw and the Design Guidelines, this Bylaw shall govern and prevail.
J. Fair Housing Requirement
All Development Projects within the districts established herein shall comply with
applicable federal, state and local fair housing laws.
K. Housing and Housing Affordability
1. Number of Assisted Units
Twenty-five percent (25%) of all Dwelling Units constructed in a Development
Project shall be maintained as Assisted Units. When the application of this percentage
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 119 of 265
results in a fractional number of required Dwelling Units, the fractional number shall
be rounded up to the next whole number.
2. General Requirements
Assisted Units shall comply with the following requirements:
a. The monthly rent payment for an Affordable Rental Unit, including utilities and
parking, shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the maximum monthly income
permissible for an Eligible Household, assuming a family size equal to the
number of bedrooms in the unit plus one, unless other affordable program rent
limits approved by DHCD shall apply;
b. For an Affordable Homeownership Unit, the monthly housing payment, including
mortgage principal and interest, private mortgage insurance, property taxes,
condominium and/or homeowner's association fees, insurance, and parking, shall
not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the maximum monthly income permissible for
an Eligible Household, assuming a family size equal to the number of bedrooms
in the unit plus one; and
c. Assisted Units required to be offered for rent or sale shall be rented or sold to and
occupied only by Eligible Households.
3. Design and Construction
a. Design. In compliance with a corresponding marketing plan and Affordable
Housing Restriction approved by DHCD, Assisted Units must be equitably
integrated and dispersed throughout any phase of a Development Project
containing Dwelling Units such that the Assisted Units are, as practicable, spread
proportionately across the overall unit mix and comparable in initial construction
quality and exterior design to the Unrestricted Units. However, nothing in this
section is intended to limit a homebuyer’s rights to renovate a Dwelling Unit
under applicable law. The Assisted Units must have access to all on-site amenities
available to Unrestricted Units. Assisted Units shall be finished housing units; and
b. Timing. All Assisted Units must be constructed and occupied not later than
concurrently with construction and occupancy of Unrestricted Units and, for
Development Projects that are constructed in phases, Assisted Units must be
constructed and occupied during the initial lease-up period, insofar as is
practicable, in proportion to the number of Dwelling Units in each residential
phase of the Development Project.
4. Unit Mix
The total number of bedrooms in the Assisted Units shall, insofar as practicable and
as approved by DHCD, be in the same proportion to the total number of bedrooms in
the Unrestricted Units.
5. Affordable Housing Restriction
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 120 of 265
All Assisted Units shall be subject to an Affordable Housing Restriction which has
been approved by DHCD and is recorded with the Norfolk County Registry of Deeds
or the Land Court. The Affordable Housing Restriction shall provide for the
implementation of the requirements of this Section. All Affordable Housing
Restrictions must include, at minimum, the following:
a. Description of the Development Project, including whether the Assisted Unit will
be rented or owner-occupied;
b. A description of the Affordable Homeownership Unit, if any, by address and
number of bedrooms; and a description of the overall quantity and number of
bedrooms and number of bedroom types of Affordable Rental Units in a
Development Project containing Dwelling Units or portion of a Development
Project containing Dwelling Units which are rental. Such restriction shall apply
individually to the specifically identified Affordable Homeownership Unit and
shall apply to a percentage of rental units of a rental Development Project
containing Dwelling Units or the rental portion of a Development Project
containing Dwelling Units with the initially designated Affordable Rental Units
identified in, and able to float subject to specific approval by DHCD in
accordance with, the corresponding Affirmative Fair Housing Marketing Plan
(“AFHMP”) and DHCD’s AFHMP guidelines.
c. The term of the Affordable Housing Restriction shall be stated in the Site Plan
Approval and shall be the longest period customarily allowed by law but shall be
no less than thirty (30) years.
d. The name and address of an Administering Agency with a designation of its
power to monitor and enforce the Affordable Housing Restriction;
e. Reference to a housing marketing and resident selection plan, to which the
Assisted Unit is subject, and which includes an affirmative fair housing marketing
program, including public notice and a fair resident selection process. The
housing marketing and selection plan shall provide for local preferences in
resident selection to the maximum extent permitted under applicable law and
approved by DHCD. The plan shall designate the household size appropriate for a
unit with respect to bedroom size and provide that preference for such unit shall
be given to a household of the appropriate size;
f. A requirement that buyers or tenants will be selected at the initial sale or initial
rental and upon all subsequent sales and rentals from a list of Eligible Households
compiled in accordance with the housing marketing and selection plan;
g. Reference to the formula pursuant to which maximum rent of a rental unit or the
maximum resale price of a homeownership unit will be set;
h. A requirement that only an Eligible Household may reside in an Assisted Unit and
that notice of any lease or sublease of any Assisted Unit to another Eligible
Household shall be given to the Administering Agency;
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 121 of 265
i. Provision for effective monitoring and enforcement of the terms and provisions of
the Affordable Housing Restriction by the Administering Agency;
j. Provision that the restriction on an Affordable Homeownership Unit shall run in
favor of the Administering Agency and the Town of Wellesley, in a form
approved by town counsel, and shall limit initial sale and re-sale to and occupancy
by an Eligible Household;
k. Provision that the restriction on Affordable Rental Units in a rental Project or
rental portion of a Development Project containing Dwelling Units shall run with
the rental Development Project containing Dwelling Units or rental portion of a
Development Project containing Dwelling Units and shall run in favor of the
Administering Agency and/or the municipality, in a form approved by municipal
counsel, and shall limit rental and occupancy to an Eligible Household;
l. Provision that the owner(s) or manager(s) of Affordable Rental Unit(s) shall file
an annual report to the Administering Agency, in a form specified by that agency,
certifying compliance with the provisions of this Bylaw and containing such other
information as may be reasonably requested in order to ensure affordability;
m. A requirement that residents in Assisted Units provide such information as the
Administering Agency may reasonably request in order to ensure affordability;
and
n. Designation of the priority of the Affordable Housing Restriction over other
mortgages and restrictions.
6. Administration
a. Administering Agency. The Administering Agency shall ensure the following:
i. Prices of Affordable Homeownership Units are properly computed; rental
amounts of Affordable Rental Units are properly computed;
ii. Income eligibility of households applying for Assisted Units is properly and
reliably determined;
iii. The housing marketing and resident selection plan conforms to all
requirements, has been approved by DHCD, and is properly administered;
iv. Sales and rentals are made to Eligible Households chosen in accordance
with the housing marketing and resident selection plan with appropriate unit
size for each household being properly determined and proper preference
being given; and
v. Affordable Housing Restrictions meeting the requirements of this section
are recorded with the Norfolk County Registry of Deeds or the Land Court.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 122 of 265
b. Housing Marketing and Selection Plan. The housing marketing and selection plan
may make provision for payment by the Applicant of reasonable costs to the
Administering Agency to develop, advertise, and maintain the list of Eligible
Households and to monitor and enforce compliance with affordability
requirements.
c. Age-Restrictions. Nothing in this Section 14J shall permit the imposition of
restrictions on age upon Development Projects unless proposed or agreed to
voluntarily by the Applicant. However, the Approving Authority may, in its
review of a submission under Section 14J.E allow a specific Development Project
within the District designated exclusively for the elderly, persons with disabilities,
or for assisted living, provided that any such Development Project shall be in
compliance with all applicable federal, state and local fair housing laws and
regulations
d. Failure of the Administering Agency. In the case where the Administering
Agency cannot adequately carry out its administrative duties, upon certification of
this fact by the Board of Selectmen or by the Department of Housing and
Community Development, the administrative duties shall devolve to and
thereafter be administered by a qualified housing entity designated by the Board
of Selectmen or, in the absence of such designation, by an entity designated by the
Department of Housing and Community Development.
7. No Waiver
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, without the express written approval of
DHCD, no provisions of Section 14J.K. shall be waived without the express written
approval of DHCD.
L. Annual Update
On or before July 31 of each year, the Board of Selectmen shall cause to be filed an
Annual Update with the DHCD in a form to be prescribed by DHCD. The Annual Update
shall contain all information required in 760 CMR 59.07, as may be amended from time
to time, and additional information as may be required pursuant to Mass. Gen. Laws Ch.
40S and accompanying regulations. The Town Clerk of the Town of Wellesley shall
maintain a copy of all updates transmitted to DHCD pursuant to this Bylaw, with said
copies to be made available upon request for public review.
M. Notification of Issuance of Building Permits
Upon issuance of a residential building permit within the districts established herein, the
Building Inspector of the Town of Wellesley shall cause to be filed an application to the
DHCD, in a form to be prescribed by DHCD, for authorization of payment of a one-time
density bonus payment for each Bonus Unit to receive a building permit pursuant to
Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40R. The application shall contain all information required in 760
CMR 59.06(2), as may be amended from time to time, and additional information as may
be required pursuant to Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40S and accompanying regulations. The
Town Clerk of the Town of Wellesley shall maintain a copy of all such applications
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 123 of 265
transmitted to DHCD pursuant to this Bylaw, with said copies to be made available upon
request for public review.
N. Date of Effect
The effective date of this Bylaw shall be the date on which such adoption is voted upon
by Town Meeting pursuant to the requirements of Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40A Section 5
and Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40R; provided, however, that an Applicant may not proceed
with construction pursuant to this Bylaw prior to the receipt of final approval of this
Bylaw and accompanying Zoning Map by both the DHCD and the Office of the
Massachusetts Attorney General.
O. Severability
If any provision of this Section and/or any provision associated with a specific district
created under this Section is found to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remaining provisions shall not be affected but shall remain in full force, and such
invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remainder of the Zoning Bylaws of the Town
of Wellesley.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 124 of 265
Editor’s Note: Page intentionally left blank
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 125 of 265
SECTION 14J.1. WELLESLEY PARK SMART GROWTH OVERLAY DISTRICT
A. Purpose
The purposes of this Section are:
1. To establish a specific District pursuant to the provisions of Section 14J;
2. To establish the Wellesley Park Smart Growth Overlay District to promote the
redevelopment of the Wellesley Office Park into a vibrant, workable, livable
community with a rich sense of place in a form that meets the objectives of “smart
growth” within the purposes of Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40R;
3. To provide for a more diversified housing stock within the Town of Wellesley,
including affordable housing and housing types that meet the needs of the Town’s
population, all as currently identified in the Wellesley Housing Production Plan;
4. To promote advanced site planning, sustainable design, improved transportation
management, and environmental enhancements in the mixed-use redevelopment of
the Wellesley Park Smart Growth Overlay District; and
5. To the extent not in conflict with the purposes of Mass. Gen. Laws Ch. 40S and the
provisions for As-of-Right development under the Governing Laws, generate positive
tax revenue, and to benefit from the financial incentives provided by Mass. Gen.
Laws Ch. 40R, while providing the opportunity for new business growth and
additional local jobs.
B. Establishment and Delineation of District
This District, to be known as the Wellesley Park Smart Growth Overlay District (the
“Wellesley Park Overlay District”), is established pursuant to and subject to the
provisions of Section 14J. The Wellesley Park Overlay District is an overlay district
having a land area of approximately 26 acres in size that is superimposed over the
underlying zoning district. The boundaries of the Wellesley Park Overlay District are
delineated as the “Wellesley Park Smart Growth Overlay District” on the Zoning Map of
the Town of Wellesley.
C. Permitted Uses
1. The following Principal Uses, either alone or in any combination thereof, as well as
any Accessory Uses to the following Principal Uses, shall be permitted upon Site Plan
Approval pursuant to the provisions of this Section and Section 14J. All uses not
expressly allowed are prohibited.
a. Multi-Family Dwellings;
b. Small-Scale Retail Establishments
c. Restaurants, excluding drive-through windows or service;
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 126 of 265
d. Assisted Elderly Housing;
e. Independent Elderly Housing;
f. Nursing Homes and Skilled Nursing Facility;
g. Child Care;
h. Offices;
i. Office-High Tech;
j. Hotels;
k. Banks;
l. Conservation Uses;
m. Recreational Uses; and
n. Parking accessory to any of the above Principal Uses, including surface parking,
parking under buildings, and above- and below-grade structured parking.
2. The following Principal Uses in excess of the area standards established under
Section 16A, or as otherwise provided for below, shall require the issuance of a
Project of Significant Impact Special Permit pursuant to Section 16A as a prerequisite
to Site Plan Approval. If such Principal Use is proposed in combination with another,
otherwise permitted use, the otherwise permitted use shall not be subject to issuance
of a Project of Significant Impact Special Permit.
a. Restaurants, which shall not include drive-through windows or service, in excess
of 5,000 square feet;
b. Assisted Elderly Housing;
c. Independent Elderly Housing;
d. Nursing Homes and Skilled Nursing Facility;
e. Child Care;
f. Offices and Office-High Tech; and
g. Hotels.
D. Dimensional and Other Requirements
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 127 of 265
Buildings and Development Lots within the Wellesley Park Overlay District shall be
subject to the following requirements:
1. Density
Development of the following uses within the Wellesley Park Overlay District shall
be limited, as follows:
a. Multi-Family Dwellings: no more than six hundred (600) total Dwelling
Units or twenty (20) units per acre based on the entire area of the District,
whichever is greater;
b. Small-Scale Retail Establishments: not to exceed a total of 19,500 gross
square feet;
c. Offices and Office-High Tech: not to exceed a total of 700,000 gross square
feet; and
d. Hotels: not to exceed a total of 175 rooms.
2. Total Allowable New Non-Residential Uses
The total non-residential Gross Leasable Floor Area within the District, including but
not limited to Small-Scale Retail, Restaurant, Assisted Elderly Housing, Independent
Elderly Housing, Nursing Homes and Skilled Nursing Facility, Child Care, Office,
Hotel, Bank, Office-High Tech, and Recreational Uses, but excluding all existing
Gross Leasable Floor Area within the District in existence on the date of adoption of
this Section (“Existing Floor Area”), shall not exceed 49% of the residential Gross
Leasable Floor Area (constructed and planned). To the extent the Existing Floor Area
is reduced for any reason whatsoever, it may be replaced with new non-residential
Gross Leasable Floor Area without impacting this calculation.
3. Minimum Area
There shall be no minimum area of a Development Lot within the Wellesley Park
Overlay District.
4. Setbacks/Yards
There shall be no minimum setback or yard requirements within the Wellesley Park
Overlay District, except for the buffer from Adjacent Property requirement described
in paragraph 5.
5. Buffer from Adjacent Property
A minimum buffer of twenty-five (25) feet shall be maintained where such a buffer is
present at the time of the adoption of this Section along the perimeter of the
Wellesley Park Overlay District boundary. No vertical construction or pavement shall
be allowed within this minimum buffer, provided that the following elements shall be
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 128 of 265
permitted: pedestrian paths and sidewalks; vehicular access points to the District; cart
paths to serve adjacent recreational uses; such emergency access and egress as may
be required by the Town of Wellesley; drainage facilities; utilities and related
easements but not including a wastewater treatment facility; landscaping; plantings;
fences and walls; and signage and lighting approved by the Approving Authority
pursuant to this Section.
6. Height
The maximum height of buildings and structures in a Development Project in the
Wellesley Park Overlay District shall be eighty-five (85) feet, and the aggregate
height of all buildings in the Wellesley Park Overlay District shall not exceed five
hundred and seventy-five (575) feet based on the maximum height of each individual
building. Independent parking structures shall not be included in the calculation of
aggregate height.
For the purposes of Development Projects within the Wellesley Park Overlay District,
building or structure height shall be the distance between average finished grade
adjacent to the building, exclusive of basements, and the ceiling of the upper-most
occupied space in the building in the case of flat roofs and, in the case of buildings
with pitched roofs, at the point at which such ceiling intersects with the exterior
portion of the building. The calculation of building height shall not apply to roof
tanks and their supports, roof decks, parapets, ventilating, air conditioning and similar
building service equipment, chimneys, railings, skylights, mechanical penthouses,
and other similar features of buildings which are in no way designed or used for
living purposes nor the portion of the pitched roof above the intersection of the
ceiling of the upper-most heated space and the exterior of the building.
7. Non-Frontage Development
In the Wellesley Park Overlay District and on parcels that are contiguous to the
Wellesley Park Overlay District, a Development Lot lacking frontage may be
developed and used without regard to the lack of frontage, provided that the nonfrontage
development has permanent access to a private or public way that is located
within the Wellesley Park Overlay District through easements recorded with the
Norfolk County Registry of Deeds and appropriate provisions are made for parking,
drainage and utilities. The development and use of such non-frontage development
located entirely within the District shall be consistent with the requirements of this
Section. Such non-frontage development may be subdivided and sold or transferred,
provided that each Development Lot so subdivided retains or is granted such cross
access, drainage and utility easements to serve such non-frontage development.
Should such transfer occur after an approval hereunder, in addition to the easements
referenced above, the transferee shall demonstrate to the Approving Authority that the
non-frontage development shall remain in compliance with any conditions of Site
Plan Approval and, for parcels that are contiguous to the Wellesley Park Overlay
District, with applicable zoning requirements.
8. Number of Buildings on a Development Lot
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 129 of 265
In the Wellesley Park Overlay District, more than one principal building may be
erected on a Development Lot. Buildings may also be erected in the Wellesley Park
Overlay District across Development Lot lines.
E. Parking
Parking provided in the Wellesley Park Development District, including structured
parking, shall comply with these provisions and shall not be subject to Section 21 or any
other provisions of the Zoning Bylaw. Regardless of these requirements, parking shall be
designed and constructed to comply with all applicable disability access requirements
including, but not limited to, the Americans with Disabilities Act.
1. Required Parking
Parking shall be provided for uses according to Table 1, Required Parking, below.
When application of the requirements set forth below results in a number that
includes a fraction, the fraction shall be rounded up to the next whole number.
Table 1 - Required Parking
Use
Minimum Parking
Required
Maximum Allowable
Parking
Multi-Family Dwelling
Unit
1 space per unit 2 spaces per unit
Small-Scale Retail
Establishments
None, if individual
establishments are less
than 10,000 gross
square feet; 3 spaces per
1,000 gross square feet
in excess of 10,000
gross square feet
4 spaces per 1,000 gross
square feet in excess of
10,000 gross square feet
Banks
Child Care
Restaurant
Recreational Uses
Assisted Elderly Housing
or Independent Elderly
Housing or Nursing
Homes and Skilled
Nursing Facility
0.25 spaces per bed 1 space per bed
Office or Office-High
Tech
2 spaces per 1,000 gross
square feet
4 spaces per 1,000 gross
square feet
Hotel 0.5 spaces per room 1 space per room
Conservation Use 5 dedicated spaces No maximum
2. On-Street Parking Offset
Parking spaces within the public right-of-way may be counted toward the minimum
parking required pursuant to paragraph 1., Required Parking.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 130 of 265
3. Parking Design and Construction Standards
The design and construction standards for parking shall be approved by the
Approving Authority in conjunction with the Site Plan Approval of a Development
Project; such design and construction standards shall address the dimensions for
parking spaces, maneuvering aisles, driveways, and landscape islands, and materials
and specifications for paving, curbing, lighting, and landscaping.
4. Modification in Parking Requirements
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, any minimum required or maximum
permitted amount of parking may be modified by the Approving Authority through
the Site Plan Approval process, if the Applicant can demonstrate that the modified
amount of parking will not cause excessive congestion, endanger public safety, or that
a modified amount of parking will provide positive environmental or other benefits,
taking into consideration:
a. The availability of public or commercial parking facilities in the vicinity of the
use being served;
b. Shared use of parking spaces serving other uses having peak user demands at
different times;
c. Age or other occupancy restrictions which are likely to resulting a lower level of
auto usage; and
d. Such other factors, including the availability of valet parking, shuttle service, or a
transportation management plan as may be considered by the Approving
Authority. Where such reduction is authorized, the Approving Authority may
impose conditions of use or occupancy appropriate to such reductions.
F. Signage
All new signage in the Wellesley Park Overlay District shall be approved by the
Approving Authority in conjunction with the Site Plan Approval of a Development
Project. The Applicant shall submit, as part of its Site Plan Review filing, a master
signage plan for approval by the Approving Authority establishing allowances,
requirements, and limitations for all new signage within the Wellesley Park Overlay
District. The master signage plan, as may be updated and revised with the approval of
the Approving Authority, shall, with respect to both existing and future signs, specify all
applicable sign types, dimensions, materials, quantities and other standards for review by
the Approving Authority in the course of Site Plan Approval. Upon approval by the
Approving Authority, the master signage plan shall become the sole governing source of
standards and requirements for all new signage within the Wellesley Park Overlay
District under the Zoning Bylaw. Sign permits for any sign meeting these established
standards may be issued by the Inspector of Buildings of the Town of Wellesley upon
approval of the master signage plan.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 131 of 265
SECTION 15. PUBLIC SERVICE CORPORATIONS
Land or structures used, or to be used by a public service corporation may be exempted in
particular respects from the operation of this Zoning Bylaw if, upon petition of the corporation,
the Department of Public Utilities shall, after notice given pursuant to Section 26 and public
hearing in the Town, determine the exemptions required and find that the present or proposed use
of the land or structure is reasonably necessary for the convenience or welfare of the public;
provided, however, that if lands or structures used or to be used by a public service corporation
are located in more than one municipality such lands or structures may be exempted in particular
respects from the operation of any zoning ordinance or bylaw if, upon petition of the corporation,
the Department of Public Utilities shall, after notice to all affected communities and public
hearing in one of said municipalities, determine the exemptions required and find that the present
or proposed use of the land or structure is reasonably necessary for the convenience of welfare of
the public.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 132 of 265
Editor’s Note: Page intentionally left blank
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 133 of 265
SECTION 16. RESTRICTIONS AFFECTING ALL DISTRICTS
(Editor’s Note: Amended 10/1/2018 to reflect amendments approved under Article 28 at 2018 ATM)
Any other provision of this Bylaw notwithstanding, no new building or structure shall be
constructed or used, in whole or in part, and no building or structure, or part thereof, shall be
altered, enlarged, reconstructed or used, and no land shall be used, in any part of the Town:
A. For any purpose which by the emission or discharge of fumes, vapor, smoke, gas, dust,
cinders, offensive odors, chemicals, poisonous fluids or substances, refuse, organic
matter, or excrement, the causing of noise or vibrations, or by unduly increasing the risk
from fire or explosion, or otherwise, would be obnoxious, offensive, dangerous, or
injurious to the public health or safety.
B. For any purpose which would be for any reason injurious to the health, safety, morals or
welfare of the community or harmful to property therein.
C. For the parking, keeping or storing of a mobile home or house trailer.
D. For the parking, keeping or storing of one or more commercial trailers for an aggregate
total of more than thirty (30) days in any one year unless said trailer is:
1. Enclosed within a building, or
2. Stored or parked pursuant to a permit issued by the Board of Selectmen allowing sale
or lease of new or used vehicles, or
3. Stored or parked pursuant to a permit issued by the Board of Selectmen allowing
public purposes or non-profit charitable purposes, or
4. Parked pursuant to an office or storage trailer permit issued by the Inspector of
Buildings in conjunction with construction and/or demolition on the premises, or
5. Stored or parked pursuant to a special permit issued by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
In approving a request for a special permit under this paragraph, the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall find:
a. That there is no reasonable alternative to the requested use of one or more
commercial trailers, and
b. That the characteristics of the site and its immediate surrounding area are
compatible with the proposed use.
Commercial trailers stored on a lot pursuant to a special permit issued by the Zoning
Board of Appeals under this paragraph 5. for more than thirty (30) days shall be
screened from view with appropriate materials, from abutting residential properties
and in other instances as may be required by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 134 of 265
E. For any construction, other than single and two family buildings, except in accordance
with the requirements of Section 16A and Section 25.
F. There shall be no site preparation work done in connection with development of any use of land
and no such work in connection with development of any subdivision until all necessary permits
and approvals have been obtained. This section shall not prohibit site work reasonably necessary
to the conduct of a land survey or any tests required as a condition precedent to the issuance of
any permit or approval. If after obtaining all necessary permits and approvals such work is
commenced and later abandoned, as said term is defined in the State Building Code, any areas of
the site which have been disturbed during construction shall be re-vegetated in a manner
sufficient to prevent erosion. To secure re-vegetation in the case of abandonment of a project, the
Building Inspector, or in the case of a subdivision of land, the Planning Board, may require, as a
condition of granting the necessary permits and approvals, that the owner post a bond or other
satisfactory security in an amount reasonably estimated, by the Building Inspector, or the
Planning Board, as the case may be, as sufficient to perform the work.
G. For the sale or distribution of any materials and any and all entertainment which is
"obscene" within the meaning of that term as defined in G. L. Chapter 272, Section 31.
G. For games of chance or similar entertainment or amusement, operated either live or through
audio or video broadcast or closed circuit transmission, except at an establishment licensed
to sell all alcoholic beverages or wine and malt beverages only.
H. For a Marijuana Establishment.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 135 of 265
SECTION 16A. PROJECT APPROVAL
A. Scope and Purpose
Minor Construction Projects (as herein defined) and Major Construction Projects (as
herein defined) are subject to comprehensive review in accordance with the terms of this
section. This section shall not apply to construction, alteration, enlargement or
reconstruction of one-family or two-family dwellings or structures accessory thereto,
unless such one-family or two-family dwelling is located in a Flood Plain or Watershed
Protection District.
This section shall be interpreted so as to:
1. Ensure compliance with the Zoning Bylaws of the Town of Wellesley;
2. Protect the safety, convenience and welfare of the public;
3. Minimize additional congestion in public and private ways;
4. Ensure adequate provision for water, sewerage and drainage;
5. Ensure compliance with the provisions of Section 16;
6. Ensure compliance with the provisions of Section 21; and
7. Ensure compliance with the provisions of Section 22.
B. Definitions
Part 1 - Principal Definitions
Construction Project - shall mean projects subject to review under this Section 16A, and
shall include phased or segmented projects where a series of two or more projects on a
single parcel, lot or development area, for which application for building permits are filed
within a three-year period are, in the opinion of the Inspector of Buildings, components
or segments of a single project.
Major Construction Project – shall mean any construction project which involves a
change in the outside appearance of a building or buildings or premises, and includes one
or more of the following:
1. construction of twenty-five hundred (2,500) or more square feet gross floor area;
2. an increase in gross floor area by fifty (50) percent or more which results in a gross
floor area of at least twenty-five hundred (2,500) square feet;
3. grading or regrading of land to planned elevations, and/or removal or disturbance of
the existing vegetative cover, over an area of five thousand (5,000) or more square
feet;
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 136 of 265
4. any activities regulated or restricted under Section 14B; or
5. any activities regulated under Section 14E.
Minor Construction Project shall mean any construction project, not included within the
definition of a major construction project, which involves either or both of the following:
1. a change in the outside appearance of a building or premises visible from a public or
private street or way, requiring a building permit;
2. construction, enlargement or alteration of a parking or storage area requiring a
parking plan permit. Alteration, as used in the preceding phrase, includes installation,
removal or relocation of any curbing, landscaping or traffic channelization island,
driveway, storm drainage, lighting or similar facilities but does not include
resurfacing, striping or restriping pavement markings on existing parking or storage
areas.
Project of Significant Impact (PSI) means any construction project having an aggregate
total of:
1. newly constructed floor area of 10,000 or more square feet; or
2. renovated, altered and/or replacement floor area of 15,000 or more square feet in a
building having 15,000 or more square feet of ground coverage to provide for a use
which is different from the existing use as determined by the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts Property Type Classification Codes (April 1991 edition).
Part 2 - Additional Definitions for Traffic Reviews
Annual Average Daily Traffic (AADT) – The total yearly volume of automobiles and
trucks divided by the number of days in the year.
Average Daily Traffic (ADT) - The calculation of averaged traffic volumes in a time
period greater than one day and less that one year. Usually ADT is determined based on a
representative (no holidays or unusual weather related circumstances) 7 day week.
Design Hourly Volume (DHV) – The one-hour volume in the design year selected for
determining the highway design (typically the worst-case weekday morning or evening
peak hour or the 30th highest hour of the year).
K-Factor (K) – The percent of Average Daily Traffic (ADT) that occurs during the peak
hour (PH).
Level of Service – A quantitative measure of traffic congestion identified by a declining
letter scale (A-F) promulgated by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) and
used by the Massachusetts Highway Department (MHD), traffic engineers and traffic
planning professionals.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 137 of 265
Peak-Hour Traffic (PH) – The highest number of vehicles passing over a section of
highway during 60 consecutive minutes. The term T(PH) may be used to designate the
PH for truck traffic only.
Peak-Hour Factor (PHF) – a ratio of the total volume occurring during the peak hour to
the maximum rate of flow during a given time period within the peak hour (typically 15
minutes duration).
Roadway Impacted by Development Traffic – A roadway segment, including one or
more approaches to an intersection, shall be considered as impacted if traversed by 20 or
more vehicles related to the project in a single direction during any single hour and it:
a. a signalized intersection and ADT or PH will increase by 5% or more; or
b. is an unsignalized intersection with a minor street approach PH of 50 or more
vehicles; or
c. is substandard, as determined by the Town Engineer, in terms of structure, pavement
surface, or other deficiencies; or
d. exhibits safety problems as identified by the Town Engineer, Town Traffic Engineer
or other qualified professional as determined by the Planning Board.
C. Applicability and Procedure
1. Design Review
Minor Construction Projects, Major Construction Projects, and Projects of Significant
Impact are subject to Design Review, as follows:
Plans and other submission materials as specified on the “Application for Design
Review” along with the completed application shall be submitted to the Design
Review Board for its written advisory design recommendations in accordance with
Section 22. Within twenty-one (2l) days of submission, copies of the written design
recommendations shall be sent by the Design Review Board to the Building
Inspector, Planning Board and the applicant. No building permit or parking plan
permit shall be issued by the Building Inspector within this twenty-one (2l) day
period unless the required written recommendations are received.
2. Site Plan Review
In addition to Design Review in accordance with the preceding section, Major
Construction Projects and Projects of Significant Impact are subject to Site Plan
Review, as follows:
a. The applicant shall submit to the Zoning Board of Appeals (“ZBA”) plans and
other submission materials in accordance with the procedures for Special Permits
adopted by the ZBA pursuant to Section 25 of this Zoning Bylaw. Within seven
(7) days from the date of its submission to the ZBA, copies of the complete
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 138 of 265
application as submitted shall be referred by the ZBA to the Board of Health,
Planning Board, Design Review Board, Town Engineer, Wetlands Protection
Committee, Municipal Light Plant, Fire Chief, Police Chief and any other Town
agencies or boards designated by the ZBA, for review and preparation of written
recommendations to the ZBA, Building Inspector and the applicant prior to the
required public hearing. Said written recommendations shall be attached to and
become part of the application.
b. No decision shall be made by the ZBA in connection with any application until
the above referenced written recommendations have been received or thirty-five
(35) days shall have elapsed after such referral of the application without a
recommendation being received. The ZBA may modify such plans to meet the
requirements of this Section, and as modified, approve the same, or may
disapprove the plans. No building permit or parking plan permit shall be issued
by the Building Inspector without the written approval of plans as herein above
provided.
3. Special Permit for Projects of Significant Impact
In addition to Design Review and Site Plan Review in accordance with the preceding
sections, Projects of Significant Impact (PSI), shall require a Special Permit issued by
the Planning Board, as follows:
a. The applicant shall submit to the Planning Board a Municipal Systems Impact
Analysis (MSIA), prepared by professional engineers registered in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and identifying the impact of the Construction
Project on water, sewer, storm drainage, electric, traffic, intersections, sidewalks
and footways, building occupant life safety, refuse disposal and recycling. The
water, sewer, and storm drainage portions of the MSIA shall be prepared by
engineers having expertise in civil engineering; the electric portion shall be
prepared by engineers having expertise in electrical engineering; the traffic and
pedestrian safety and bicycle safety portions shall be prepared by engineers
having expertise in traffic and transportation engineering.
b. The intent of the analysis is to determine the impact on the Town's existing capital
infrastructure in order to assess costs of providing or upgrading Town public
facilities which will benefit a PSI.
c. The Municipal Systems Impact Analysis shall include:
i. Utility Capacity
including water, sewer, storm drain and electric distribution systems before
construction and at expected occupancy date;
ii. Traffic
identification of existing traffic and anticipated traffic at time of full project
occupancy at existing and proposed roadway segments and intersections,
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 139 of 265
existing and proposed site connections to the street system, and streets
bordering, supporting, and connecting the development including:
a) vehicle speed;
b) 85th percentile vehicle speed;
c) sight distances;
d) existing safety records including accident data;
e) description of existing traffic controls;
f) Annual Average Daily Traffic;
g) Average Daily Traffic
h) Peak-Hour Traffic (morning, afternoon and other peak(s));
i) Peak-Hour Factor;
j) Design Hourly Volume;
k) K- Factor;
l) Levels of Service (LOS);
m) Project generated traffic and its distribution;
n) Volume to Capacity Ratio;
o) Average Delay;
p) Average and 95th Percentile Queue Lengths;
q) Roadways Impacted by Development Traffic;
r) Delay and Gap Study (when deemed necessary by the Town’s traffic
engineering consultant); and
s) Data Calibration.
Evaluations shall be made in accordance with the current MHD Design Guide,
the elements listed above and standards adopted by the Board of Selectmen.
identification of roadways impacted by development traffic;
estimated traffic impacts of the proposed development in terms of the amount
of morning and afternoon peak hour and total daily traffic generated by the
development on streets bordering the development area; sight lines from
access connections; proposed changes to traffic controls; and projected levels
of service of intersections identified in item 3. above and at points of
connection of the development area to the street system;
iii. Pedestrian and Bicycle Safety
possible hazardous pedestrian and bicycle crossings; a detailed identification
of gaps in the sidewalk network and identification of cracking, deterioration,
heaving, sinking, shifting, patching and missing sections and intrusion or
encroachment of vegetation and other obstructions into the sidewalk area
within a walking distance of 600 feet from the development area and along
walking routes to the nearest public transportation station(s) or boarding
point(s) if such facilities exists within one mile of the development site;
identification of sidewalk links or connections to surrounding neighborhoods.
Pedestrian crosswalks, traffic control devices and traffic calming measures
will be part of the safety analysis.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 140 of 265
iv. Building Occupant Life Safety
identification of proposed use and occupancy and characteristics of the
occupants, building contents, equipment and materials on site; identification
of possible hazards and hazard scenarios and anticipated impact on municipal
fire alarm systems. The Fire Chief may require a comprehensive emergency
plan which shall include an evacuation plan.
v. Refuse Disposal and Recycling
anticipated impact on the Town's refuse disposal and recycling system.
d. No decision shall be made by the Planning Board acting as Special Permit
Granting Authority (SPGA) in connection with any properly completed
application until it has been referred to, reviewed and approved by the four review
departments (Department of Public Works for the water, sewer, storm drain,
refuse and recycling elements; Municipal Light Plant for the electric element, Fire
Department for fire alarm, fire protection and life safety element and the Board of
Selectmen for the traffic and pedestrian safety element). The Board of Selectmen
shall solicit the recommendations of the Chief of Police. The report of the Board
of Selectmen to the Planning Board shall include the recommendations of the
Chief of Police or verification that the Chief offered no comment. Review
departments are not required to hold a public hearing for this purpose. Review
departments may employ outside consultant assistance as deemed necessary.
e. The Planning Board shall grant a special permit provided the following minimum
service standards are met:
i. Water -
There shall be sufficient water capacity to meet the flow demands of the
proposed use without causing municipal water flow characteristics off site to
fall below the standards adopted by the Board of Public Works.
ii. Sewer -
There shall be sufficient sewer capacity to meet the flow demands of the
proposed use without causing surcharge in those sewer lines which serve the
project and consistent with the standards adopted by the Board of Public
Works.
iii. Storm Drainage -
There shall be sufficient storm drainage capacity to meet the flow demands of
the proposed development site without causing surcharge in those storm
drainage lines which serve the project and consistent with the standards
adopted by the Board of Public Works.
iv. Electric -
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 141 of 265
There shall be sufficient electrical capacity to meet the peak service demands
of the proposed use without causing the service in adjacent areas to fall below
the standards adopted by the Municipal Light Board.
v. Traffic, Pedestrian and Bicycle Safety
With respect to all signalized impacted intersections, and any unsignalized
impacted intersections having 50 or more PH vehicle trips on any minor
approach, there shall be no degradation in the overall level of service
designation to a level below the level of “C” and, if an impacted intersection
is projected to operate at an overall level of service lower than “C” in a design
year no-build alternative, then the proposed development shall not degrade the
level of service designation below the projected design year no-build levels;
and
With respect to unsignalized impacted intersections having fewer than 50 PH
vehicle trips on any minor approach, the Applicant shall undertake an
evaluation to identify any specific circumstances requiring further action or
mitigation, which may be the subject of negotiated improvements at the
discretion of the Planning Board. For purposes of clause 1 above, the “overall
level of service” for an unsignalized impacted intersection shall be considered
to be the worst of the individual levels of service for each of the minor
movements.
Pedestrian and bicycle circulation shall be provided in accordance with
recognized safety standards; provided in all cases sidewalks within a walking
distance of 600 feet of the Project shall be provided and in addition sidewalk
connections within such radius to surrounding neighborhoods and to public
transportation shall be provided as required by the Special Permit Granting
Authority in a safe and convenient condition and consistent with standards of
the Massachusetts Highway Project Development and Design Guide.
vi. Fire Protection and Life Safety -
There shall be sufficient municipal fire alarm system capacity to meet the
operating requirements of the proposed use under applicable codes,
regulations and statutes enforced by the Fire Chief. There shall be off-site fire
protection facilities serving the development site in the opinion of the Fire
Chief meeting the needs of the project based on the intended use and
occupancy including fire flow requirements, location of and access to fire
hydrants and access for emergency vehicles. The Fire Chief may require a
comprehensive emergency plan which shall include an evacuation plan
satisfactory to the Fire Chief and meeting the specifications and standards
adopted by the Fire Chief.
vii. Refuse Disposal System -
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 142 of 265
Refuse recycling and disposal systems, consistent with the standards adopted
by the Board of Public Works, shall be provided.
f. Following review of the Municipal Systems Analysis, applicants for PSI approval
or the Planning Board may propose specific design alternatives and/or off-site
Negotiated Improvements to municipal facilities to meet minimum service
standards.
g. The Planning Board is authorized to incorporate these design alternatives and
improvements as conditions in special permit PSI approval.
h. The applicant shall bear all of the costs of design work and construction of all
Negotiated Improvements and shall be responsible for implementation of the
Negotiated Improvements and special permit approval conditions. All work
proposed to improve or upgrade Town utilities or facilities shall be done
according to the specifications adopted by the Board of Public Works, except that
electric work shall be done according to the specifications adopted by the
Municipal Light Board. The applicant shall also bear the cost of review of plans
and of periodic inspections of such work during construction.
Post development traffic counts may be required at the discretion of the Planning
Board, at reasonable intervals over a period not to exceed twelve (12) months, and
commencing no sooner than three months after commencement of Project
operation. The purpose of this monitoring is to review the accuracy of PSI traffic
projections. If at least two consecutive traffic counts no less than six months apart
reflect that site-related daily traffic is more than 10 percent (10%) above the
projected volume, then the Applicant shall undertake an evaluation to identify any
specific circumstances requiring further action or mitigation. Should post
development traffic counts, review of plans, mitigation proposals or any other
peer review or related professional services be required, the Applicant shall bear
the cost thereof.
i. Upon the granting of a special permit by the Planning Board for a PSI the
applicant is authorized to apply for Project Approval under the procedure in
Section 16A for Major Construction Project Approval. Planning Board review of
PSI application shall not substitute for Major Construction Project approval. No
application shall be made for Major Construction Project approval for a PSI prior
to the granting of a special permit by the Planning Board.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 143 of 265
SECTION 16B. INCLUSIONARY ZONING
A. Purpose
The purpose of Inclusionary Zoning is to recognize the affordable housing need in
Wellesley; to require applicants for development projects having a significant impact on
the Town to contribute toward this need; to encourage the expansion and upgrade of the
Town's affordable housing in order to provide for a full range of housing choices for
households of all incomes, ages and sizes; to prevent the displacement of low to moderate
income Wellesley residents; to increase the production of affordable housing units; and to
encourage affordable housing to be incorporated into new development projects.
B. Applicability
The provisions of this section shall apply to all projects requiring approval as Projects of
Significant Impact under Section 16A in Business Districts, Business Districts A,
Industrial Districts, Industrial Districts A, and Wellesley Square Commercial Districts
and to single family residential subdivisions on sites having a development potential
under current zoning of five or more lots.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to any project undertaken by the Town for
any municipal purposes.
C. Requirements
An applicant for a project defined in Section 16B.B., above, shall provide in conjunction
with that project, a minimum ratio of Assisted Units on the project site in accordance
with the following:
1. .02 Assisted Units per each 1,000 square feet of floor area in the project devoted to
any allowed use other than Dwelling Units; and
2. .20 Assisted Units per each Dwelling Unit in the project.
Both of the above ratios will apply in any mixed-use project which includes both
Dwelling Units and floor area devoted to any allowed use other than Dwelling Units. If
the project’s required ratio includes any fraction of an Assisted Unit, the project’s
obligation with respect to such fractional Assisted Unit shall be determined in accordance
with Section 16B.D.3. below.
D. Alternatives to Satisfy Assisted Unit Ratio
The following alternatives may be used to satisfy the requirements of Section 16B.C.1.
and 2. above, subject to the issuance of a special permit by the Planning Board acting as
Special Permit Granting Authority:
1. Assisted Units may be located on land within the Town of Wellesley other than on
the project site; and/or
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 144 of 265
2. A cash contribution may be made to the affordable housing trust fund account
established by the Wellesley Housing Development Corporation pursuant to Chapter
311 of the Acts of 1998 as a payment-in-lieu of providing the required ratio of
Assisted Units on the project site. Moneys so deposited with in such trust fund
account shall only be used to provide Assisted Units within the Town according to the
required ratio for that project; and/or
3. If the required ratio calculated under Section 16B.C.1. and 2. above includes any
fractional Assisted Unit, the project’s obligation with respect to such fractional
Assisted Unit may be satisfied either by providing a whole Assisted Unit for such
fractional Assisted Unit either on the project site or off the project site or by making a
cash contribution under Section 16B.D.2. above in the amount equal to the product of
(a) such fraction multiplied by (b) the cash contribution for a whole Assisted Unit
determined under Section 16B.E. below. In a mixed use development fractional
Assisted Units attributable to commercial and residential must be accounted for
separately, and may not be added together.
E. Determination of Cash Contribution
The amount of the cash contribution described in Section 14B.D.2. above shall be
determined by the Planning Board and shall be the amount equal to the product of (1) the
required number of Assisted Units multiplied by (2) the difference in sale price between
an Assisted Unit and a Conventional Unit. For the purposes of determining the amount of
the cash contribution, an Assisted Unit shall be deemed to have at least three bedrooms and
1,500 square feet of living space.
The sale price for the Assisted Unit shall be determined in accordance with the Local
Initiative Program regulations of the Massachusetts Department of Housing and
Community Development (DHCD) at 760 CMR 45.00 or any successor regulations or
program of DHCD establishing guidelines for low or moderate income housing programs
that qualify under General Laws Chapter 40B. The sale price for the Conventional Unit
shall be based on the current median sale price in the Town for Conventional Units
similar in size and type to the Assisted Unit.
F. General Provisions
1. The Planning Board shall be charged with administering this by-law and shall
promulgate rules and regulations to implement its provisions.
2. To the extent practicable, Assisted Units shall be dispersed throughout the project
unless they are to be provided on other land. The Assisted Units shall be
indistinguishable in external appearance from any market-rate housing units in the
project.
3. Accessible unit(s), not to exceed 15% of the total number of units, may be required in
any project.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 145 of 265
4. Tenants or purchasers, as the case may be, shall be selected for the Assisted Units by,
and in accordance with the procedures of, the Wellesley Housing Development
Corporation.
5. The Assisted Units shall remain so in perpetuity in accordance with a deed restriction
or other method satisfactory to the Planning Board.
6. Projects shall not be segmented or phased to avoid compliance with these provisions.
G. Construction
1. Occupancy permits for any Conventional Unit or uses other than Dwelling Units in a
project shall be issued proportionately in the required ratio as occupancy permits for
the required Assisted Units are issued or payment of the cash contribution in lieu of
the required Assisted Units is made for the entire project.
2. All documents necessary to ensure compliance with this by-law shall be subject to the
review and approval by Town Counsel and shall be executed prior to and as a
condition of the issuance of any Certificate of Occupancy.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 146 of 265
Editor’s Note: Page intentionally left blank
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 147 of 265
SECTION 16C. DRAINAGE REVIEW
A. Purpose
This Section is adopted by the Town to provide a pre-construction, construction and postconstruction
review of the projects which have the potential for detrimental effect caused
by storm water drainage discharge onto streets and ways, into the Town’s storm water
drainage system and into the Charles River, the Town’s lakes, ponds and streams; to
reduce discharge of pollutants to the maximum extent practicable; to protect water
quality; to satisfy the water quality requirements of the Clean Water Act and
Massachusetts Water Quality Standards; to maintain compliance with Wellesley’s
General Permit under the Phase II Regulations of National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System of U.S. EPA; and to be consistent with the Massachusetts Wetlands
Protection Act; the Town of Wellesley Wetlands Protection Bylaw (Article 44 of the
Town Bylaws); the Town of Wellesley Erosion and Sedimentation Control Regulations
and the Municipal Stormwater Drainage System Rules and Regulations adopted by the
Board of Public Works; by minimizing land clearing; by minimizing the amount of
exposed soil and duration of exposure, by installing, protecting and maintaining
vegetative buffers, silt fencing, and BMP’s.
B. Definitions
Best Management Practices (BMP’s) - The most effective and practical measures to
reduce or prevent pollutants from reaching water bodies and to control the quantity of
runoff from a site. These measures may be structural, such as particle separators or sand
filters, and they may be non-structural, such as but not limited to, buffer areas around
developments or proper methods for storage of chemicals.
Construction Mitigation Plan - A plan which details the design, location and type of
erosion and sedimentation control measures to be employed on-site.
Grading and Drainage Plan - To be prepared in accordance with specifications to be
developed and from time to time amended by the Town Engineer it shall include but not
be limited to the following information: post-development peak runoff rates, rates of
recharge of stormwater to groundwater and rates of removal of total suspended solids. It
shall be stamped and signed by a Massachusetts Registered Professional Engineer.
On-Site Stormwater System - Catch basins, leaching basins, manholes, pipes, retention
and/or detention basins, swales, drainage ditches, headwalls, BMP’s and other
components.
Operation and Maintenance Plan - A plan which includes the details of the regular
maintenance of the on-site stormwater system including but not necessarily limited to
cleaning of dry wells for roof drains and any catch basins, sweeping of paved areas
draining into the catch basins, visual inspection of drainage structures for damage or
blockage, keeping the area around catch basins located in lawns or other landscaped
areas clear of excess leaves, twigs and other debris, and inspection and maintenance of
BMP’s.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 148 of 265
Review Staff - Town Engineer (or designated representative of the Town Engineer),
Inspector of Buildings (or designated representative of the Inspector of Buildings),
Wetlands Administrator (or designated representative of the Wetlands Administrator).
C. Applicability
The provisions of this section shall apply to all projects not otherwise subject to Section
16A involving grading or re-grading of land to planned elevations, and/or removal or
disturbance of the existing vegetative cover, over an area of one acre or more.
D. Procedure
Prior to the issuance of a building permit, a grading and drainage plan and other materials
as may be required consistent with specifications to be developed by the Wellesley
Department of Public Works shall be submitted to the Planning Director. A reasonable
submission fee may be established and from time to time adjusted by the review staff.
The Planning Director shall forthwith send copies of the submission to the review staff.
The review staff shall within 14 days make such comments or recommendations as
deemed appropriate and shall send copies to the Planning Director and the applicant. The
grading and drainage plan may be approved, approved subject to conditions or plan
modifications. An operation and maintenance plan may be required in instances where
the on-site stormwater system is deemed by the review staff to warrant same. A
construction mitigation plan may be required if in the opinion of the review staff the
topography of the land warrants erosion and sedimentation control measures.
Prior to a Certificate of Occupancy being issued or final building inspection being made
as the case may be for the construction, reconstruction or addition an inspection shall be
made by the Town Engineer or designated representative of the Town Engineer to
determine whether there is compliance with the grading and drainage plan and notify the
other members of the review staff of the inspection results. If there is compliance the
other members of the review staff shall be so notified whereupon a Certificate of
Occupancy may be issued, or final building inspection may be made. If found to be not in
compliance, the Planning Director shall notify the applicant of the work remaining to be
done.
E. Appeals
An applicant may appeal the decision of the review staff. In the event of an appeal it shall
be made to the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with Section 24.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 149 of 265
SECTION 16D. LARGE HOUSE REVIEW
Editor’s Note: Updated March 27, 2018 to reflect amendments under Article 32 at 2017 ATM)
A. Purpose
This Section is adopted by the Town to provide pre-construction and post-construction
review of single family dwellings which meet the applicability standards set forth below.
B. Definitions
Total Living Area plus Garage Space - This term includes:
(i) The sum of the floor area(s) of the above-grade floors, including portions of attics,
in structures used as one-family dwellings and detached accessory structures related
to such use on a lot, measured from the exterior face of the exterior walls;
(ii) Floor area(s) of portions of attic(s) with an interior roofline height of 5 ft. or
greater;
Figure 1. Attic TLAG Illustration – Gable Roof
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 150 of 265
Figure 2. Attic TLAG Illustration – Hip Roof
(iii) Floor area of garage and storage space, whether as part of a one-family dwelling or
in detached accessory structures; and
(iv) Basement area multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the external
above ground surface of basement walls and the denominator of which is the total
surface (both above and below ground) of external basement walls, provided that if
such fraction is less than .25, then the basement areas shall not be included.
Calculations shall be determined in accordance with the Rules and Regulations adopted
by the Planning Board.
C. Applicability
The provisions of this Section shall apply to all building permits issued after January 1,
2008 for new single family dwellings where the Total Living Area plus Garage Space of
the dwelling, after completion, exceeds:
3,600 square feet for dwellings within the Single Residence 10,000 Square Foot Area
Regulation District;
4,300 square feet for dwellings within the Single Residence 15,000 Square Foot Area
Regulation District;
5,900 square feet for dwellings within the Single Residence 20,000 Square Foot Area
Regulation District; and
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 151 of 265
7,200 square feet for dwellings within the Single Residence 30,000 and 40,000 Square
Foot Area Regulation Districts.
The provisions of this section shall also apply to all building permits issued after January
1, 2008 for alteration of single family dwellings where the alteration will increase the
Total Living Area Plus Garage Space of the dwelling in question by more than 10%, and
the Total Living Area Plus Garage Space of the dwelling, after completion of the project,
will exceed the applicable threshold, as listed above.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following are exempt from Planning Board review:
1. Changes to non-conforming single-family dwellings which are subject to a Finding in
accordance with Section 6 of Chapter 40A M.G.L and Section 17 of this Zoning Bylaw;
2. The reconstruction of pre-existing, non-conforming buildings, damaged or destroyed
by accidental cause, including fire, or otherwise damaged or destroyed without the
consent of the owner, in accordance with Section 17.C.; and
3. The completion or finishing of attics in existing structures where there are no exterior
alterations or changes.
D. Procedure
1. General. Any applicant for a single family residential dwelling which is subject to
this Section shall submit the required information, including plans indicating the
delineation of the neighborhood, existing and proposed site conditions, photographs,
topography, building elevations, proposed grading and landscape design described in
the Rules and Regulations to the Planning Board through the Planning Director and
shall not be entitled to the issuance of a building permit unless and until the dwelling
is approved in accordance with this Section.
2. Waivers. The Planning Board may, in any particular case where it determines such
action to be consistent with the purpose and intent of the Zoning Bylaw and otherwise
in the public interest, waive strict compliance with certain application and review
requirements contained in this Section and with the Rules and Regulations adopted by
it under this Section if it finds that the proposed construction, or certain aspects of the
construction are de minimus based on the Standards and Criteria contained in Section
16D.E. Waiver requests must be made in writing and shall be addressed in a
preliminary meeting between the Planning Board and the prospective applicant, held
not later than 21 days after receipt of the waiver request. An applicant who makes a
waiver request shall not submit an application until after meeting with the Planning
Board on the waiver request.
3. Review and Timing. The Planning Board and Design Review Board shall each meet
separately with the applicant to discuss the applicability of the Standards and Criteria
set forth in Section 16D.E. of this Section after receipt of the submission to discuss
the project. Although a public hearing is not required, notice of the Planning Board
meeting shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the abutters and abutters to the
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 152 of 265
abutters within 300 feet of the property line of the applicant, as they appear on the
most recent applicable tax list at least 10 days prior to the public meeting. Owners of
land directly opposite the applicant on any public or private street or way shall be
considered abutters under this Section. Written comments from abutters will be
received and considered, and oral comments will be considered only at the discretion
of the Planning Board. The Design Review Board shall prepare comments and
recommendations as it deems appropriate and shall submit these to the Planning
Board. The Planning Board shall prepare its decision and provide it to the applicant
within 90 days of the submission as well as to the Building Inspector and Zoning
Board of Appeals as may be appropriate. The Planning Board may seek the
recommendations of other Town Departments depending on the nature of the
application. If the Planning Board has not issued its decision within 90 days of
receipt of the submission from the applicant, the project, as described in the
submission, shall be deemed approved. The 90-day time limit may be extended by
written agreement between the Planning Board and the applicant, signed by, or on
behalf of, the applicant.
4. Approval. The Planning Board shall determine whether the Standards and Criteria
for Review set forth below have been satisfied. In reaching its decision, the Planning
Board shall consider the recommendations of the Design Review Board and other
applicable Boards and Departments, and all other materials submitted to the Planning
Board. If the Planning Board finds that the Standards and Criteria for Review have
been satisfied, it shall approve the project as set forth in the submissions, provided
that it may approve the project subject to conditions or plan modifications specified
by the Planning Board in writing. A construction mitigation plan may be required if
the site warrants erosion and sedimentation control measures. If the Planning Board
finds that the Standards and Criteria for Review have not been satisfied, it shall
disapprove the project, and shall state in writing the basis for its decision.
5. Issuance of Building Permit and Certificate of Occupancy. The Building Inspector
shall not issue a building permit unless and until the project is approved by the
Planning Board or is deemed approved in accordance with this Section and is filed at
the Registry of Deeds. The Building Inspector shall verify compliance with all
required conditions or plan modifications prior to the issuance of a Certificate of
Occupancy. The Building Inspector shall inform the Planning Director and the
applicant of any failure to comply with conditions of plan approval or plan
modifications pursuant to this section.
6. Revision and Amendment of Plans. Any revision, amendment or new information
relating to an LHR application shall be considered as follows:
a. Pending LHR Applications. Revision or amendments relating to a pending LHR
application that is before the Planning Board for review shall be accepted by the
Planning Board as part of the original submission.
b. Previously Approved LHR Applications. Revisions or amendments to an LHR
Application that has previously been approved by the Planning Board must be
submitted to the Planning Director who shall make a determination as to whether
the revisions are major or minor and shall be processed as follows:
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 153 of 265
i. Minor. If the Planning Director determines the proposed revisions or
amendments to be minor, he or she shall determine the consistency of the
revisions with the Planning Board’s previous findings and the Standards and
Criteria for Review, and either approve or deny the revisions accordingly. If
denied, the Planning Director shall notify the applicant and the Planning
Board within five (5) business days of the applicant’s submittal of such
revisions. The applicant may submit denied minor revisions to the Planning
Board for their consideration; the Board shall either accept or reject the
proposed revisions as part of the approved LHR application.
ii. Major. If the Planning Director determines the proposed revisions or
amendments to be major, the Director shall notify the applicant and Planning
Board within five (5) business days of the applicant’s submittal to such
revisions. The applicant may then submit the proposed revisions to the
Planning Board, which shall either accept or reject the proposed revisions as
part of the approved LHR application.
E. Standards and Criteria for Review
1. Preservation of Landscape. The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state
insofar as practicable by minimizing use of wetlands, flood plains, hilltops, any grade
changes and vegetation and soil removal. Unique natural areas, topographic features
such as ledge outcrops, significant trees and landscaping, and historic features shall
be saved or enhanced insofar as practicable.
2. Scale of Buildings. All new construction shall be sited and implemented in a manner
that is consistent with the scale of other structures in its vicinity through the use of
appropriate massing, screening, lighting and other architectural techniques such as
variation in detail, form and siting. Consideration shall be given to the need for
vegetated buffers. To the extent practicable this shall be based on the “Intent, Policy
and Recommendations” specified in Part II. Design Criteria. of the “Design
Guidelines Handbook” adopted by the Design Review Board and otherwise applying
good architectural and aesthetic principles. Structures shall be arranged insofar as
practicable to avoid casting shadows onto abutting property.
3. Lighting. Exterior lighting shall be only as needed to accomplish safety and design
objectives and shall be arranged so as to minimize the impact on neighboring
properties.
4. Open Space. Open space shall be as extensive as is practicable and designed so as to
add to the visual amenities of the neighborhood for persons passing the site or
overlooking it from nearby properties. To the extent practicable this shall be based on
the “Intent, Policy and Recommendations” specified in Part II. Design Criteria. of the
“Design Guidelines Handbook” adopted by the Design Review Board
5. Drainage. The development shall incorporate measures that are adequate to prevent
pollution of surface or groundwater, to minimize erosion and sedimentation, and to
prevent changes to groundwater levels, increased rates of runoff, and minimize
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 154 of 265
potential for flooding. Drainage shall be designed so that groundwater recharge is
maximized, and so that the rate of runoff shall not be increased at the project
boundaries.
6. Circulation. Walkways, drives and parking shall be safe and convenient and, insofar
as practicable, not detract from the use and enjoyment of adjacent properties and
Town streets.
F. Fees
Any applicant seeking plan approval under this section shall submit an application and
pay such fees as shall be determined by the Planning Board, to cover any expenses
connected with public notice and review of plans, including but not limited to the costs of
any engineering or planning consulting services necessary for review purposes.
G. Rules and Regulations
The Planning Board may promulgate or amend Rules and Regulations which pertain to
the plan approval process under this section, and shall file a copy of said rules in the
office of the Town Clerk. Such rules may prescribe the size, form, contents, style, and
number of copies of plans and specifications, and the procedure for the submission and
approval of such review so long as the Rules and Regulations conform to this Section
16D of the Zoning By-law. The adoption or amendment of Rules and Regulations shall
be after a public hearing to receive comments on the proposed or amended Rules and
Regulations. The public hearing shall be advertised once in a newspaper of general local
circulation, at least 14 days prior to the date of the public hearing.
H. Appeals
An applicant, or any person receiving notice under Section 16D.D.4. above, may appeal
the Planning Board’s approval, denial, conditions or plan modifications to the Zoning
Board of Appeals in accordance with Section 24.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 155 of 265
SECTION 16E. TREE PROTECTION & PRESERVATION
A. Title
Section 16E may be cited as the “Town of Wellesley Tree Bylaw” and/or “Tree Bylaw”.
B. Intent and Purpose
The intent of Section 16E is to encourage the preservation and protection of sizeable trees
on portions of private property during significant demolition and/or development activity.
Trees are recognized for their abilities to improve air quality, protect from glare and heat,
reduce noise, aid in the stabilization of soil, provide natural flood and drainage control,
create habitats for wildlife, enhance aesthetics and property values, contribute to the
distinct character of certain neighborhoods, and provide natural privacy to neighbors.
Therefore, the Town deems that the preservation and protection of certain trees on private
property, the requirement to replant trees to replace those removed, and the collection of
financial contributions to support the Town’s tree planting and maintenance efforts are
public purposes that protect the public health, welfare, environment and aesthetics.
C. Definitions
For the purposes of Section 16E, the following definitions shall apply.
Caliper - Diameter of a tree trunk (in inches). For trees up to and including four (4)
inches in diameter, the caliper is measured six (6) inches above the existing grade at the
base of the tree. For trees larger than four (4) inches in diameter, the caliper is measured
twelve (12) inches above the existing grade at the base of the tree.
Certified Arborist – A professional arborist possessing current certification issued by the
International Society of Arboriculture (I.S.A.) and/or the Massachusetts Arborist
Association (M.A.A.).
Critical Root Zone (CRZ) - The minimum area beneath the canopy of a tree which must
be left undisturbed in order to preserve a sufficient root mass to give a tree a reasonable
chance of survival. The CRZ is represented by a concentric circle centering on the tree's
trunk and extending outward towards the tree’s drip-line. The minimum area of the CRZ
shall be dependent on the required minimum radius of the CRZ; the required minimum
radius of the CRZ shall be determined by multiplying a tree’s DBH (in inches) by
eighteen (18) inches, with the resulting product constituting the minimum radius of the
CRZ. Example: A tree with a DBH of twenty (20) inches shall have a CRZ with a
minimum radius of 360 inches or 30 feet (20” x 18” = 360” or 30’).
Diameter at Breast Height (DBH) - The standard measure of tree size for those trees
existing on a site that are at least four (4) inches in diameter at a height of four and onehalf
(4.5) feet above the existing grade at the base of the tree. If a tree splits into multiple
trunks below four and one-half (4.5) feet above the existing grade, the DBH shall be
considered to be the measurement taken at the narrowest point beneath the split.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 156 of 265
Drip-Line - The area surrounding the tree from the trunk to the outermost branches. This
area is distinguished from, and not to be confused with Critical Root Zone.
Overstory Tree - A tree that will generally reach a mature height of greater than forty (40)
feet.
Protected Tree - Any existing tree or tree that was removed within twelve (12) months
prior to application for an applicable demolition or building permit, with a DBH of ten
(10) inches or greater, located in a Tree Yard of a property zoned Single Residence
District or General Residence District, or located anywhere on property zoned other than
Single Residence District or General Residence District. Any tree with a DBH of ten (10)
inches or greater with portions of the stem of the tree actively growing into a Tree Yard
between a height of six (6) inches and four and one-half (4.5) feet above grade shall be
considered a Protected Tree.
Tree - Any self-supporting, woody perennial plant usually having a single trunk with a
diameter of three (3) inches or more which normally attains a mature height of six (6) feet
or greater.
Tree Bank - An account established for the deposit of contributions in lieu of tree
replanting as required by Section 16E. Funds deposited in this account shall be used
solely for the purpose of buying, planting and maintaining trees in the Town.
Tree Protection & Mitigation Plan - A plan submitted to the Building Department for
review prior to the commencement of demolition and/or construction on a property on
which a Protected Tree is located. This plan may be either part of a landscape plan and/or
a separate plan.
Tree Removal - Any act that causes a tree to die or will cause a tree to die within a three
(3) year period as determined by the Department of Public Works - Park & Tree Division
based on arboricultural practices recommended by the International Society of
Arboriculture (I.S.A.).
Tree Save Area - The area surrounding a tree which includes at a minimum the Critical
Root Zone (“CRZ”) and Drip-Line of all Protected Trees, unless otherwise authorized
herein. The Tree Save Area must be enclosed within a fence and remain undisturbed so as
to prevent damage to the tree.
Tree Yard - The area of a parcel zoned Single Residence District or General Residence
District located adjacent to all front, side, and rear lines of a lot; Tree Yards shall have a
minimum depth as specified in the table entitled “Location of Protected Trees on
Property Zoned Single Residence District or General Residence District”, contained in
Section 16E.F.1. Trees having a DBH of ten (10) inches or greater and located within a
Tree Yard shall be considered to be Protected Trees.
D. Applicability
1. Applicability: The requirements of Section 16E shall apply under any of the
following circumstances:
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 157 of 265
a. Proposed demolition of an existing structure with a footprint of 250 square feet or
greater;
b. Construction of retaining walls subject to the requirements of Section 22D;
c. Construction of any building or structure on a vacant lot; or
d. Construction of one or more structures or additions to structures on a lot, where
the total area of the footprint of the new structures will result in an increase of
50% or more of the total footprint of the pre-existing structure(s).
2. Non-applicability: The requirements of Section 16E shall not apply to:
a. The subdivision of land under the Subdivision Control Law and the Rules and
Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land In Wellesley Massachusetts,
wherein the Planning Board regulates the planting, retention and/or replacement
of trees, by means of the Board's authority over the subdivision of land;
b. Construction subject to Large House Review, wherein the Planning Board
regulates the planting, retention and/or replacement of trees located on private
residential land;
c. Those areas of property under the jurisdiction of the Wetlands Protection Act
(Chapter 131 and 310 CMR), wherein the Wetlands Protection Committee
regulates the retention and/or replacement of trees located on private land.
Protected trees located outside areas under the jurisdiction of the Wetlands
Protection Committee shall be subject to Section 16E;
d. Town-owned public trees, including trees that are considered to be Public Shade
Trees pursuant to M.G.L. Chapter 87, which are protected by the Natural
Resources Commission acting as the Town’s Tree Warden.
e. Emergency projects necessary for public safety, health and welfare as determined
by the Inspector of Buildings;
f. Trees that are hazardous as determined and confirmed in writing by a Certified
Arborist; and
g. Trees subject to an immediate and/or probable risk of disease or insect infestation,
as determined and confirmed in writing by a Certified Arborist.
3. Existing Encroachments: For the purposes of interpreting, administering, and
enforcing Section 16E and Section 17, an existing structure shall not be considered to
be a nonconforming structure solely because the structure, or a portion of the
structure, is located within the CRZ and/or Drip-Line of an existing Protected Tree.
The reconstruction of demolished structures or portions of structures within the
previously encroached area of the CRZ and/or Drip-Line shall be prohibited, except
when consistent with the requirements of Section 16E.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 158 of 265
E. Town of Wellesley Tree Bank
There is hereby established a Town of Wellesley Tree Bank (“Tree Bank”) which shall be
held by the Town Treasurer in an account administered by the Department of Public
Works - Park & Tree Division in accordance with applicable provisions of the General
Laws. Any contributions collected per Section 16E.F.2.b.ii. shall be deposited in said
Tree Bank, and shall be used solely for the purpose of buying, planting and maintaining
trees in the Town.
F. Protected Trees
1. Scope: Existing trees or trees that were removed within twelve (12) months prior to
application for an applicable demolition or building permit with a DBH of 10” or
greater and located within the minimum Tree Yard of a property zoned Single
Residence District or General Residence District as identified in the following table,
shall be considered to be Protected Trees.
Existing trees or trees that were removed within twelve (12) months prior to
application for an applicable demolition or building permit with a DBH of 10” or
greater and located anywhere on property zoned other than Single Residence District
or General Residence District, shall be considered to be Protected Trees.
Demolition and/or construction activity (as identified under Section16E.D.1.) on a
property on which a Protected Tree is located is prohibited unless authorized by the
Inspector of Buildings as set forth in this subsection.
Location of Protected Trees on Property Zoned Single Residence District or
General Residence District
Zoning District
Minimum Tree Yard (feet)
Front Side Rear
SRD 10 20 10 10
SRD 15 20 20 20
SRD 20 20 20 20
SRD 30 40 30 30
SRD 40 40 40 40
General Residence District 20 10 10
2. Tree Protection & Mitigation:
a. Protection: Each Protected Tree to be retained on property planned for demolition
and/or construction activity shall be protected by the establishment of a Tree Save
Area. The Tree Save Area shall be delineated within the submitted Tree
Protection & Mitigation Plan, shall be installed prior to the issuance of applicable
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 159 of 265
permits, and shall remain in place until work is completed on the property. The
applicant shall submit written documentation, prepared, stamped, dated and
signed by a Certified Arborist, to the Building Department confirming that the
required Tree Save Area identified in the Tree Protection & Mitigation Plan has
been installed.
An applicant may choose to encroach within the CRZ and/or Drip-Line of a
Protected Tree; however, such proposed action shall require the applicant to
submit a maintenance plan for the tree, to be prepared, stamped, dated and signed
by a Certified Arborist as part of the Tree Protection & Mitigation Plan. Under
these instances, the Tree Save Area may be reduced to protect only those areas of
the CRZ and/or Drip-Line not proposed for encroachment.
b. Mitigation: The removal of a Protected Tree from a property in connection with
one or more of the circumstances set forth in Section 16E.D.1. shall require
mitigation by satisfying one of the following provisions (i. Replanting of Trees or
ii. Contribution to the Town of Wellesley Tree Bank). Mitigation measures shall
be identified in the submitted Tree Protection and Mitigation Plan. The removal
or proposed removal of a Protected Tree(s) that has been mitigated for, in
conjunction with a previous applicable permit, shall not require additional
mitigation under subsequent permits, unless such mitigation has not been
completed or otherwise assured.
i. Replanting of Trees: For each inch of DBH of the tree(s) removed no less than
one-half (0.5) inch of caliper of new tree(s) shall be replanted in accordance
with the following:
1. Each new tree must have a minimum caliper of two (2) inches;
2. Such replanting, either on the applicant’s land or on land abutting the
applicant’s land with the express written approval of the owner of such
abutting land, shall occur prior to Final Inspection, or be otherwise assured
at such time to the satisfaction of the Town in a manner consistent with the
Rules and Regulations;
3. If the Protected Tree to be removed is an Overstory Tree species, the
replacement tree(s) to mitigate the removal shall be an Overstory Tree
species; and
4. Invasive tree species, as determined by the Department of Public Works -
Park & Tree Division, shall not be replanted to mitigate the removal of a
Protected Tree.
ii. Contribution to the Town of Wellesley Tree Bank: The Board of Selectmen
shall establish a Tree Bank contribution schedule, such schedule to be based
on the DBH of Protected Tree(s) to be removed. The schedule may take into
account the aggregate DBH of Protected Trees to be removed. The applicant
shall make such contribution to the Tree Bank for the removal of a Protected
Tree not already mitigated for per Section16E.F.2.b.i.; contributions shall be
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 160 of 265
received by the Building Department prior to the issuance of all applicable
permits.
3. Plan Review and Permit Issuance:
a. Tree Protection & Mitigation Plan Submittal: Prior to the issuance of a permit in
connection with one or more of the circumstances set forth in Section16E.D.1. on
property on which a Protected Tree is located or was located within twelve (12)
months prior to application, the owner of the property shall submit a Tree
Protection & Mitigation Plan to the Building Department along with the
applicable application.
If a permit requiring the submittal of a Tree Protection & Mitigation Plan was
issued for a property within twelve (12) months prior to application for one or
more of the circumstances set forth in Section 16E.D.1., the submittal of a Tree
Protection & Mitigation Plan shall not be required for subsequent permits unless
any information required under Section16E.F.3.b. is changed or altered.
b. Tree Protection & Mitigation Plan Requirements: The submitted Tree Protection
& Mitigation Plan shall be a to-scale survey or site plan, along with any
accompanying documentation, containing information prepared, stamped, dated
and signed by an individual(s) appropriately licensed and authorized by the State
of Massachusetts to attest to and certify such information, unless a specific
certification is referenced herein. The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the
following information:
i. Boundaries of the subject property, including all property lines, easements,
and right-of-ways of public and private ways;
ii. The location of all existing buildings, driveways, retaining walls and other
improvements, with an indication of those features to be retained or
removed/demolished;
iii. The location of all planned buildings, driveways, retaining walls and other
improvements;
iv. The location, height, DBH, and species of all existing Protected Trees and all
Protected Trees that were removed within twelve (12) months prior to
application for an applicable demolition or building permit, with an indication
of those Protected Trees to be removed and those to be retained, if applicable;
v. The CRZ, drip-line and location of the Tree Save Area shall be shown for all
Protected Trees to be retained;
vi. The location, caliper, species, and planting schedule of trees to be replanted to
mitigate the removal of a Protected Tree(s), if applicable;
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 161 of 265
vii. A maintenance plan prepared, stamped, dated and signed by a Certified
Arborist for all Protected Trees which are proposed to have encroachment
within the CRZ and/or drip-line, if applicable;
viii. The amount to be contributed to the Tree Bank to mitigate the removal of a
Protected Tree(s), if applicable; and
ix. Such other information as is required by the Inspector of Buildings pursuant to
applicable regulations.
c. Tree Bank Contribution: In lieu of replanting, if applicable, the owner of the
property shall submit any required contribution to the Tree Bank as mitigation for
the removal of a protected tree.
d. Building Department Action: If the Tree Protection & Mitigation Plan is
consistent with the protection and mitigation requirements contained herein and
any established rules, regulations or manuals, and any applicable Tree Bank
contribution has been submitted, the Building Department may issue any
applicable permit. If the proposal does not meet or satisfy these requirements, the
Building Department shall deny all applicable permit applications and so notify
the applicant.
4. Maintenance of Protected and Replanted Trees:
a. Protected Trees: Each Protected Tree retained shall be maintained in good health
for a period of no less than twenty-four (24) months from the date of Final
Inspection, or issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy if applicable. Should such
tree die within this twenty-four (24) month period, the owner of the property shall
be required to provide mitigation consistent with the requirements for the removal
of a Protected Tree as contained herein within nine (9) months from the death of
the original tree.
b. Replanted Trees: All new trees replanted to mitigate the removal of Protected
Tree(s) shall be maintained in good health for a period of no less than twenty-four
(24) months from the date of planting. Should such tree die within this twentyfour
(24) month period, the owner of the property shall be responsible for
replacing the tree with a tree equal to or greater than the size of the original
replacement tree at the time of planting; such tree shall be planted within nine (9)
months of the death of the original replacement tree.
G. Rules and Regulations
The Planning Board may promulgate or amend Rules and Regulations which pertain to
the administration of Section 16E, and shall file a copy of said rules in the office of the
Town Clerk. Such rules may prescribe the size, form, contents, style, and number of
copies of plans and specifications, the procedure for the submission and approval of such
plans, the procedure for determining final compliance with these regulations, and the
criteria and procedure regarding the Planning Board’s acceptance of sureties (i.e., bonds,
letters of credit, etc.) intended to satisfy the requirements of Section 16E.F.2.b.i., so long
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 162 of 265
as the Rules and Regulations conform to Section 16E of the Zoning Bylaw. The adoption
or amendment of Rules and Regulations shall be after a public hearing to receive
comments on the proposed or amended Rules and Regulations. The public hearing shall
be advertised once in a newspaper of general local circulation, at least 14 days prior to
the date of the public hearing.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 163 of 265
SECTION 16F. NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION (NRP) DEVELOPMENT
(Editor’s Note: Section XVIF added 1/9/14 to reflect new provisions adopted under Article 28 at 2013 ATM)
A. Purpose
To allow innovative, context sensitive design of large subdivisions as a matter of right
where such design shall achieve the following:
1. To allow for greater flexibility and creativity in the design of residential
developments.
2. To minimize the destruction of, and to encourage the permanent preservation of open
space, wildlife habitat, recreational uses and other resources including aquifers, water
bodies and wetlands, groundwater, historical, cultural and scenic areas.
3. To promote a less sprawling, less intense and more sustainable and efficient form of
development that consumes less open land and conforms to existing topography and
natural features.
4. To minimize the total amount of disturbance, grade changes and run-off on or from
the site.
5. To facilitate the construction and maintenance of housing, streets, utilities, and public
services in a more economical and efficient manner.
B. Definitions
Primary Conservation Areas – Areas of a potential development site that are protected or
where development is limited by federal, state or local law or private land use restrictions
including, without limitation:
1. Easements (including, without limitation, easements or restrictions for conservation,
preservations, agricultural use, aquifer protection or similar easements and
restrictions) and similar covenants land use restrictions;
2. Wetlands, Isolated Wetlands, Bordering Vegetated Wetlands, and the 25-foot No-
Disturbance Zone as defined in the Wellesley Wetlands Bylaw;
3. Vernal Pools as defined in the Wellesley Wetlands Bylaw;
4. 100 Year Flood Plain as defined by Section 14B;
5. Wildlife habitat;
6. Steep slopes having a grade over 10% or as defined by federal or state law or
regulation, whichever is the lesser grade; and
7. Lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, and brooks;
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 164 of 265
Secondary Conservation Areas – Areas of a potential development site that contain
valuable natural or cultural resources including, but are not limited to:
1. Specimen trees;
2. Stone walls;
3. Significant geological features, including, without limitation, eskers, exposed ledge
and significant boulders;
4. Mature woodlands;
5. Scenic and wet meadows;
6. Historical or archaeological sites; and
7. Portions of a site within a Scenic Road or Scenic Road Layout.
Yield Plan – A conceptual subdivision plan containing all of the elements required by the
Subdivision Rules and Regulations that depicts the number of single family house lots
that could reasonably be developed according to local, state and federal law.
C. Applicability
1. NRP Development is required as a matter of right for any property that would yield 5
or more residential lots. To determine yield, the Planning Board shall consider the
following:
a. The following formula shall be used for yield determination related to NRP
Development:
Where A = Total Property Area
PCA = Area of primary conservation areas
10% = Assumed infrastructure area such as roads, etc. In the formula below,
this is expressed as the inverse (i.e., multiplying by 90%)
L = Minimum Lot Size per Section 18, without regard to Section 16F.F. of
this Section.
Y = Assumed number of residential units
(A-PCA) * 0.9
L
b. Separate contiguous properties under common ownership, or contiguous
properties that will otherwise be connected through future development activity,
shall be considered in the aggregate when determining applicability through the
= Y
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 165 of 265
yield calculation. The intent and requirements of this Section shall not be avoided
by segmentation or any incremental approach to development.
c. Where a property owner believes that the property is encumbered by physical,
legal or other unforeseen constraints that would reduce the property yield to
below 5 lots, the property owner may develop a Yield Plan to demonstrate that the
actual expected yield is below 5 lots and therefore NRP Development is not
required. The Yield Plan shall contain the information required in the Rules and
Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land and shall be submitted to the
Planning Board. The Planning Board’s determination as to the accuracy of the
Yield Plan shall be made at a regularly scheduled Planning Board meeting within
45 days of the submittal of an adequate Yield Plan. The determination of the
Planning Board shall be used only to establish whether or not NRP Development
is required and shall not be interpreted as approval of a subdivision or the vesting
of any development yield on the property.
2. This Section does not apply to the construction of homes or businesses on individual
lots that existed prior to the effective date of this Section of the bylaw.
3. A Special Permit application to the Planning Board is required for any subdivision
that does not conform to the development requirements herein. In order to approve
such Special Permit, the Planning Board must find that the proposed alternative plan
advances the purposes of the NRP Development bylaw as well as or better than a plan
that conforms to this Section. If the Planning Board determines that the land with the
greatest natural resource value (as identified in the required materials) cannot be
protected except by the use of a NRP Development plan, the Planning Board shall
deny the Special Permit for the deviation and require the applicant to submit a plan
that complies with the requirements of the NRP Development process. The Planning
Board may impose conditions on the grant of any such Special Permit.
D. Design Standards
The following Design Standards shall apply to all plans for NRP Development and shall
govern the development and design process:
1. Overall site design and development shall be performed in a manner that protects the
conservation areas identified pursuant to the procedures established in the Rules and
Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land. Techniques to ensure adequate
protection shall include, but shall not be limited to:
a. Avoidance and protection of Primary and Secondary Conservation Areas that are
to be preserved both during and after construction.
b. Installation of natural boundaries or demarcation markers to ensure the protection
of sensitive resources. Markers such as boulders, wooden fencing, and similar
features may be used for this purpose.
c. Proper selection, installation, and maintenance of erosion and sediment control
practices during construction activities.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 166 of 265
d. Fencing used to protect trees during construction activities installed minimally to
the drip line of the tree(s).
e. The recording of any easements or covenants required for the long term
maintenance of any access ways or open space as described in Section 16F.G.
f. To keep storm water run-off from any parcel on such parcel to the fullest extent
reasonably practical, employing low impact development techniques when
practicable.
2. Streets shall be designed and located in such a manner as to maintain and preserve
natural topography, significant landmarks, and trees; to minimize cut and fill, to
handle storm water run-off (if any) through low impact design techniques, and to
preserve and enhance views and vistas on or off the subject parcel.
3. Dwellings shall be oriented and placed on lots in such a manner so as to promote
visual interest, while preserving the neighborhood streetscape, if applicable.
4. The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state, insofar as practicable, by
minimizing tree and soil removal. Any grade changes shall be in keeping with the
general appearance of the neighboring developed areas. The orientation of individual
building sites shall be such as to maintain maximum natural topography and cover.
5. All open space shall be set aside and/or designed to add to the visual amenities of the
area through the siting of houses, the creation of “no-cut” buffers, low impact trail
design, or other similar methods.
6. Open space parcels with public access shall have physical and legal access from a
street of not less than 20 feet in width. Such access shall be demarcated by stone
bounds to distinguish between the edge of the public access and amenities from
private property.
7. The removal or disruption of historic, traditional or significant uses, structures, or
architectural elements shall be minimized insofar as practicable, whether these exist
on the site or on adjacent properties.
8. Exterior lighting shall be only as needed to accomplish safety and design objectives
and shall be arranged so as to minimize the impact on neighboring properties.
9. Shared driveways may be constructed to access a maximum of three (3) residences
and shall comply with the following standards:
a. Shared driveways shall have a minimum surface width of sixteen (16) feet along
that portion that is shared by more than one residence.
b. No shared driveway shall be connected or attached to any other driveway, nor
shall any common driveway be extended without prior approval of the Planning
Board.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 167 of 265
c. Shared driveways shall be located within an easement which may allow space for
installation of water lines and utilities as needed.
d. Shared driveways shall not exceed three hundred (300) feet in length, measured
from the street line to the end of the shared portion of the driveway.
e. To provide better traffic safety and reduce the visual impacts of traffic on abutting
properties, the Planning Board may require shared driveways to be set back from
lot lines and/or screened with a buffer of trees and/or shrubs.
f. Sight distances at the entrance of a shared driveway along the intersecting road
shall be at least one hundred (100) feet along the intersected roadway or as far as
the next intersection, whichever distance is shorter.
E. Design Process
At the time of the application for NRP Development, applicants shall demonstrate to the
Planning Board that the following design process was performed, in the order so
prescribed, by a Multidisciplinary team of qualified professionals to determine the layout
of proposed streets, house lots, including designation of all common areas and open
space.
1. Identifying Conservation Resources. Identify Primary and Secondary Conservation
Areas. The Potentially Developable Area of the site shall consist of land outside
identified Primary Conservation Areas to the extent required by this Section, and
outside the Secondary Conservation Areas to the fullest extent practicable.
2. Locating House Sites. Locate the approximate sites of individual houses within the
Potentially Developable Area and include the delineation of private yards and shared
amenities, so as to reflect an integrated community within the subdivision.
3. Locating Streets and Trails. Layout streets in order to access the house lots. Trails
should be laid out to create internal and external connections to existing and/or
potential future streets, sidewalks, and trails.
4. Lot Lines. Draw in the lot lines using assumed lot lines if the ownership is in
condominium, cooperative or other similar form of common ownership.
F. Allowable Design Flexibility
Dimensional Requirements. To facilitate the design process provided in Section 16F.E.
above, the following housing and dimensional standards shall apply to NRP
Development.
1. Housing Types. Only detached single family homes are allowed in NRP
Development.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 168 of 265
2. Lot Dimension. To facilitate the design process provided in Section 16F.E. above, the
following housing and dimensional standards shall apply to NRP Development.
Table 1.
SINGLE RESIDENCE DISTRICT
Area Regulation District 10,000 s.f. 15,000 s.f. 20,000 s.f 30,000 s.f. 40,000 s.f.
Minimum Lot Size 7,500 s.f. 7,500 s.f. 10,000 s.f. 15,000 s.f. 20,000 s.f.
Minimum Frontage 50 ft. 50 ft. 75 ft. 100 ft. 100 ft.
Minimum Front Yard
Width
50 ft. 50 ft. 75 ft. 100 ft. 100 ft.
Minimum Front Yard
Depth (Setback)
30 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft.
Minimum Side Yard
Width
15 ft. 15 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 25 ft.
Minimum Rear Yard
Depth
15 ft. 15 ft. 20 ft. 25 ft. 30 ft.
3. Frontage and Setbacks. Lots having reduced area shall not have frontage on a street
other than a street within the NRP Development.
4. Accessory Structures. Detached accessory structures over 100 square feet shall have a
minimum side yard and rear yard setback of fifteen (15) feet.
G. Open Space
1. Minimum Open Space Requirement. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the site
shall be protected open space. The percentage of this open space that may include
wetland shall not exceed the percentage of wetland of the entire site under existing
conditions.
2. Contiguous Open Space. Preserved open space shall be contiguous to the greatest
extent practicable. Where noncontiguous pockets of open space are preferable to
protect conservation areas, applicants shall attempt to connect these resources area to
the greatest extent practicable through the use of trails and/or vegetated corridors.
Open space will still be considered contiguous if it is separated by a shared driveway,
roadway, or an accessory amenity (such as a barn, paved pathway or trail, or shed for
the storage of recreational equipment).
3. Restrictions on Open Space. Any land required to be set aside as open space shall be
permanently protected pursuant to Article 97 of the Articles of Amendment to the
Constitution of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or a perpetual restriction under
M.G.L. Chapter 184 Section 31-33. Unless conveyed to the Natural Resources
Commission, the required open space shall be subject to a permanent Conservation,
Watershed, or Agricultural Preservation Restriction conforming to the standards of
the Massachusetts Executive Office of Environmental Affairs, Division of
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 169 of 265
Conservation Services, or Department of Agricultural Resources in accordance with
M.G.L. Chapter. 184 Section 31-33, approved by the Planning Board and the Board
of Selectmen and held by the Town of Wellesley, the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, or a non-profit conservation organization qualified to hold conservation
restrictions under M.G.L. Chapter 184, Section 31-33.
The restriction shall specify the prohibited and permitted uses of the restricted land,
which would otherwise constitute impermissible development or use of the open
space, consistent with the Allowable Use of the Open Space Subsection of this bylaw
and any permits. The restriction may permit, but the Planning Board may not require,
public access or access by residents of the development to the protected land.
4. Allowable Use of the Open Space. Open space used to satisfy the minimum open
space requirement shall be perpetually kept in an open state, preserved exclusively for
the purposes set forth herein and in the deed and/or in the restriction, and maintained
in a manner which will ensure its suitability for its intended purposes. Proposed use(s)
of the open space consistent with this Section shall be specified in the application. At
the applicant’s discretion, conservation restrictions may be placed on open space
beyond the minimum amount required by this bylaw.
a. The open space may be used for wildlife habitat, conservation, historic or cultural
resource preservation, outdoor education, active or passive recreation, community
gardens, or a combination of these uses, and shall be served by suitable access for
such purposes.
b. Open space may include paved and/or developed areas to be paved or built upon
(preferably, and to the fullest extent possible, using permeable pavement and
other means of retaining natural hydrology) for structures accessory to the
dedicated use or uses of such open space (e.g., parking to facilitate public access
for passive recreation, informational kiosks, pedestrian walks, ADA access
features, and bike paths) so long as the conservation values of the open space are
not compromised.
c. Open space may include vegetated storm water management practices including
swales, rain gardens, bio-retention facilities and constructed wetlands.
5. Ownership of the Open Space. At the Planning Board’s determination, the open space
may be owned by:
a. A private owner for agricultural, horticultural, forestry or any other purpose not
inconsistent with the conservation restriction;
b. A non-profit organization or agency of the Commonwealth, with their consent,
whose principal purpose is the conservation of open space for any of the purposes
set forth herein;
c. The Natural Resources Commission; or
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 170 of 265
d. A homeowners association (HOA) as defined herein owned jointly or in common
by the owners of lots or units within the project. If a HOA is selected as the
means of ownership, the following shall apply:
i. The documents organizing the HOA shall be drafted and approved by the
Planning Board before final approval of the NRP Development, recorded
prior to the issuance of building permits, comply with all applicable
provisions of state law, and pass with conveyance of the lots or units in
perpetuity. Each individual deed, and the deed, trust, or articles of
incorporation, shall include language designed to effect these provisions.
ii. Membership must be mandatory for each property owner, who must be
required by recorded covenants and restrictions to pay fees to the HOA for
taxes, insurance, and maintenance of common open space, private roads, and
other common facilities.
iii. The HOA must be responsible in perpetuity for liability insurance, property
taxes, the maintenance of recreational and other facilities, private roads, and
any shared driveways.
iv. The assessment levied by the HOA must be able to become a lien upon
individual properties within the development.
v. The HOA must be able to adjust the assessment to meet changed needs.
vi. The applicant shall make a conditional grant to the Town, binding upon the
HOA, of the fee interest to all open space to be conveyed to the HOA. Such
offer may be accepted by the Town at the discretion of the Board of
Selectmen, upon the failure of the HOA to take title to the open space from
the applicant or other current owner, upon dissolution of the association at any
future time, or upon failure of the HOA to fulfill its maintenance obligations
hereunder or to pay its real property taxes.
vii. Ownership shall be structured in such a manner that real property taxing
authorities may satisfy property tax claims against the open space lands by
proceeding against individual property owners in the HOA and the dwelling
units they each own.
viii. The Town of Wellesley legal counsel must find that the HOA documents
presented satisfy the conditions above, and such other conditions as the
Planning Board shall deem necessary.
e. Selection of an ownership option other than the Natural Resources Commission
shall require the following:
i. The conveyance of a conservation restriction as outlined herein; and
ii. The granting of an access easement over such land sufficient to ensure its
perpetual maintenance as specified in the conservation easement. Such
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 171 of 265
easement shall provide that in the event the trust or other owner fails to
maintain the open space in reasonable condition, the Town of Wellesley
may, after notice to the lot owners and public hearing, enter upon such land
to maintain it in order to prevent or abate a nuisance. The cost of such
maintenance by the Town shall be assessed against the properties within the
development and/or to the owner of the open space. Pursuant to G.L.
Chapter 40 Section 58, the Town may file a lien against the lot or lots to
ensure payment for such maintenance. Pursuant to G.L. Chapter 40 Section
57, the Town may also deny any application for, or revoke or suspend a
building permit or any local license or permit, due to neglect or refusal by
any property owner to pay any maintenance assessments levied.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 172 of 265
Editor’s Note: Page intentionally left blank
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 173 of 265
SECTION 16G. OUTDOOR LIGHTING
A. Title
The Section shall hereafter be known and cited as the “Town of Wellesley Outdoor
Lighting Bylaw” or “Outdoor Lighting Bylaw.”
B. Purpose and Intent
The purpose of this Section is to enhance public safety by providing for adequate and
appropriate outdoor lighting, protect community character, promote energy conservation,
protect against light trespass and glare, protect the privacy of residents, and minimize sky
glow.
C. Definitions
Cutoff Angle - The angle formed by a line
drawn from the direction of the direct light
rays at the light source with respect to the
vertical, beyond which no direct light is
emitted. (See Figure 1 for examples of
Cutoff Angle)
Direct Light - Light emitted from the
lamp, off the reflector or reflector diffuser
or through the refractor or diffuser lens, of
a luminaire.
Fixture - The assembly that houses a lamp
or lamps and which may include a
housing, a mounting bracket or pole
socket, a lamp holder, a ballast, a reflector
or mirror, and/or a refractor, lens, or
diffuser lens.
Foot-candle - A unit that measures light
illumination on a surface or area that is
one foot from a uniform point source.
Fully Shielded Luminaire - A lamp and
fixture assembly designed with a cutoff
angle of 90 degrees or less so that no
direct light is emitted above a horizontal plane. (See Figure 2 for examples for Fully
Shielded Luminaires that would be acceptable and permitted under this Section, or would
be unacceptable/discouraged and therefore prohibited under this Section)
Glare - Light emitted from a luminaire with an intensity great enough to produce
annoyance, discomfort, or a reduction in a viewer’s ability to see.
Figure 1 - Examples of Cutoff Angle
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 174 of 265
Height of Luminaire - The vertical distance from the finished grade of the ground directly
below to the lowest direct-light-emitting part of the luminaire.
Illuminance - The luminous flux per unit area at any point on a surface exposed to
incident light. Measured in foot-candles or lux.
Lamp - The component of a luminaire that produces the actual light.
Light Trespass - The shining or spillage of direct light produced by a luminaire beyond
the boundaries of the lot or parcel on which the luminaire it is located, or beyond the
boundaries of multiple lots or parcels under common ownership.
Lumen - A unit that measures light energy generated by a light source. For the purposes
of this Section, the lumen output shall be the initial lumen output of a lamp, as rated by
the manufacturer.
Luminance - The intensity of light emitted from a surface per unit area in a given
direction; measured in candela per meter squared (cd/m2).
Luminaire - A complete lighting system, including a lamp or lamps and a fixture.
Lux - A unit that measures light illumination on a surface or area that is one meter from a
uniform point source. On a photometric plan, the lux measurement is often converted
from meters to feet and referred to in terms of foot-candles.
Sky Glow - The diffuse luminance of the night sky derived from artificial lighting, apart
from discrete natural light sources such as the Moon and stars. It is the most commonly
noticed aspect of light pollution.
D. Applicability
The provisions of this Section shall apply to the following project types which include the
proposed installation of one or more outdoor luminaires for exterior lighting:
1. Major Construction Projects and Minor Construction Projects, as defined by Section
16A; and
2. Externally illuminated signs requiring Design Review and/or a Special Permit, as
required and defined by Section 22A.
Where these regulations are more specific and/or more restrictive with respect to lighting
associated with an applicable project type for which other standards may exist within the
Zoning Bylaw, the regulations contained in this Section shall take precedence.
The provisions of this Section shall not apply to one-family or two family dwellings, or
structures and uses accessory to such dwellings.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 175 of 265
The provisions of this Section shall not apply to the ordinary maintenance, repair, and/or
replacement of luminaires not approved as part of and/or associated with one or more of
the aforementioned project types; furthermore, the provisions of this Section shall not
apply to the installation of new luminaires on properties not subject to one or more of the
aforementioned project types following the effective date of this Section.
E. Administration
For the project types subject to the provisions of this Section, the following information
shall be submitted, except to the extent as such information may be waived by the Design
Review Board or Zoning Board of Appeals, as applicable:
1. Information identifying the location, orientation, height, and type of outdoor
luminaires to be installed;
2. The luminaire manufacturer’s specification data, including, at a minimum, lamp type
(light emitting diode, metal halide, compact fluorescent, high pressure sodium),
lumen output, correlated color temperature (“CCT”), and photometric data showing
light distribution and polar plots;
3. A photometric plan showing the intensity of illumination expressed in foot-candles
and/or lux at ground level within the interior of the property and at the property
boundaries, except that such plans shall not be required for externally illuminated
signs; and
4. Sufficient evidence to confirm that all proposed outdoor luminaires and lighting
conditions comply with Section 16G.F.
F. General Regulations
All exterior luminaires and/or the outdoor lighting conditions associated with the project
types subject to the provisions of this Section, shall comply with the following
regulations, unless otherwise specified:
1. All luminaires shall be fully shielded. (See Figure 2 for examples for Fully Shielded
Luminaires that would be Acceptable and permitted under this Section, or would be
unacceptable and therefore prohibited under this Section)
2. For residential uses, the correlated color temperature (“CCT”) of any lamp shall not
exceed 2,700K; for all other uses, the CCT of any lamp shall not exceed 3,000K.
3. Building-Mounted Fixtures: Luminaires attached to the exterior of a building or
structure, including those to light signs, shall be mounted no higher than fifteen (15)
feet above grade.
4. Ground-Mounted Fixtures: Luminaires mounted on the ground, including on poles or
attached to Ground Signs, shall have a height no greater than twenty (20) feet.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 176 of 265
5. Illuminance Levels and Light Trespass Limitations: Exterior lighting shall not exceed
the illuminance levels (measured horizontally on the ground) or exceed the light
trespass limits
specified
below in Table
16G.1; Table
16G.1 shall not
apply to
externally
illuminated
signs;
however,
luminaires
associated with
such signs
shall not have
lamps which
produce more
than 60 watts
and/or 800-900
lumens.
Figure 2 - Examples of Non-Shielded (unacceptable)
and Fully Shielded (acceptable) Luminaires
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 177 of 265
TABLE 16G.1, LIGHTING LEVELS AND LIGHT TRESPASS LIMITATIONS
Use
Maximum Illuminance
(foot-candles/lux)
Maximum Light
Trespass*
(foot-candles/lux)
Residential Uses 5/50 0.5/5
Outdoor Recreation and Sports
Facilities**
75/800
1.0/10
All Other Uses 10/100
*The maximum foot-candles/lux allowable at all property lines, including property lines
along a public or private street or way, except property lines between lots under common
ownership.
**To include fields and venues for sporting events, games, and matches, such as tennis
courts, and fields for baseball and soccer; not applicable to passive recreation areas, such
as walking paths, or natural areas that may be used for recreation, such as skating ponds.
G. Exempt and Prohibited
1. Exempt: The following luminaires or lighting conditions shall be exempt from
regulation under this Section:
a. Luminaires associated with emergency call boxes;
b. Luminaires located greater than 1,000 feet from a property line not in common
ownership; and
c. Seasonal lighting of a temporary nature.
2. Prohibited: Unless exempt above, the following luminaires or lighting conditions
shall be prohibited in conjunction with the project types identified in subsection D. of
this Section:
a. Luminaires mounted to or otherwise attached to any trees or similar vegetation;
and
b. Searchlights for commercial purposes.
H. Special Permits
1. Special Permits, Generally: In the case of such projects which incorporate one more
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 178 of 265
outdoor luminaires not meeting the requirements of Section 16G.F. or not otherwise
exempt, the Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a Special Permit, per Section 25.
2. Standards: In addition to those standards specified in Section 25, in considering the
issuance of a Special Permit from the requirements of this Section, the applicable
Special Permit Granting Authority shall make a finding that one or more of the
following conditions are met:
a. The proposed lighting is necessary to enhance public safety;
b. The proposed lighting enhances, or does not negatively impact, community
ambiance and character;
c. The proposed lighting does not produce unacceptable light trespass, glare, sky
glow, or compromise the privacy of abutting property owners; or
d. The proposed lighting is necessary for recreational or athletic activities conducted
on land used for municipal or educational uses.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 179 of 265
SECTION 17. PRE-EXISTING NON-CONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS
The rights concerning pre-existing non-conforming uses, structures and lots shall be as set forth
in Section 6 of Chapter 40A M.G.L. (The Zoning Act) and as otherwise defined in this Section
17.
A. Discontinued Uses
Except for the repair and reconstruction rights of an owner under Section 17.C. below,
non-conforming uses and/or structures abandoned or not used for a period of more than
two (2) years shall be subject to all provisions of this Zoning Bylaw.
B. Changes to Non-Conforming Structures
1. One and Two-Family Dwellings.
Application for changes to non-conforming One and Two-Family Dwellings, except
changes which themselves comply with this Zoning Bylaw, shall require the Zoning
Board of Appeals to identify the particular respect or respects in which the existing
structure does not conform to the requirements of the present Zoning Bylaws and then
determine whether the proposed alteration or addition would intensify the existing
non-conformities or result in additional ones.
Should the Zoning Board of Appeals conclude that there will be no intensification or
addition, the applicant will be entitled to the issuance of a permit.
If the conclusion is otherwise, the applicant will be required to show that the change
will not be substantially more detrimental than the existing non-conforming structure
or use to the neighborhood.
Should the Zoning Board of Appeals find that such change will not be substantially
more detrimental than the existing non-conforming structure or use to the
neighborhood, the applicant will be entitled to the issuance of a permit.
2. Other than One and Two-Family Dwellings.
Application for changes to non-conforming structures other than One and Two-
Family Dwellings shall be governed by Section 6 of Chapter 40A M.G.L. (The
Zoning Act).
Findings referred to in this Section 17 shall be made by the Zoning Board of Appeals
acting as Special Permit Granting Authority under the provisions of Section 25.
C. Disaster Rebuild
Pre-existing non-conforming buildings, damaged or destroyed by accidental cause, including
fire, or otherwise damaged or destroyed without the consent of the owner, may be repaired or
reconstructed, provided that:
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 180 of 265
1. the non-conforming nature of the repaired or reconstructed building is not increased
in any respect;
2. the repaired or reconstructed building shall be used in the same manner as the
building being replaced or otherwise used in compliance with the use limitations of
the applicable zoning district; and
3. a building permit for the repair or reconstruction shall be issued within two years
from the date of the damage or destruction; time incurred in resolving an appeal or
other court action or insurance claim shall not be counted as part of the two year
limit; the Zoning Board of Appeals may extend the two year period for good cause.
D. Conformance with Subsequent Amendments
Construction or uses under a building or special permit shall conform to any subsequent
amendment of this Zoning Bylaw unless the construction or use is commenced within a
period of not more than six months after the issuance of the permit and in cases involving
construction, unless such construction is continued through to completion as continuously
and expeditiously as is reasonable.
Except as herein above provided, a pre-existing non-conforming structure shall not be
altered, extended, repaired or reconstructed except in conformity with all provisions of
the Zoning Bylaws in effect at the time of such alteration, extension, repair or
reconstruction.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 181 of 265
SECTION 18. AREA REGULATIONS
(Editor’s Note: Section XVIII updated 1/9/14 to reflect amendments adopted under Article 28 and
Article 30 at 2013 ATM)
For the purposes of this Section, the Town of Wellesley is hereby divided into classes of area
regulation districts as shown on the "Zoning Map of the Town of Wellesley, Massachusetts",
prepared under the direction of the Planning Board, Scale 1" = 500', dated December 20, 2002,
as amended, on file with the Town Clerk, which map together with all the boundary lines and
designations thereon relating to such area regulations is hereby incorporated as part of this
Section.
The classes of area regulation districts are respectively as indicated on said map:
1. Ten Thousand Foot Districts;
2. Fifteen Thousand Foot Districts;
3. Twenty Thousand Foot Districts;
4. Thirty Thousand Foot Districts;
5. Forty Thousand Foot Districts.
A. Dwelling and Club House Lots.
In Single Residence Districts, Single Residence Districts A, General Residence Districts,
General Residence Districts A, Limited Residence Districts, Educational Districts,
Educational Districts A, Educational Districts B, Administrative and Professional
Districts and Limited Business Districts, there shall be provided for each dwelling or club
house, hereafter constructed, a lot containing not less than 10,000 square feet, 15,000
square feet, 20,000 square feet, 30,000 square feet, or 40,000 square feet according to the
area requirement of the area regulation district in which such dwelling or club house is
situated, and hereafter, no dwelling or club house shall be erected or placed on a lot
containing less than such minimum area. In Business or Industrial Districts or in
Business Districts A or Industrial Districts A, there shall be provided for each dwelling
(including apartment houses and apartment hotels) or club house hereafter constructed or
placed, a lot containing not less than 10,000 square feet.
Nothing contained in this Section shall prevent the construction or placing of any such
building on any lot (1) in any of said Ten Thousand Foot, Fifteen Thousand Foot and
Twenty Thousand Foot Districts containing a smaller area, if such lot on the effective
date of the applicable provisions of this Zoning Bylaw originally establishing such
districts did not adjoin other land of the same owner available for use in connection with
said lot, (2) in any said Thirty Thousand Foot and Forty Thousand Foot Districts
containing a smaller area, if such lot on May 1, 1953 did not adjoin other land of the
same owner available for use in connection with said lot, or (3) in any Business or
Industrial Districts or in Business Districts A or Industrial Districts A containing less than
10,000 square feet, if such lot on May 1, 1941 did not adjoin other land of the same
owner available for use in connection with said lot.
This Section shall not apply to the lots shown on the subdivision plans approved by the
Planning Board pursuant to the General Laws, Chapter 41, as amended, prior to May 1,
1953.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 182 of 265
No lot on which a dwelling or club house is situated, whether heretofore or hereafter
placed, shall be reduced in area, if such lot is smaller than is hereby prescribed, or if by
such reduction it would be made smaller than is hereby prescribed, except in either case
by taking by eminent domain or by a conveyance for a public purpose.
B. Ratio of Building to Lot Area.
In Single Residence and General Residence Districts, Single Residence Districts A, and
General Residence Districts A, no building or addition to any building shall hereafter be
placed on any lot of land which will result in the covering by buildings of more than the
following specified maximum percentages of the area of such lot or maximum building
coverage expressed in square feet:
For lots containing less than 10,000 square feet - 25 percent;
For lots containing at least 10,000 square feet but less than 20,000 square feet – the
greater of 20 percent or 2,500 square feet;
For lots containing at least 20,000 square feet but less than 40,000 square feet – the
greater of 18 percent or 4,000 square feet – but not more than 6,000 square feet; and
For lots containing at least 40,000 square feet - 15 percent;
In Educational Districts B, Limited Residence Districts, Limited Business Districts and
Administrative and Professional Districts no building or addition to any building shall be
placed on any lot of land which will result in the covering by buildings of more than
(20%) of the area of such lot, provided, however, that if the only buildings at any time on
a lot in any such district are those permitted by Section 6.1., Section 8A.1., Section 9.1.,
or Section10.1., then the limitations aforesaid shall be (25%) in lieu of (20%). In
Educational, Business or Industrial Districts or in Educational Districts A, Educational
Districts B, Business Districts A, or Industrial Districts A, no dwelling (including
apartment houses and apartment hotels) or club house shall hereafter be erected or placed
on any lot of land which will result in the covering by buildings of more than (25%) of
the area of such lot.
C. Ratio of Families to Lot Area.
1. In General Residence Districts and General Residence Districts A there shall be
provided for each dwelling hereafter constructed or placed therein a lot containing not
less than 5,000 square feet for each family for whose habitation such building is
designed or adapted or the minimum area required for lots in the area regulation
district in which the building is located, whichever is greater.
Except that town houses may be constructed at a ratio in accordance with and subject
to the provisions of Section 4.A.3.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 183 of 265
2. In Educational, Business and Industrial Districts and in Educational Districts A,
Educational Districts B, Lower Falls Village Commercial Districts, Wellesley Square
Commercial District, Business Districts A and Industrial Districts A there shall be
provided for each apartment house, apartment hotel, hotel, inn or town house,
hereafter constructed or placed therein a lot containing not less than 2,500 square feet
for each family for whose habitation such building is designed or adapted or the
minimum area required for lots in the area regulation district in which the building is
located, whichever is greater.
3. In the Wellesley Square Commercial District, the 2,500 square foot minimum lot area
requirement per family for whose habitation such building is designed, set forth in
Section 18.C.2 above, may be reduced to no less than 1,800 square feet for each
family for whose habitation such building is designed or adapted subject to the terms
of a special permit granted by the Planning Board, acting as the Special Permit
Granting Authority, in accordance with the following performance standards:
a. A report shall have been received from the Design Review Board finding the
proposed project is consistent with the design criteria listed in Section 22 and that
the project is an improvement of building facades to enhance the pedestrian
experience and contribute toward the history and vitality of Wellesley Square; and
b. All whole Assisted Units required to comply with Section 16B (excepting any
fractional Assisted Unit) are to be constructed on the Development Area; and
c. There shall be provided for each project a minimum open space, as defined under
Section 1B, equal to at least twenty percent (20%) of the Development Area; and
d. There shall be provided for each unit parking for two vehicles.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 184 of 265
Editor’s Note: Page intentionally left blank
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 185 of 265
SECTION 19. YARD REGULATIONS
A. Definitions
Front Yard - An area, on the same lot with the building, measured from the street line to
the building extending across the entire front of the lot, and unoccupied above ground
level except by uncovered steps, eaves projecting not more than 2 feet from the wall of
the building, bay windows that do not have a foundation and do not extend more than two
feet from the wall of the building and a covered or uncovered, enclosed or unenclosed,
entrance porch on the first floor which neither exceeds a total area of 50 square feet nor
projects more than five feet from the face of the building nor extends nearer than 25 feet
to the street line.
Side Yard - An area, on the same lot with the building, measured from the side line of the
lot to the building, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, and unoccupied above
ground level except by covered basement entrances not over four feet in height and not
over 35 square feet in area, bay windows that do not have a foundation and do not extend
more than two feet from the wall of the building, uncovered steps, eaves projecting not
more than 2 feet from the wall of the building, attached chimneys projecting not more
than 2 feet from the wall of the building and unenclosed, covered or uncovered stair
landings not over 25 square feet in area.
Rear Yard - An area, on the same lot with the building, measured from the rear line of the
lot to the building, extending the full width of the lot, and unoccupied above ground level
except by covered basement entrances not over four feet in height and not over 35 square
feet in area, bay windows that do not have a foundation and do not extend more than two
feet from the wall of the building, uncovered steps, eaves projecting not more than 2 feet
from the wall of the building, covered or uncovered, enclosed or unenclosed, entrance
porches on the first floor which do not exceed a total area of 50 square feet, attached
chimneys projecting not more than 2 feet from the wall of the building and stair landings
not over 25 square feet in area.
Frontage - A lot boundary line which abuts a public way; or
a way which the Town Clerk certifies is maintained and used as a public way; or
a way shown on a plan approved and endorsed in accordance with the Subdivision
Control Law; or
a way in existence when the Subdivision Control Law became effective in the
Town of Wellesley having, in the opinion of the Planning Board, sufficient width,
suitable grades and adequate construction to provide for the needs of vehicular
traffic in relation to the proposed use of land abutting thereon or served thereby,
and for the installation of municipal services to serve the land and the buildings
erected or to be erected thereon;
Certification of the adequacy of a way by the Planning Board shall be required
prior to the issuance of a building permit for:
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 186 of 265
Construction of a new one or two-family dwelling;
Reconstruction of a one or two-family dwelling in conjunction with
removal of 50% or more of the existing building coverage (footprint); or
Addition to a one or two-family dwelling where total building coverage
(footprint) would be increased by 50% or more.
and across which line there is legal access.
Build Factor - A ratio of lot perimeter to lot area which limits the degree to which a lot
may have an irregular shape according to the following formula:
Lot Perimeter Squared Actual Lot Area
Actual Lot Area Required Lot Area
B. Requirements
There shall be provided for every building or structure hereafter erected or placed upon a
lot at least the minimum frontage, minimum front yard width, minimum front yard depth
(setback), minimum side yard width and minimum rear yard depth requirements
hereinafter set forth; and there shall be not more than one dwelling erected on any lot.
Such minimum front yard width shall be provided for the entire depth of the front yard.
Provided, however, in the 10,000 and 15,000 square foot Area Regulation Districts, when
a rear yard of a lot abuts the side yard of the next lot the minimum rear yard depth shall
be not less than the minimum side yard depth.
Heating, ventilation, air conditioning, swimming pool, electric generating, or other noise
emitting equipment shall not be located in required setback areas. Plans and installation
of sound reduction and/or visual screening may be required if, in the opinion of the
Inspector of Buildings abutters may be affected.
Where the entrance of an attached or detached garage, built in conjunction with a onefamily
dwelling faces a property boundary line other than the street line there shall be a
minimum distance of 30 feet from the garage entrance to that line. The intent of this
requirement is to ensure adequate area for vehicles entering and exiting the garage.
Table 1 is applicable to lots recorded or endorsed on or before January 24, 1985 and to
lots in the 10,000 square foot Area Regulation District recorded or endorsed after January
24, 1985 and prior to January 19, 1989.
Table 2 is applicable to lots recorded or endorsed after January 24, 1985 and to lots in the
10,000 square foot Area Regulation District, recorded or endorsed on or after January 19,
1989 and prior to April 9, 1997.
Table 3 is applicable to lots recorded or endorsed on or after April 8, 1997.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 187 of 265
Lots recorded or endorsed after January 24, 1985 also shall be subject to a maximum
Build Factor of 20.
TABLE 1
District 10,000
sq. ft.
15,000
sq. ft.
20,000
sq. ft.
30,000
sq. ft.
40,000
sq. ft.
Minimum Frontage
60 ft.
60 ft.
60 ft.
60 ft.
60 ft.
Minimum Front
Yard Width
60 ft.
60 ft.
60 ft.
60. ft.
60 ft.
Minimum Front
Yard
Depth (Setback)
30 ft.*
30 ft.*
30 ft.*
30 ft.*
30 ft.*
Minimum Side Yard
Width
20 ft.
20 ft.
20 ft.
20 ft.
20 ft.
Minimum Rear Yard
Depth
10 ft.
15 ft.
20 ft.
20 ft.
20 ft.
Provided however, that a lot having its only frontage on a curved street line having a
sideline radius of less than 100 feet may have a reduced frontage upon the granting of a
special permit in accordance with Section 25, and provided that:
a. The minimum frontage shall be 50 ft.;
b. The minimum front yard width is maintained at the street setback line (house line),
and
c. All other dimensional zoning requirements are satisfied.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 188 of 265
TABLE 2
Area Regulation
District
10,000
sq. ft.
15,000
sq. ft.
20,000
sq. ft.
30,000
sq. ft.
40,000
sq. ft.
Minimum Frontage 75 ft. 80 ft. 100 ft. 120 ft. 140 ft.
Minimum Front
Yard Width
75 ft.
80 ft.
100 ft.
120 ft.
140 ft.
Minimum Front
Yard Depth (Street
Setback)
30 ft.*
30 ft.*
30 ft.*
40 ft.*
40 ft.*
Minimum Side Yard
Width (Side Line
Setback)
20 ft.
20 ft.
20 ft.
20 ft.
20 ft.
Minimum Rear Yard
Depth (Rear Line
Setback)
10 ft.
15 ft.
20 ft.
20 ft.
20 ft.
TABLE 3
Area Regulation
District
10,000
sq. ft.
15,000
sq. ft.
20,000
sq. ft.
30,000
sq. ft.
40,000
sq. ft.
Minimum Frontage 90 ft. 100 ft. 110 ft. 175 ft. 200 ft.
Minimum Front Yard
Width
90 ft.
100 ft.
110 ft.
175 ft.
200 ft.
Minimum Front Yard
Depth (Street
Setback)
30 ft.*
30 ft.*
35 ft.*
40 ft.*
40 ft.*
Minimum Side Yard
Width (Side Line
Setback)
20 ft.
20 ft.
20 ft.
30 ft.
40 ft.
Minimum Rear Yard
Depth (Rear Line
Setback)
18 ft.
20 ft.
20 ft.
30 ft.
40 ft.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 189 of 265
Provided however, that a lot having its only frontage on the curved sideline of a cul-desac
bulb having a sideline radius of less than 100 feet may have a reduced frontage
provided that:
a. The minimum frontage shall be 50 feet;
b. The minimum front yard width is maintained at the street setback line (house line);
c. The maximum number of lots with frontage exclusively on the bulb of any cul-de-sac
shall be three;
d. All other dimensional zoning requirements are satisfied.
*Where, on a frontage of 500 feet including the lot to be affected, or on a frontage
between two intersecting or entering streets if such frontage is less than 500 feet, all
existing buildings (if they are not less than three in number) have front yards of a depth
greater than 30 feet, the minimum depth thereof shall be the depth required.
This Section shall not apply to lots in districts zoned as Lower Falls Village Commercial,
Wellesley Square Commercial District, Business, Business A, Industrial, or Industrial A,
except for the requirements for front yards. In the Lower Falls Village Commercial
District and Wellesley Square Commercial District there shall be a minimum front yard
depth of 5 feet. The frontage requirements of this Section shall not apply to lots located in
a Residential Incentive Overlay District, regardless of whether or not the lot is developed
under the provisions of Section 14F. There shall be no front yard depth requirement for
property included in a Business District on April 1, 1939, and fronting on Washington
Street, Church Street, Central Street, Grove Street, Spring Street, Cross Street, or that part
of Weston Road between Central Street and Cross Street.
The requirements for side and rear yards shall apply to all accessory buildings over one
hundred square feet in area. For purposes of this Section, an accessory building shall
mean a detached subordinate building located on the same lot with the main building, the
use of which is customarily incidental to that of the main building or to the use of the
land. The requirements for front, side and rear yards shall not apply to the construction
or enlargement of dormers on pre-existing non-conforming dwellings provided that the
highest point of the existing roof is not exceeded and there is no further encroachment on
the lot lines.
For exemptions for pre-existing non-conforming lots refer to Section 17 of this Zoning
Bylaw.
C. General
No building or lot shall be so altered as to reduce the size of the then existing yard unless
the resulting yard complies with the requirements of this Section, except by taking by
eminent domain or by a conveyance for a public purpose.
No yard or other open space shall at any time be considered as appurtenant to more than
one building in computing the requirement for yards under this Bylaw.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 190 of 265
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or placed nearer than ten (10) feet to
any public land held or in use for a park, playground or recreational purpose and no
existing building or structure shall be so altered as to result in the said building or
structure being nearer than ten (10) feet to such public land.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 191 of 265
SECTION 20. HEIGHTS OF BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES
No building or structure, except one for religious or non-residential municipal purposes, or
excepting further, a building or structure in Limited Apartment Districts authorized by Section
6A.3., shall be constructed, enlarged or altered so as to exceed a height measured from the average
original grade or finished grade, whichever is lower, of the land surrounding the exterior walls to the
highest roofline, of forty-five (45) feet or three stories; however, building height shall be measured
from the average finished grade of the land surrounding the exterior walls to the highest roofline
for projects being developed under a Special Permit for a Project of Significant Impact issued
prior to March 1, 2010. Parapets, chimneys, flag poles, solar collectors or necessary projections
shall not be included in the measurement of height.
Provided, however, that single family, two family and town house buildings and additions thereto
erected pursuant to a building permit issued on or after November 5, 1996 and buildings or
additions thereto constructed in the Lower Falls Village Commercial District shall not exceed 36
feet in height as defined and restricted in this Section.
Provided further, however, that the height of residential buildings constructed under the
provisions of the Residential Incentive Overlay District shall be governed by the height
restrictions contained in Section 14F.
This Section shall not apply to the replacement, without substantial change or addition thereto, of
buildings in existence on May 1, 1949 which are thereafter destroyed or demolished.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 192 of 265
Editor’s Note: Page intentionally left blank
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 193 of 265
SECTION 21. OFF-STREET PARKING
A. Purpose
It is the intent of this Section that any use of land involving the arrival, departure, parking
or storage of motor vehicles upon such land be so designed and operated as to assure that
all structures and land uses shall have sufficient off-street automobile parking to meet the
needs of persons employed at, or making use of, such structures or land uses.
B. Definitions
As used herein the following words and phrases shall have and include the following
respective meanings:
Parking Space - An area exclusive of maneuvering area and driveway for the parking of
one motor vehicle.
Parking Area - An area either used or required for parking of five or more motor vehicles
not for sale or rental, including necessary maneuvering space, maneuvering aisle, and
driveway, but not including such areas on a lot used for one or two-family dwellings.
Storage Area - An area either used or required for the storage of motor vehicles held for
sale or rent.
Maneuvering Space - An area in a parking area which (1) is immediately adjacent to a
parking space, (2) is used for and/or is necessary for turning, backing, or driving forward
a motor vehicle into such parking space but (3) is not used for the parking or storage of
motor vehicles.
Maneuvering Aisle - A maneuvering space which serves two or more parking spaces,
such as the area between two rows of parking spaces.
Driveway - An area on a lot, in addition to parking and maneuvering spaces and aisles,
which is designed or used to provide for the passage of motor vehicles to and from a
street or way.
Motor Vehicle - Any vehicle for which registration is required in order to travel legally
on Massachusetts highways.
Use - The purpose for which land or buildings are employed, arranged, designed, or
intended, or for which either is occupied or maintained.
Service Area - An area used for maneuvering and/or temporary parking of motor vehicles
or storage containers employed in providing the pickup and delivery of goods and
services.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 194 of 265
C. Applicability
The following activities shall be subject to the requirements of this Section, and a Parking
Plan demonstrating compliance with this Section and submitted in accordance with
Section 21.E shall be required for any of these activities:
1. The erection, enlargement, or alteration of a building or structure for which a parking
area or storage area would be required by Section 21.D.2.;
2. The construction of a new parking area or storage area, or the enlargement or
alteration of an existing parking area or storage area; enlargement or alteration shall
include any installation, removal, or relocation of any curbing, landscaping islands,
traffic islands, or driveways, and any striping or restriping of pavement markings on
an existing parking area or storage area which alters the configuration of the parking
area or number of parking spaces; and
3. Any change in the use or uses of the structure or land that would require greater
parking requirements, as required by Section 21.D.2. from those applicable to the
former use(s) of said structure or land.
D. Regulations and Restrictions
1. General Provisions
The following general provisions shall apply:
a. No existing off-street parking spaces shall be eliminated by the replacement or
enlargement of an existing structure, unless replaced by spaces provided in
accordance with this Section;
b. No existing parking area or existing storage area shall be discontinued or altered
if the requirements of this Section would not thereafter be satisfied;
c. Enlargements or alterations to existing structures with less parking than is
required by this Section (unless such deficient parking was allowed by a Variance
or Special Permit) shall only be required to provide additional parking to
accommodate the additional use (e.g. based on the applicable square footage,
ground coverage, dwelling unit, guest room);
d. Changes in the use or uses of existing structures, or parts thereof, or of land, shall
require additional off-street parking spaces in accordance with the provisions of
this Section, but only to the extent of such change;
e. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the owner of a parking or storage
area from restricting the use thereof to his customers, employees, or other
invitees, nor from charging a reasonable fee for the use thereof; and
f. Areas required to be kept open and unoccupied by buildings or structures under
Section 18.C. and Section 19 may be used to satisfy the provisions of this Section.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 195 of 265
2. Required Parking
In all districts which require off-street parking in accordance with this Zoning Bylaw,
off-street parking shall be provided for uses (excluding public housing for the elderly)
according to Table 21.1, Off-Street Parking Requirements. The Table provides the
minimum number of parking spaces required for various uses in the zoning districts,
but is not intended to indicate the allowed uses in the districts.
Where two or more uses are conducted on a single lot, the minimum number of
required parking spaces shall be the sum of the requirements for the uses.
Table 21.1, Off-Street Parking Requirements
USE ZONING DISTRICT
MINIMUM NUMBER OF
PARKING SPACES
Apartment house,
apartment hotels.
Business Districts A,
Industrial Districts A.
One space for each apartment dwelling
unit contained in buildings.
Hotel, inn, lodging house,
restaurant or other eating
place.
Single Residence Districts
A, General Residence
Districts A, Limited
Residence Districts,
Business Districts A,
Industrial Districts A.
Either one space per two guest rooms or
one space for each 100 sq. ft.* of area in
which food is served, whichever is
greater.
Building used for
administrative, clerical,
statistical & professional
offices, and other similar
uses.
Administrative and
Professional Districts ***,
Limited Business Districts.
One space for 100 sq. ft.* of ground
coverage of buildings but not less than
3.2 & spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor
area of buildings.**
Hotel, motel, inn, restaurant
operated in conjunction with
such similar uses.
Limited Business Districts.
One space per guestroom and one space
for each 100 sq. ft.* of area in which
food is served.
Any building where the
principal use is motor
vehicle sales or service.
Business Districts A,
Industrial Districts A.
One space per employee and one space
per motor vehicle (not for sale or rental)
owned, operated or associated with the
establishment and one space per 100 sq.
ft.* of area occupied by buildings.
Apartment building or group
of buildings containing three
or more dwelling units.
Limited Residence
Districts.
One space on the lot for each dwelling
unit.
Apartment building or group
of buildings containing 20
or more dwelling units.
Limited Apartment
Districts.
1.5 spaces for each dwelling unit of two
bedrooms or less and two parking
spaces for each dwelling unit providing
three bedrooms or more.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 196 of 265
Table 21.1, Off-Street Parking Requirements
USE ZONING DISTRICT
MINIMUM NUMBER OF
PARKING SPACES
Any building used for any
business, industrial,
educational or commercial
purpose residential uses
accessory to an educational
use.
Educational Districts A,
Business Districts A,
Industrial Districts A.
One space for each 150 sq. ft.*
occupied by buildings but not less than
3.2 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area
of buildings.**
Any building used for
physical education or
physical recreation purpose.
Educational Districts B,
Business Districts A,
Industrial Districts A.
One space for every 3 permanent
spectator seats, which shall include
folding bleachers that are attached to
buildings, but not less than one space
per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area of
buildings.**
Any allowed use with or
without a special permit.
Lower Falls Village
Commercial District.
3.2 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft.* of first
floor area of buildings.** 2 spaces per
1,000 sq. ft.* of upper floor space in
excess of 4,000 sq. ft.** ****
Assisted Elderly Living,
Independent Elderly
Housing.
Residential Incentive
Overlay District.
0.65 spaces per dwelling unit.
Conventional Multi Family
Housing
Residential Incentive
Overlay District.
2 spaces per dwelling unit.
Nursing Home and/or
Skilled Nursing Facility.
Residential Incentive
Overlay District.
1 space for 5 nursing home beds.
Any building used for any
business, industrial,
educational or commercial
purpose.
Wellesley Square
Commercial District,
Business Districts,
Industrial Districts.
One space for each 150 sq. ft.* of
ground coverage of buildings but not
less than 3.2 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of
floor area of buildings.**
Town House
Town House,
General Residence,
General Residence A.
Two spaces on the lot for each dwelling
unit.
Any residential use
Linden Street Corridor
Overlay District
2.5 spaces per one, two or three
bedroom unit.
Any nonresidential use
Linden Street Corridor
Overlay District
5 spaces for each 1,000 square feet of
ground coverage of buildings*, but not
less than 3.2 spaces per 1,000 square
feet of floor area of buildings.**
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 197 of 265
Table 21.1, Off-Street Parking Requirements
USE ZONING DISTRICT
MINIMUM NUMBER OF
PARKING SPACES
For purposes of the above parking requirements, any increase in on-street parking spaces
included in a proposed Linden Street Corridor Overlay District Development Site at the
expense of the proponent shall be counted towards satisfaction of the off-street parking
requirement.
* Computed to the nearest ten square feet.
** Floor area shall be the sum of the horizontal areas of the several floors (including
basement) of a building to the nearest 100 square feet, except that such floor area as is
provided for deck parking or other in building parking shall be counted for required
parking space and not in figuring floor area for which parking must be provided. For the
purpose of computing the requirements, the area shall be measured from the exterior
surface of the exterior walls.
*** No parking facilities other than those for transient motor vehicles shall be located between
the principal building and the principal street line.
**** If any portion of a parcel is within 600 feet of any portion of a public parking area or
areas, having individually or jointly 50 or more parking spaces, off-street parking shall be
provided at a ratio of 2.5 spaces per 1,000 gross square feet of commercial floor area,
excluding uninhabitable basement areas.
3. Development Standards
Each parking area hereafter devoted to the off-street parking of fifteen (15) or more
vehicles regardless of whether said parking area is required by this Bylaw, shall
comply with the standards as hereinafter set forth:
Design
a. Parking spaces and maneuvering aisles shall have the minimum dimensions set
forth in the following table:
MINIMUM PARKING SPACE AND AISLE DIMENSIONS
FOR PARKING AREAS (in feet)
Angle of Parking
Width of Parking
Space
Depth of Parking
Space
Width of Maneuver
Aisle
61o - 90o 8'6" 18' 24'
46o - 60o 8'6" 18' 18'
45o 8'6" 18' 15'
Parallel 8'0" 22' 12'
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 198 of 265
Parking spaces for the exclusive use of handicapped individuals shall be provided
in accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the Architectural Barriers Board.
Provided however, that compact car spaces having the minimum dimensions set
forth in the following table may be used to satisfy up to a maximum of 30% of the
off-street parking spaces required. Such spaces shall be designated for "Compact
Cars Only" by signs or pavement markings.
MINIMUM PARKING SPACE AND AISLE DIMENSIONS
FOR PARKING AREAS (in feet) DEVOTED TO COMPACT CARS
Angle of Parking
Width of Parking
Space
Depth of Parking
Space
Width of Maneuver
Aisle
61o - 90o 7'6" 15' 24'
46o - 60o 7'6" 15' 18'
45o 7'6" 15' 15'
Parallel 7'0" 19' 12'
b. The number of driveways permitting entrance to and for exit from a lot shall be
limited to two per street line. Driveways shall be located so as to minimize
conflict with traffic on public streets and where good visibility and sight distances
are available to observe approaching pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
c. The width of a driveway for one-way traffic shall be not less than twelve (12) feet
as measured at its narrowest point. The width of a driveway for two-way use
shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) feet and a maximum of twenty-four (24) feet,
as measured at its narrowest point.
d. All parking areas shall be so arranged and designed that the only means of access
and egress to and from such areas shall be by driveways meeting the requirements
of this Section.
e. Driveways shall be arranged for the free flow of vehicles at all times, and all
maneuvering spaces and aisles shall be so designated that all vehicles may exit
from and enter into a public street by being driven in a forward direction.
f. On any parking area in any District, all paved portions of all parking spaces and
maneuvering aisles shall be set back five (5) feet from any wall of a building, and
five (5) feet from any private or public way, or any lot line of any land in
residential districts or used for residential, conservation or park purposes.
g. Each required off-street parking space shall be designed so that any motor vehicle
may proceed to and from said space without requiring the moving of any other
vehicle or by passing over any other parking space, except where the parking area
is attended or limited to employees.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 199 of 265
Construction
a. All required parking spaces, maneuvering aisles, and driveways shall have a
durable, dustless, all-weather surface, such as bituminous concrete or cement
concrete, and shall provide for a satisfactory disposal of surface water by grading
and drainage in such a manner that no surface water shall drain onto any public
way or onto any lot in other ownership and such surfaces shall be well
maintained.
b. Parking areas in all Districts shall be provided with curbing, wheel stops, or other
devices to prevent motor vehicles from being parked or driven within required
setback areas or onto the required landscaped open space.
c. In any parking area the surface shall be painted, marked or otherwise delineated
so that each parking space is apparent.
Landscaping
a. For an outdoor parking area containing twenty (20) or more parking spaces, there
shall be planted at least one tree for every ten (10) parking spaces on any side of
the perimeter of such parking area that abuts the side line of a private or public
way, or abuts the lot line of land in residential districts or land used for residential
purposes.
b. In any outdoor parking area a landscaped open space having an area of not less
than 10% of the outdoor parking area on the lot shall be provided. A minimum of
one half of the required landscaped open space shall be located in the interior of
the parking area.
c. Trees required by the provisions of this Section shall be at least two (2) inches in
diameter at a height of five (5) feet at the time of planting and shall be of a species
characterized by rapid growth and by suitability and hardiness for location in a
parking lot. To the extent practicable, existing trees shall be retained and used to
satisfy the provisions of this Section.
Screening
Any parking, storage or service area which abuts residential districts or uses shall be
screened from such residential districts or uses and any parking area shall be screened
from a public or private way in accordance with the following requirements:
a. Materials - plant materials characterized by dense growth which will form an
effective year-round screen shall be planted, or a fence or a wall shall be
constructed, to form the screen. Where a grill or open-work fence or wall is used
it shall be suitable in appearance and materials. Screening may consist of both
natural and man-made materials. To the extent practicable, existing trees shall be
retained and used to satisfy the provisions of this Section.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 200 of 265
b. Height - screening shall be at least five (5) feet in height. Plant materials when
planted, may be not less than 3 1/2 feet in height if of a species or variety which
shall attain the required height and width within three (3) years of planting.
Height shall be measured from the finished grade.
c. Width - screening shall be in a strip of landscaped open space at least five (5) feet
wide, and so located as not to conflict with any corner visibility requirements or
any other Bylaws of the Town.
d. Maintenance - all required plant materials shall be maintained in a healthy
condition and whenever necessary replaced with new plant materials to insure
continued compliance with screening requirements. All required fences and walls
shall be permanently maintained in good repair and presentable appearance and
whenever necessary they shall be repaired or replaced.
e. Lighting - all artificial lighting used to illuminate a parking or storage area,
maneuvering space or driveway shall be arranged and shielded so as to prevent
direct glare from the light source into any public street or private way or onto
adjacent property.
E. Administration
1. Permits
Any application for a permit for the activities listed in Section 21.C. shall be
accompanied by a Parking Plan showing compliance with the requirements of this
Section. For activities that constitute a Major Construction Project or Project of
Significant Impact as defined by Section 16A.B.1., the required Parking Plan shall be
submitted to the Zoning Board of Appeals for review. The Zoning Board of Appeals
shall grant a Parking Plan Permit if the requirements of this Section are satisfied. For
all other activities, the required Parking Plan shall be submitted to the Building
Inspector. The Building Inspector shall grant a Parking Plan Permit if the
requirements of this Section are satisfied. If the Building Inspector or Zoning Board
of Appeals, as applicable, determines that the Plan is not in compliance with this
Section, they shall deny the application setting forth their grounds for denial in
writing.
A Parking Plan shall include:
a. The quantity, location, and dimensions of all driveways, maneuvering spaces and
aisles, parking spaces, storage areas, and drainage facilities;
b. The location, size, and type of materials for surface paving, curbing or wheel
stops, landscaping, screening and lighting;
c. The location of all building and lot lines; and
d. Such other information as the Building Inspector or Zoning Board of Appeals, as
applicable, may require.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 201 of 265
The Plan shall be a drawing at a scale of 1 inch equals 20 feet or 1 inch equals 40 feet
or at such other scale as the Building Inspector or Zoning Board of Appeals, as
applicable, may direct.
Where necessary for the administration of this Section, the Building Inspector or
Zoning Board of Appeals, as applicable, may require that the owner, operator or
occupant of a lot or any building thereon, furnish a statement as to the number of
employees customarily working at any one time on the premises. The Building
Inspector or Zoning Board of Appeals, as applicable, may, at any reasonably time,
enter upon a lot or into any building thereon, in order to make such determinations as
are necessary for the administration of this Section.
2. Special Permits
a. In the case of such activities which do not meet the requirements of this Section,
or are not otherwise exempt, the Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a Special
Permit, pursuant to Section 25.
b. Standards: In considering the issuance of a Special Permit from the requirements
of this Section, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall make a finding that the
standards specified in Section 25.D. are satisfied.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 202 of 265
Editor’s Note: Page intentionally left blank
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 203 of 265
SECTION 22. DESIGN REVIEW
A. Purpose
It is the intent of this Section to provide detailed review of uses and structures having
substantial impact on the Town; to prevent blight, to enhance the natural and aesthetic
qualities of the Town; to conserve the value of land and buildings; and to protect and
preserve the historic and cultural heritage of the Town.
B. Design Review Board
1. Composition
For the purposes of this Section 22, the Design Review Board shall be appointed by the
Planning Board to consist of five persons as follows:
a. A member of the Planning Board or designee by the Board who shall be a resident;
b. A person qualified by training and experience in architecture who shall be a resident;
c. A person qualified by training and experience in landscape design and landscape
architecture who shall be a resident;
d. A person qualified by training and experience in the art or design professions who
shall be a resident; and
e. A person recommended by one or more of the Town associations representing
Wellesley retail business owners.
The Planning Board may appoint up to three Alternate Members each of whom shall meet one
or more of the qualifications set forth above. In the absence of a Member, the Chairman of the
Design Review Board may designate an Alternate Member to serve in the place of the absent
Member. An Alternate Member so designated may discuss, vote, and otherwise participate as a
Design Review Board member in matters that come before the Board.
2. Authority and Specific Powers
The Design Review Board shall review requests for sign permits submitted under the
provisions of Section 22A, requests for Project Approval submitted in accordance with
Section 16A and other projects as specified in this Zoning Bylaw. It shall evaluate such
requests based on the criteria in Section 22.C. Its findings, along with any restrictions and
conditions, shall be incorporated in the recommendations of the Planning Board to the
Special Permit Granting Authority.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 204 of 265
C. Design Criteria
The Design Review Board shall review requests for special permits under this Section 22
based on the following standards:
2. Preservation and enhancement of landscaping. The landscape shall be preserved in
its natural state, insofar as practicable, by minimizing tree and soil removal, and any
grade changes shall be in keeping with the general appearance of neighboring
developed areas.
3. Relation of buildings to environment. Proposed development shall be related
harmoniously to the terrain and to the use, scale, and architecture of existing
buildings in the vicinity that have functional or visual relationship to the proposed
buildings. Proposed buildings shall be related to their surroundings with respect to:
a. height
b. street facade
c. rhythm of solids and voids
d. spacing of buildings or signs
e. materials, textures, and color
f. roof slopes
g. scale.
3. Open space - All open space (landscaped and usable) shall be designed to add to the
visual amenities of the area by maximizing its visibility for persons passing the site or
overlooking it from nearby properties.
4. Signs and advertising devices - The size, location, design, color, texture, lighting and
materials of signs and advertising devices shall be in harmony with significant
architectural features of existing and proposed buildings and structures and with
surrounding properties.
5. Heritage - Removal or disruption of historic, traditional or significant uses, structures,
or architectural elements shall be minimized insofar as practicable, whether these
exist on the site or on adjacent properties.
D. Design Guidelines Handbook
The Design Review Board shall publish and make available to the public on request a
booklet of guidelines based on the specific Design Criteria cited in Section 22.C. to
effectuate the purposes of this Section 22.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 205 of 265
SECTION 22A. SIGNS
(Editor’s Note: Section XXIIA updated 1/9/14 to reflect amendments adopted under Article 31 at 2013 ATM;
updated 9/10/2015 to reflect amendments approved under Article 33 and Article 34 at 2015 ATM)
A. Title
This section shall hereafter be known and cited as the “Town of Wellesley Sign Bylaw”
or “Sign Bylaw.”
B. Purpose
1. Purpose. This Section was enacted with the following purposes:
a. To protect the rights of individuals and businesses to convey their messages
through signs;
b. To encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication;
c. To promote and protect business viability and economic opportunity;
d. To improve traffic and pedestrian safety as it may be affected by distracting signs;
e. To preserve the natural beauty and environment, as well as the architectural and
historical assets, of the Town;
f. To protect the public health, safety, and general welfare;
g. To encourage and promote aesthetic integrity, village character, creativity and
community appearance by exercising reasonable control;
h. To encourage compatibility and harmony with surrounding buildings, land and
land uses;
i. To ensure the fair and consistent enforcement of sign standards; and
j. To make it easier, faster, and more economically efficient to apply for a sign
permit.
C. Definitions
Words and phrases used in this Section shall have the meanings set forth herein. Words
and phrases not defined herein, but defined in the Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw,
shall be given the meanings set forth in such Bylaw. All other words and phrases shall be
given their common, ordinary meaning, unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
Headings or captions are for reference purposes only and shall not be used in the
interpretation of this Section.
Abandoned Sign - Any sign associated with a use which has ceased operations for sixty
(60) or more days and/or contains or exhibits broken panels, visible rust, visible rot,
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 206 of 265
damaged support structures, or missing letters or which is otherwise dilapidated,
unsightly, or unkempt.
Address Sign - A sign indicating the numerical location, or numerical and street location,
of a particular property.
Animated Sign - Any sign, or part of a sign, that uses any movement or change of
lighting or color to depict action or create a special effect or scene.
Audible Sign - Any sign which emits a sound which is audible or emits a signal which
can be converted into audible sounds, whether by radio or other means.
Awning - Any device, fixed or retractable, of any material, which extends over or
otherwise covers a sidewalk, courtyard, walkway, eating area, driveway, or other area or
space whether that area or space is intended for pedestrians, vehicles or other purposes.
Also known as a “canopy.”
Awning Sign - Any sign that is a part of, attached to, or displayed on an awning, canopy
or other fabric, plastic or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or
outdoor service area.
Banner - A sign placed above or across a public or private street or way with the prior
written permission of the Board of Selectmen; the Board of Selectmen shall determine
the terms and conditions for the use of such sign, including, but not limited to,
dimensional and length of time of allowances. Neither flags nor awning signs are
considered banners.
Beacon - Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at
one or more points not on the same lot as the light source; also, any light with one or
more beams that rotate or move.
Building Sign - Any sign attached to any part of a building, as contrasted to a ground
sign.
Business Establishment - Any non-residential use, whether or not consisting of one (1) or
more buildings. In a building with more than one (1) non-residential tenant, each tenant
shall constitute a separate business establishment.
Changeable Copy - Any lights, lettering, or images that may be electronically or
manually changed to form a sign message or messages.
Commercial Districts - Shall refer to the Business Districts, Business Districts A,
Industrial, Industrial A, Lower Falls Village Commercial District, and Wellesley Square
Commercial District.
Commercial Message - Any sign wording, logo, or other representation that, directly or
indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business, product, service, or other
commercial activity.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 207 of 265
Director - The Planning Director of the Town of Wellesley, or his or her designee for a
particular purpose.
Directional Signs - Any sign limited solely to directing both vehicular and pedestrian
traffic within or setting out restrictions on the use of parking areas.
Directory Sign - A sign which may be utilized by multiple business establishments
occupying a single building with a shared public entrance.
Entrance - A means of accessing a building. For the purpose of regulating signage the
following are types of entrances:
a. Public Entrance - An entrance to a single business establishment available for
use by the general public during hours of operation.
b. Principal Entrance - The primary public entrance to a single business
establishment.
c. Secondary Entrance - A public entrance to a single business establishment that
is additional to the principal entrance.
d. Shared Public Entrance - A common public entrance that provides access to
multiple business establishments but does not directly access any single
business establishment.
Externally Illuminated Sign - A sign illuminated by an external light source directed
solely toward such sign.
Facade of the Business Establishment - That portion of the building wall facing a street or
containing a public entrance, which corresponds to the height and width of the interior
space rented or owned by the tenant of the business establishment.
Flag - Any fabric or bunting containing colors, patterns, or symbols used as a symbol of a
government or other entity or organization.
Flashing Sign - A sign, the illumination of which is not kept constant in intensity at all
times when in use or which exhibits marked changes in lighting effects.
Gasoline Filling Station - A business engaged, as a primary purpose, in the retail
dispensing of motor vehicle fuels to the public.
Ground Sign - Any sign, supported by structures or supports that are placed on or
anchored in the ground, independent from any building or other structure.
Inspector of Buildings - The Inspector of Buildings of the Town of Wellesley, or his or
her designee for a particular purpose.
Institutional Use - For the purpose of this Section, shall mean any religious or educational
use.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 208 of 265
Internally Illuminated Sign - A sign illuminated by an internal light source, utilizing
translucent panels, canvas or other fabric, letters, devices or other similar components to
create an image by allowing light to pass through. A “Reverse Lit” sign is not an
internally illuminated sign.
Lot - An area of land in single ownership with definite boundaries, established by a
recorded plan or deed, including a lot created by combining several previously recorded
lots, and used or available for use as a site of one (1) or more buildings or for any other
purpose.
Moving Sign - Any and every sign any part of which moves, is designed to move, or to
be moved, by any means.
Multi-Faced Sign - Any sign consisting of more than one (1) sign face.
Non-Conforming Sign - Any sign legally erected prior to the adoption of this section, or
any amendment thereof, which does not conform to the requirements of this section or
such future amendments.
Normal Grade - The lower of 1) existing grade prior to construction or 2) the newly
established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or
excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign.
Obscene Matter - As defined in M.G.L. Chapter 272, § 31.
Office and Professional Districts - Shall refer to the Administrative & Professional
Districts, Limited Business Districts, Educational Districts, Educational Districts A, and
Educational Districts B.
Out-of-Store Marketing Device - An out-of-store marketing device is any facility or
equipment which is located outside of a primary building on a site zoned for non-residential
uses, which is used for the primary purpose of providing a product or service without the
owner’s or agent’s immediate presence, and which is manufactured to include a color, form,
graphic, illumination, symbol, and/or writing thereon to communicate information regarding
the product or service provided thereby to the public. Examples of out-of-store marketing
devices include: fuel pumps, bank ATM units, vending machines, newspaper racks, drink
machines, ice boxes, and phone booths.
Open Face - A type of sign and/or sign illumination utilizing an open or clear plastic sign
face, allowing the light source to be visible.
Pennant - Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a
message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in a series, designed
to move in the wind. Also known and referred to as a streamer.
Permanent Sign - Any sign of a type and construction as not to be easily or readily
removed, which, when installed, is intended for permanent use. Types of permanent signs
include, but are not limited to, standing signs, wall signs, awning signs, and window
signs.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 209 of 265
Person - A natural or legal person, including a partnership, trust, corporation or similar
entity.
Portable Sign - A sign which is not permanently affixed to the ground or to a structure,
including but not limited to signs on trailers which are parked in such a manner as to serve
the purpose of a sign.
Principal Building - The building in which the principal use of the lot is conducted. Nonresidential
lots with multiple principal uses may have multiple principal buildings, but
storage buildings, garages, and other structures with clearly accessory uses shall not be
considered principal buildings.
Projecting Sign - A type of wall sign which is perpendicular to the wall to which it is
attached and projects away from such wall.
Residential Districts - Shall refer to the Single Residence Districts, Single Residence
Districts A, Town House Districts, General Residence Districts, General Residence
Districts A, Multi-Family Residence Districts, Limited Residence Districts, and Limited
Apartment Districts.
Reverse Lit - A type of sign and/or sign illumination using an opaque face and sides,
generally constructed of aluminum, and a clear polycarbonate back or no back. Light
does not pass through the face of the sign, but rather comes out of the back of the sign
and is cast off the wall behind the sign, thereby creating a silhouette of the outline of the
sign face. Also known and referred to as “Reverse Back Lit”, “Halo”, or “Halo Lit” sign
or sign illumination.
Roof Sign - Any sign erected and constructed above, or projecting above, the lowest
point of the eave or the top of a parapet wall of any building, or which is painted or
otherwise attached or affixed to a roof.
Sign - Any device, fixture, placard, or structure affixed to, supported by, or suspended by
a stationary object, building or the ground that uses any color, form, graphic,
illumination, symbol, or writing to communicate information of any kind to the public.
Sign Face - That part of a sign that is or can be used for the purpose of advertising,
identification or conveying a message.
Sign Permit - A permit issued by the Inspector of Buildings allowing a sign to be
installed on a piece of property.
Standard Informational Sign - A sign with no one side consisting of an area greater than six
(6) square feet, with a sign face made for short term use, containing no reflecting elements,
flags, or projections and which, when erect, stands at a height not greater than six (6) feet.
Sandwich board signs shall be considered to be a type of standard informational sign.
Standing Sign - A permanent sign erected on or affixed to the ground and not attached to
a building.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 210 of 265
Temporary Sign - Any and every sign which by its design and/or use is temporary in
nature and/or is not permanently mounted. Neither flags nor awning signs are considered
temporary signs.
Town - The Town of Wellesley, Massachusetts.
Wall Sign - A permanent building sign not considered to be a roof sign, window sign,
temporary sign, temporary window sign, or directory, attached to or erected and confined
within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by
such wall or building. Wall signs may be mounted parallel or perpendicular to a wall,
subject to the requirements herein.
Window Sign - Any sign attached, painted or otherwise similarly affixed directly to the
glass surface of a window or door, either inside or outside the building, and/or any
illuminated sign installed inside the building within one (1) foot of the glass surface of a
window or door, and designed to be visible from the exterior of the structure.
D. Powers and Duties of Personnel
The Inspector of Buildings is hereby authorized and directed to interpret, administer and
enforce this Section.
E. Applicability
The standards and regulations of this Section shall apply to all signs erected, maintained,
or replaced in any district within the corporate limits of the Town of Wellesley.
F. Sign Permits
1. Sign Permit Required. Unless a Sign Permit is specifically not required by the
standards of this Section, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect or replace a sign
without first having obtained a Sign Permit. Refer to Table 22A.1 to determine if a
Sign Permit is required for a specific sign type.
2. Application Submittal and Content. When required by this Section, Sign Permit
applications shall be filed in the office of the Inspector of Buildings upon forms
furnished by that office. The submittal of the following information, material and fees
shall constitute a complete application:
a. The application shall describe and set forth the following:
i. The type and purpose of the sign(s) as defined in this Section (i.e. wall
sign, window sign, etc.);
ii. Dimensions and area of the sign(s), including letter height and
aggregate sign area if more than one (1) sign and/or sign face;
iii. Materials and colors of the sign(s);
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 211 of 265
iv. Type of illumination;
v. Number, type and area of existing signs;
vi. Height of sign;
vii. The zoning district in which the subject property is located;
viii. The Business Certificate ID number, if a non-residential use;
ix. The name, address, telephone number and signature of the business
owner;
x. The name, address, telephone number and signature of the owner of
the property upon which the sign is to be located. The owner’s agent
may sign if an authorization letter from the property owner is
submitted; and
xi. The name, address, and telephone number of the contractor.
b. The following attachments, and necessary copies as required by the
Inspector of Buildings, shall be submitted:
i. For standing signs, a location plan or survey showing the property
upon which the subject sign is to be located, the proposed location of
the subject sign on the property, the distance of the proposed sign from
the subject property’s boundaries, and all existing structures or
buildings on the subject property. Such plan shall be to a legible
engineer’s scale;
ii. For all signs, dimensioned drawings of the sign including lettering,
borders, proposed color scheme, height and other design elements.
Such drawings shall be to a legible architect’s scale;
iii. For wall, awning and window signs, a dimensioned drawing or
photograph of the façade indicating the placement of the signs, area of
the façade of the business establishment, and height of the sign. Such
drawings shall be to a legible architect’s scale;
iv. Color photographs of the property including all buildings and the
proposed sign location; and
v. For all signs, a copy of a letter from the Planning Director indicating the
recommendation of the Design Review Board or, for signs requiring a Special
Permit, a copy of a letter from the Zoning Board of Appeals indicating
approval of the Special Permit.
c. Appropriate fees, as set from time to time by the Board of Selectmen and/or the
Planning Board, shall be paid.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 212 of 265
3. Processing Time; Permit Issuance. The Town shall process all complete and accurate
Sign Permit applications within thirty (30) days of the Inspector of Buildings’ actual
receipt of a complete (per F.2. of this Section) and accurate application and upon
remittance of the appropriate fee. No Sign Permit shall be issued by the Inspector of
Buildings sooner than thirty (30) days unless the advisory recommendation of the
Design Review Board has been received. If the advisory recommendation of the
Design Review Board is not received within thirty (30) days, the Inspector of
Buildings shall act on the Sign Permit.
4. Application Rejection. The Inspector of Buildings shall reject any application that is
incomplete (per F.2. of this Section), that contains false material statements or
omissions, or that is for a sign which would violate any standard within this Section
within thirty (30) business days of receipt of said application.
5. Resubmission. A rejected application later resubmitted in conformity with this
Section shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of resubmission, instead
of the original submission date. An application which is resubmitted shall meet all the
standards for an original application.
6. Permit Revocation. Should it be determined that a Sign Permit was issued in error
and/or pursuant to an application containing a false material statement or omission, or
for a sign not meeting the standards of this Section, the Inspector of Buildings shall
revoke said permit and the subject sign shall be immediately removed.
7. Expiration Date. A Sign Permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the
permit was issued has not been installed and completed within six (6) months after
the date of issuance; provided, however, that where an applicant can demonstrate that
a commercial entity was timely engaged to construct the permitted sign, but the
fabrication has not yet been completed, one (1) ninety (90) day extension may be
granted by the Inspector of Buildings. No refunds shall be made for a permit after the
permit is issued. If later an individual desires to erect a sign at the same location, a
new application for the sign must be processed and another fee paid in accordance
with the fee schedule applicable at such time.
G. Design Review
1. Design Review Required. All signs requiring a Sign Permit or Special Permit under
the provisions of this Section shall require the review of the Design Review Board
(refer to subsection H. for DRB Special Permit review procedures).
2. Process. Following the Inspector of Buildings’ receipt of a complete and compliant
Sign Permit application (per F.2. of this Section), the applicant shall submit a Design
Review Board application, attachments, and the appropriate number of copies to the
Planning Director, upon forms furnished by that office. The submitted application and
attachments shall include the information and documents as required under subsection
I., Sign Permits, 2., Application Submittal and Content, a. and b., of this Section
(excluding those letters indicating the recommendation of the DRB or the action of
the ZBA). The application shall be scheduled for review by the Design Review Board
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 213 of 265
at the next meeting of the Board not less than seven (7) days following the Director’s
receipt of the application. The Design Review Board shall render an advisory
recommendation regarding the design of the sign within thirty (30) days of the
Director’s receipt of a Design Review Board application. Failure of the Design
Review Board to make a recommendation within thirty (30) days from the date of the
submission of application materials to the Director shall be deemed to constitute a
recommendation for approval. The Director shall forward such recommendation in
writing to the applicant and the Inspector of Buildings, to be either hand-delivered or
mailed.
3. Criteria for Review. The Design Review Board’s review and advisory
recommendation of proposed signs shall be based on the following:
a. Those criteria contained in Section 22.C.4. of this Bylaw;
b. The Design Guidelines Handbook as referenced in Section 22.D. of this Bylaw;
c. Consideration of how the proposed sign(s) relates to:
i. The context of the building façade;
ii. Buildings in the immediate vicinity of the sign;
iii. The basic pattern of the street front to which the sign is oriented; and
iv. The size, brightness, style, height and colors of other permanent structures and
elements in the immediate vicinity; and
d. Consideration of whether the proposed sign(s) is:
i. Sized and located so as to avoid obscuring existing architectural features such
as columns, sill lines, roof eaves, and cornices;
ii. Comprised of materials and colors that reflect the character of the building to
which it is attached or associated with; and
iii. Displaying graphics, symbols, logos, and/or letters of a size that are
proportional to the sign and the building to which it is attached or associated
with, does not create a sign with a cluttered appearance, and are legible and
visible to both vehicle operators and pedestrians; such graphics, symbols,
logos, and/or letters on secondary signs should be proportionally smaller than
those on a primary sign.
4. Recommendation. The Design Review Board’s advisory recommendation shall take
one of the following forms:
a. Approval: The Design Review Board shall recommend the approval of proposed
signs that meet the Criteria for Review and comply with all requirements of this
Section.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 214 of 265
b. Approval with Conditions: The Design Review Board shall recommend the
approval with conditions of proposed signs that comply with the requirements of
this Section, but do not meet the Criteria for Review. The Design Review Board
may recommend conditions that require changes to the sign; conditions shall
relate to the Criteria for Review with the intent being that the conditions serve to
conform the sign to such Criteria.
c. Denial: The Design Review Board shall recommend denial of all proposed signs
that do not comply with the requirements of this Section; the Design Review
Board may recommend denial of Sign Permits that do not meet the Criteria for
Review if, in the opinion of the Board, there are no possible conditions which will
allow the sign to more closely meet the Criteria for Review.
H. Special Permits
1. Special Permit Granting Authority. The Zoning Board of Appeals (“ZBA”) shall
serve as the Special Permit Granting Authority for all Special Permits for signs and
shall consider requests for Special Permits in accordance with this subsection and
Section 25 of the Zoning Bylaw.
2. Circumstances in Which a Special Permit May Be Sought. Special Permits may be
considered and issued for any request for relief from the requirements of this Section;
however, Special Permits may not be issued to allow those signs indicated in Section
22A.I.2.b. through p.
3. Required Findings. A Special Permit for a sign may be issued provided the ZBA
makes the following findings:
a. The sign is otherwise in compliance with the provisions of this Section;
b. Sign scale is determined to be in reasonable relation to development scale, viewer
distance and travel speed, and sign sizes on nearby structures;
c. Sign size, shape, and placement serve to define or enhance architectural elements
of the building such as columns, sill lines, cornices, and roof edges, and does not
unreasonably interrupt, obscure, or hide them;
d. Sign design is in reasonable continuity with the mounting location, height,
proportions and materials of other signage on the same or adjacent structures;
e. Sign materials, colors, lettering style, illumination and form are reasonably
compatible with building design, neighborhood context and use; and
f. Sign size, location, design and illumination are not judged to present a safety
hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
4. Design Review. Prior to the granting of a Special Permit by the ZBA, the Design
Review Board shall submit an advisory recommendation on the Special Permit to the
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 215 of 265
ZBA. Such recommendation shall address compliance of the sign with Section
22A.H.3. An unfavorable report of the Design Review Board shall indicate which of
the findings were not met and shall state what modifications to the sign or signs could
be made to render a favorable report. Failure of the Design Review Board to make
such report within thirty (30) days from the date of the submission of application
materials to the Design Review Board shall be deemed by the ZBA to constitute a
favorable report.
I. Exempt and Prohibited Signs and Devices
1. Exempt. The following signs shall not count toward the total amount of signage
allowed and shall be exempt from regulation under this Section:
a. Any public notice or warning required by a valid and applicable federal, state, or
local law, regulation, or statute;
b. Any sign inside a building, except for regulated window signs;
c. Banners;
d. Address signs, the letter and number height of which does not exceed eight (8)
inches;
e. Flags;
f. Works of art that do not include a commercial message;
g. Traffic control signs on private property, such as Stop, Yield, and similar signs,
the face of which meet Department of Transportation standards and which contain
no commercial message of any sort;
h. Signs located on property owned by the Town and approved by the Board of
Selectmen; and
i. Signs sanctioned by the Town of Wellesley Historical Commission, which display
historical information about buildings, properties, people and the like, and not
exceeding two (2) square feet in area. Such signs may be wall or ground mounted.
2. Prohibited Signs. The following types of signs are prohibited in the Town:
a. Any sign not specifically identified in Table 22A.1, Signage Allowances Based
on Zoning District or Use, as allowed or any sign not allowed by the issuance of a
Special Permit;
b. Promotional beacons, laser lights or images;
c. Audible signs;
d. Moving signs;
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 216 of 265
e. Roof signs;
f. Signs in the right-of-way, other than those belonging to a government, public
service agency, or railroad;
g. Signs mounted or located on a tree, utility pole, or other similar structure;
h. Portable signs;
i. Signs which depict obscene matter or are considered obscene matter, as defined in
M.G.L. Chapter 272, § 31;
j. Signs which advertise an activity which is illegal under federal, state or local
laws;
k. Signs not in good repair, in violation of codes, or containing or exhibiting broken
panels, visible rust, visible rot, damaged support structures, or missing letters;
l. Abandoned signs, identifying abandoned or discontinued business. Such signs
shall be removed within sixty (60) days following the abandonment or
discontinuance as ordered by the Inspector of Buildings;
m. Animated signs; flashing signs;
n. Imitation traffic signs, signs which contain or are an imitation of an official traffic
sign or signal or contain the words “stop,” “go,” “slow,” “caution,” “warning,” or
similar words in such a manner as to resemble official traffic control signs;
o. Pennants; and
p. Signs and/or portions of signs rented, leased, and/or purchased by an individual,
group and/or business and located upon property to which such individual, group
and/or business does not possess a Business Certificate ID to operate a
commercial activity. This prohibition shall not apply to signs attached or affixed
to, or an integral part of, out-of-store marketing devices or to standard
informational signs installed on a property during such time that permitted
construction activity is occurring, the property is being considered for sale, lease,
or rent, and/or beginning thirty (30) days before and ending five (5) days after any
federal, state or local election, ballot initiative or referendum.
J. Measurement of Sign Area and Height
1. Measurement of Sign Area.
a. Generally. Sign area shall be computed as the area within the smallest single
rectangle or square enclosing the extreme limits of the sign face including any
cabinet or frame or material, texture, or color forming an integral part of the sign
face used to differentiate the sign face from the structure upon which it is placed.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 217 of 265
For purposes of determining the maximum size limitations, any intermediary
removable surface to which a sign is attached shall be deemed part of the sign,
and any sign composed of separate letters, numbers, or symbols cut into or
attached to a wall or painted on or otherwise attached to an awning, canopy, or
window shall be deemed to occupy the entire area within a single rectangle or
square enclosing the extreme limits of the sign, including any structural elements.
b. Structure. The computation of the area of a sign face shall not include the
structure, supports, or uprights on which the sign face is placed or any portions of
a sign structure that are not intended to contain any message or idea and are
purely structural or decorative in nature, other than those parts contained within
the rectangle or square that delimits the sign face.
c. Changeable Copy. For any signs on which the words, letters, figures, symbols,
logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements routinely change or are intended
to be changed from time to time, the sign face area shall include the entire area
within which any words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other
design elements may be placed, together with any frame or material, texture or
coloring forming an integral part of the sign face or used to differentiate the sign
face from the structure upon which it is placed.
d. Multi-Faced Signs. For multi-faced signs, the sign area shall be the sum of the
area of both sign faces and shall be limited to the maximum sign area for the sign
type in the specific zoning district or for the specific use.
2. Measurement of Sign Height.
a. Ground Signs. The height of a standing sign shall be computed as the distance
from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest component of
the sign. Where the normal grade is below the normal grade of a public street, the
sign base can be raised to the elevation of the normal grade of the street before the
height limitations are applied (surveyor’s certificate required).
b. Building Signs. The height of a wall sign shall be determined to be the vertical
distance measured from grade to the top of the highest attached component of the
sign.
K. Location, Construction, and Design Standards
1. Setback. Unless a more restrictive setback is specified otherwise in this Section, all
Ground Signs, whether permanent or temporary, shall be set back at least fifteen (15)
feet from the nearest property line, whether or not said line abuts a public or private
street or way; except Standard Informational Signs which may be located anywhere
on the lot, but shall not create a traffic safety hazard by blocking visibility of traffic
on a public street from a driveway and shall not overhang a public sidewalk.
2. Corner Clearance. All signs shall meet the corner clearance requirements contained
within the Town Bylaws.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 218 of 265
3. Right-of-Way. No sign or any part thereof, except authorized government, public
service agency, or railroad signs, shall be located in any right-of-way. Any preexisting
sign which projects into, on or over a public sidewalk, street or way shall be
subject to the provisions of the State Building Code regulating such signs and shall be
subject to bonding and/or insurance requirements as determined by the Board of
Selectmen.
4. Compliance with Building Code. All signs permitted under this Section shall be
constructed and installed in accordance with the applicable provisions of the State
Building Code and with the reasonable requirements of the Inspector of Buildings.
5. Maintenance. All signs, together with the structural elements, shall be kept in good
repair and in a proper state of preservation to the reasonable satisfaction of the
Inspector of Buildings. The Inspector of Buildings may order the removal of any sign
that is not maintained in accordance with the provisions of this Section, the State
Building Code and/or the Zoning Bylaw.
6. Installation. No sign shall be painted or posted directly on the exterior surface of any
wall. All signs must be painted, posted or otherwise securely attached to a substantial
intermediary removable surface which shall be securely attached to the building;
however, the foregoing shall not prevent the installation of a sign consisting of
individual letters or devices securely attached to the exterior wall of the building.
Installed signs shall display the name of the installer and the permit number issued by
the Inspector of Buildings in a conspicuous location.
7. Illumination.
a. Permitted: The following types of illumination shall be allowed:
i. Externally Illuminated Signs: Signs may be externally illuminated by
white, steady, stationary light shielded and directed solely at the sign; and
ii. Reverse Lit Signs: Signs may be reverse lit, illuminated by white light
only.
b. Prohibited: The following types of illumination shall be prohibited, except as
may be permitted by the issuance of a Special Permit:
i. Internally Illuminated Signs;
ii. Open Face Channel Letters; and
iii. Exposed neon tubing or exposed LEDs.
c. Time: Unless a business establishment is open to the public, no sign shall be
illuminated between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 219 of 265
L. Regulations Based on Sign Type
1. Standing Signs.
a. Location: Standing signs shall be located on the same lot with the principal
building.
2. Wall Signs.
a. Orientation: A wall sign shall be mounted parallel or perpendicular to the wall of
the building and shall not project beyond the face of the wall to which it is
attached.
b. Projection: A wall sign shall not project more than one (1) foot, in the case of a
sign mounted parallel to a wall, or four (4) feet in the case of a sign mounted
perpendicular to a wall, from the face of the wall to which it is attached. No wall
sign shall project into, on or over a public sidewalk, street or way.
c. Location: Wall signs shall be mounted on the façade of the business establishment
owned or leased by the Sign Permit applicant.
3. Awning Signs.
a. Location: Awning signs shall be mounted on the façade of the business
establishment owned or leased by the Sign Permit applicant.
b. Display: Awning signs shall be painted on or attached flat against the surface of
the awning or canopy and shall not be attached to or displayed on the underside.
4. Temporary Signs and Temporary Window Signs.
a. Registration: Prior to their installation, temporary signs and temporary window
signs shall be registered with the Inspector of Buildings.
b. Time: Lots or business establishments upon which a temporary sign and/or
temporary window sign is allowed, per Table 22A.1, Signage Allowances Based
on Zoning District or Use, shall be limited to display such signs for a period not
exceeding thirty (30) days with no more than three (3) such thirty (30) day periods
permitted per calendar year. Thirty (30) day periods may be utilized
consecutively.
M. Signage Allowances Based on Zoning District or Use
If not otherwise stated, any sign not specifically allowed in a zoning district or for a specific
use as provided herein shall be prohibited, except as otherwise provided for under this
Section. The following table (Table 22A.1, Signage Allowances Based on Zoning District
or Use) provides standards governing signs within specific zoning districts or for specific
uses. Specific uses shall be allowed signage as indicated for such use rather than based on
the zoning district of such use, unless the signage allowances of the zoning district are
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 220 of 265
less restrictive than those indicated for the specific use. Signs for which a permit is not
required shall meet all other provisions of this Section applicable to the subject sign.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 221 of 265
Table 22A.1, SIGNAGE ALLOWANCES BASED ON ZONING DISTRICT OR USE
Sign
Type
Standard
Zoning Districts and Uses
Residential
Districts
Office and
Professional
Districts
Commercial
Districts
Fronting
Streets Other
Than
Worcester
Street
Commercial
Districts
Fronting
Worcester
Street
Gasoline
Filling
Stations
Institutional
Uses
TOTAL PERMANENT SIGNAGE
Number of
Signs
1 per lot
2 per
building
? 1 standing sign per lot.
? 2 permanent signs, consisting of
no more than 1 wall sign, 1
awning sign, or 1 window sign
(not to include window signs 1
sq. ft. or less in area) per
business establishment.
NA
1 standing
sign per lot
Maximum
Total Area
1 sq. ft.
30 sq. ft.
(per
building)
For the sum
of all wall,
awning, and
window signs,
50 sq. ft. or
10% of the
area of the
façade of the
business
establishment,
whichever is
less, per
business
establishment;
for standing
signs, 25 sq.
ft.
For the sum
of all wall,
awning, and
window signs,
75 sq. ft. or
10% of the
area of the
façade of the
business
establishment,
whichever is
less, per
business
establishment;
For standing
signs, 50 sq.
ft.
100 sq. ft.
25 sq. ft. for
lots fronting
on streets
other than
Worcester
Street; 50 sq.
ft. for lots
fronting on
Worcester
Street
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 222 of 265
Table 22A.1, SIGNAGE ALLOWANCES BASED ON ZONING DISTRICT OR USE
Sign
Type
Standard
Zoning Districts and Uses
Residential
Districts
Office and
Professional
Districts
Commercial
Districts
Fronting
Streets Other
Than
Worcester
Street
Commercial
Districts
Fronting
Worcester
Street
Gasoline
Filling
Stations
Institutional
Uses
STANDING SIGNS
Permit
Required
No Yes
Number of
Signs
1 per lot
1 per
building
1 per lot
Maximum
Area
1 sq. ft. 15 sq. ft. 25 sq. ft. 50 sq. ft.
50 sq. ft.
for lots
fronting
on streets
other than
Worcester
Street; 75
sq. ft. for
lots
fronting
on
Worcester
Street
25 sq. ft. for
lots fronting
on streets
other than
Worcester
Street; 50 sq.
ft. for lots
fronting on
Worcester
Street
Maximum
Letter
Height
NA 14 inches 14 inches 18 inches
14 inches for lots
fronting on streets other
than Worcester Street; 18
inches for lots fronting
on Worcester Street
Maximum
Height
4 feet 6 feet 10 feet
6 feet for lots fronting on
streets other than
Worcester Street; 10 feet
for lots fronting on
Worcester Street
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 223 of 265
Table 22A.1, SIGNAGE ALLOWANCES BASED ON ZONING DISTRICT OR USE
Sign
Type
Standard
Zoning Districts and Uses
Residential
Districts
Office and
Professional
Districts
Commercial
Districts
Fronting
Streets Other
Than
Worcester
Street
Commercial
Districts
Fronting
Worcester
Street
Gasoline
Filling
Stations
Institutional
Uses
Permit
Required
No Yes
WALL SIGNS
Number of
Signs
1 per lot
1 per
building
? 1 per business establishment
? 1 additional sign shall be
allowed for each additional
street level public entrance,
beyond the principal entrance,
utilized by the business
establishment.
? For business establishments
occupying more than 1 building,
1 additional sign shall be
allowed per building, to be
affixed to such additional
building.
? For buildings occupied by more
than 1 business establishment
which share a common public
entrance, 1 additional wall sign
may be displayed on the
building and such sign may be
located on one or more business
establishment’s facade.
NA
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 224 of 265
Table 22A.1, SIGNAGE ALLOWANCES BASED ON ZONING DISTRICT OR USE
Sign
Type
Standard
Zoning Districts and Uses
Residential
Districts
Office and
Professional
Districts
Commercial
Districts
Fronting
Streets Other
Than
Worcester
Street
Commercial
Districts
Fronting
Worcester
Street
Gasoline
Filling
Stations
Institutional
Uses
Maximum
Area
1 sq. ft. 15 sq. ft.
50 sq. ft. or
10% of the
area of the
façade of the
business
establishment,
whichever is
less.
75 sq. ft. or
10% of the
area of the
façade of the
business
establishment,
whichever is
less.
50 sq. ft.
for lots
fronting
on streets
other than
Worcester
Street; 75
sq. ft. for
lots
fronting
on
Worcester
Street
WALL SIGNS
Additional signs allowed per
additional public entrances and
additional signs allowed for
building occupied by more than
1 business establishment, shall
not exceed 25 sq. ft. or 10% of
the area of the wall to which
attached.
Maximum
Letter
Height
NA 14 inches 18 inches
14 inches
for lots
fronting
on streets
other than
Worcester
Street; 18
inches for
lots
fronting
on
Worcester
Street
Maximum
Height
4 feet 15 feet 20 feet NA
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 225 of 265
Table 22A.1, SIGNAGE ALLOWANCES BASED ON ZONING DISTRICT OR USE
Sign
Type
Standard
Zoning Districts and Uses
Residential
Districts
Office and
Professional
Districts
Commercial
Districts
Fronting
Streets Other
Than
Worcester
Street
Commercial
Districts
Fronting
Worcester
Street
Gasoline
Filling
Stations
Institutional
Uses
Permit
Required
Yes
Number of
Signs
1 per business establishment
AWNING SIGNS
Maximum
Area
25% of the area of the portion of
the awning to which such sign is
affixed or 10% of the façade of
the business establishment,
whichever is less.
Maximum
Letter
Height
8 inches
WINDOW SIGNS
Permit
Required
Yes; No, if sign area is 1 sq. ft. or less
Number of
Signs
2 per business establishment, consisting of 1
sign, 1 sq. ft. or less in area, and 1 sign greater
than 1 sq. ft. in area. Window signs 1 sq. ft. or
less in area shall not count toward the
Maximum Total Area of all Permanent
Signage.
Maximum
Area
10 sq. ft. or 10% of the area of all exterior
windows (excluding doors) of the business
establishment, whichever is less.
Maximum
Letter
Height
8 inches
DIRECTORY
SIGNS
Permit
Required
No
Number of
Signs
1 per shared public entrance to a building
occupied by more than 1 business establishment
Maximum
Area
1 sq. ft. per business establishment occupying
the building or 6 sq. ft., whichever is less
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 226 of 265
Table 22A.1, SIGNAGE ALLOWANCES BASED ON ZONING DISTRICT OR USE
Sign
Type
Standard
Zoning Districts and Uses
Residential
Districts
Office and
Professional
Districts
Commercial
Districts
Fronting
Streets Other
Than
Worcester
Street
Commercial
Districts
Fronting
Worcester
Street
Gasoline
Filling
Stations
Institutional
Uses
DIRECTIONAL
SIGNS
Permit
Required
No
Maximum
Area
4 sq. ft.
STANDARD
INFORMATIONAL SIGNS
Permit
Required
No
Number of
Signs
1 per lot; lots shall be allowed an unlimited number of signs during a period beginning
thirty (30) days before and ending five (5) days after any federal, state or local election,
ballot initiative and/or referendum
Maximum
Area
No single sign face shall exceed 6 sq. ft.
Maximum
Height
3 feet or 6 feet for post and arm type signs
TEMPORARY SIGNS
Permit
Required
No Sign Permit is required, but the sign must be registered consistent with
L.4.a. of this Section
Number of
Signs
1 per lot. Refer to L.4.b of this Section for time limits on the display of such
signs
Maximum
Area
25 sq. ft. 12 sq. ft. 25 sq. ft.
12 sq. ft.
for lots
fronting
on streets
other than
Worcester
Street; 25
sq. ft. for
lots
fronting
on
Worcester
Street
6 sq. ft.
Maximum
Height
15 feet 6 feet
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 227 of 265
Table 22A.1, SIGNAGE ALLOWANCES BASED ON ZONING DISTRICT OR USE
Sign
Type
Standard
Zoning Districts and Uses
Residential
Districts
Office and
Professional
Districts
Commercial
Districts
Fronting
Streets Other
Than
Worcester
Street
Commercial
Districts
Fronting
Worcester
Street
Gasoline
Filling
Stations
Institutional
Uses
TEMPORARY
WINDOW SIGNS
Permit
Required
No Sign Permit is required, but the sign must
be registered consistent with L.4.a. of this
Section
Number of
Signs
1 per business establishment. Refer to L.4.b of
this Section for time limits on the display of
such signs
Maximum
Area
25% of the area of the window on which it is
attached
OUT OF STORE
MARKETING DEVICE
SIGNS
Permit
Required
No
Number of
Signs
1 sign shall be allowed on each out-of-store
marketing device
Maximum
Area
14 sq. ft.
Maximum
Height
No more than 2 feet above the device
MENU SIGN
Permit
Required
Yes
Number of
Signs
1 sign per drive-thru facility
Maximum
Area
10 sq. ft.
Maximum
Height
6 feet
N. NON-CONFORMING SIGNS.
Any non-conforming sign may continue to be maintained but shall not be enlarged,
redesigned or altered in any way unless it is brought into conformity with the
requirements of this Section and the Zoning Bylaw. This shall not include the substitution
or interchange of poster panels, painted boards, or dismountable material on nonconforming
signs, which shall be permitted. Any such sign which has been destroyed or
damaged to such an extent that the cost of restoration would exceed thirty-five percent
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 228 of 265
(35%) of the replacement value of the sign at the time of the destruction or damage, shall
not be repaired or rebuilt or altered unless in conformity with this Section.
The exemption herein granted shall terminate with respect to any sign which:
a. Shall have been abandoned;
b. Advertises or calls attention to any products, businesses or activities which are no
longer carried on or sold, whether generally or at the particular premises; or
c. Shall not have been repaired or properly maintained within sixty (60) days after
notice to that effect has been given by the Inspector of Buildings.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 229 of 265
SECTION 22B. SWIMMING POOLS
A. Purpose
This Section is adopted by the Town for the regulation and restriction of private
swimming pools.
B. Definitions
Private Swimming Pool - Any outdoor pool, having a depth of at least 24" and a water
surface area of at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet, which is used, or intended to
be used, as a swimming or bathing pool in connection with a residence and available only
to the family and private guests of the householder.
C. Applicability
1. Other requirements of the Zoning Bylaws notwithstanding the regulations and
restrictions set forth herein shall apply to private swimming pools.
2. The provisions of this Section 22B shall not apply to any swimming pool for which a
building permit has been issued prior to the adoption of this Section.
D. Regulations and Restrictions
1. Location.
a. Minimum setback from street - No structural part of a swimming pool shall be
located less than thirty (30) feet from any property boundary line abutting a public
street or private way or less than fifty (50) feet from the centerline of any private
way.
b. Minimum setback from abutting property - No structural part of a private
swimming pool shall be located closer to any property boundary line than the
distance S specified by the following formula: S = 4e, where e equals the
difference in elevation, measured to the nearest foot, between the overall height of
the pool structure at the perimeter of the pool or walkway railing, if any, and the
natural ground elevation at the nearest property boundary line, provided however,
that in no event shall the required side yard be less than ten (10) feet nor more
than thirty (30) feet.
2. Lot Coverage - For the purposes of Section 18, exterior swimming pools constructed
at or below grade shall not be considered building coverage.
3. Lighting - All artificial lighting used to illuminate a swimming pool shall be arranged
and shielded so as to prevent direct glare from the light source into any public street
or private way or onto adjacent property.
4. Fencing - A fence or protective barrier not less than six (6) feet in height having selflatching
devices on all gates shall be installed and maintained that will prevent the
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 230 of 265
unauthorized entry of small children to the pool area. The location and type of fence
or protective barrier shall be acceptable to the Building Inspector.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 231 of 265
SECTION 22C. ANTENNAS
A. Purpose
This Section is adopted by the Town for the regulation and restriction of the construction,
erection, installation, placement and/or use of antennas, and other devices that perform
the functions of antennas, and of accessory telecommunications structures, equipment
and facilities and similar devices, within the Town.
B. Definitions
As used in this Section 22C, the following words and terms shall have and include the
following respective meanings:
Device - Any antenna or other apparatus that performs the function of antennas, together
with any telecommunications structures, equipment and facilities ancillary and/or
accessory thereto; by way of example and not limitation, "device" shall mean among
other things panel antennas, whip antennas, pole antennas, dish and cone-shaped
antennas, other free-standing antennas and personal wireless service facilities.
It is recognized that technology is rapidly changing and the definitions herein, specifically
that of a "device", is intended to encompass such devices and things as they evolve over
time.
Free Standing Device - A monopole wireless service facility not requiring guy wires for
support; and any other device mounted on the ground and not mounted on any existing
building or structure.
Personal Wireless Service Facilities - Facilities for the provision of personal wireless
services; such facilities may, by way of example, include but are not limited to
transmitting and receiving equipment, antennas, antenna structures and supports and
other equipment, structures and installations accessory to such facilities.
Personal Wireless Services - Wireless telecommunications services regulated by the
Federal Communications Commission ("FCC") and defined as "personal wireless
services" in Section 704, or other sections, of the Federal Telecommunications Act of
1996 as amended; by way of example but not limitation, personal wireless services
include cellular telephone services, so-called personal communications services ("PCS")
and paging services.
Height - A distance measured from the average finished grade of the land surrounding the
device to its highest point, surface or projection, in the case of free-standing devices, or
A distance measured from the average finished grade of the land surrounding the exterior
walls to the highest point, surface or projection of the device, in the case of devices mounted
on existing buildings.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 232 of 265
C. Applicability
Other provisions of this Zoning Bylaw notwithstanding the regulations and restrictions
set forth herein shall apply to the construction, erection, installation, placement and/or
use of devices including but not limited to personal wireless service facilities, and freestanding
devices, antennas of federally licensed amateur radio operators and so-called
satellite dishes, on land, buildings or structures within the Town of Wellesley.
No device exterior to an enclosed building and/or structure, whether mounted thereon or
free-standing shall be constructed, erected, installed, placed and/or used on land, buildings
and/or structures within the Town of Wellesley on or after October 8, 1996 except in
accordance with the provisions of this Section 22C and Section 25. Devices in existence on
October 8, 1996 may be maintained and shall be kept in good condition. The Inspector of
Buildings may order the removal, repair or securing of any device for public safety purposes
that is determined, by the Inspector of Buildings, to be hazardous to life or property, in poor
condition, disrepair or damaged by storm or other cause. The Inspector of Buildings shall
determine on a case by case basis whether the repair of a device shall require a special
permit in accordance with this section.
D. Regulations and Restrictions
1. Design Review
The construction, erection, installation and/or placement of all devices, except those
for customary private household use as further described in Section 22C.D.2.b.
below, are subject to review by the Wellesley Design Review Board. In review of
applications the Design Review Board shall employ the following guidelines:
Screening, Landscaping and Preservation of Existing Vegetation
Whenever possible, devices shall be sited so as to minimize the visibility of such
devices from adjacent property and shall be suitably screened from abutters and
residential neighborhoods. To the extent feasible installation of free-standing devices
shall minimize the removal of existing trees and other vegetation.
Height
A device shall be designed and installed at the minimum height necessary for the
proper functioning of the telecommunications services to be provided by the device at
that location. Free-standing devices shall not exceed 45 feet in height unless the
Special Permit Granting Authority makes the finding under Section 22C.D.3.c.
required for installation of a device at a height greater than 45 feet.
Color
Free-standing, wall mounted and roof-mounted devices shall be painted or otherwise
colored or finished in a manner which aesthetically minimizes the visibility of the
devices in the surrounding landscape or on the building or structure to which they are
attached.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 233 of 265
Fencing
Any fencing necessary to control access to devices shall be compatible with the
character of the area. (see also Section 22C.4.c. below)
Signs
There shall be no advertising permitted on or in the vicinity of devices. There shall be
a sign not exceeding 4 square feet in area at each installation which shall display a
phone number where the person responsible for the maintenance of the installation
may be reached on a 24 hour basis. All other signage shall be consistent with the
provision of Section 22A.
Lighting
Night lighting of installations shall be prohibited except for such lighting as may be
necessary for emergency repair purposes.
Parking
Free-standing device installations shall provide one off-street parking space for
service vehicles.
Personal Safety
When devices are mounted in locations above or in the vicinity of pedestrian areas or
other areas open to the public such installations shall be made in a manner that does
not impede or restrict the movement of pedestrians nor pose a hazard to any person.
2. By-Right Provisions
The following devices may be constructed, erected, installed, placed and/or used
within the Town subject to the issuance of a building permit by the Inspector of
Buildings in those instances when a building permit is required:
a. A device or combination of devices installed on land, a building or other
structure, provided that such a device or combination of devices, including its
supports, is:
i. finished in a manner designed to be aesthetically consistent with the exterior
finish of such building or structure and otherwise in accordance with Section
22C.D. hereof; and
ii. mounted in such a manner so that it does not:
? obscure any window or other exterior architectural feature;
? extend above the highest point of the roof by more than 12 feet;
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 234 of 265
? extend beyond the face of any wall, or exterior surface in the case of
structures that do not have walls, by more than 18 inches;
? extend below the top of the wall, or exterior surface in the case of
structures that do not have walls, of a one-story building or structure; or
? extend more than 8 feet below the top of the wall, or exterior surface in the
case of structures that do not have walls, of a multi-story building or
structure; and
iii. comprised of devices which do not individually or in the aggregate have a
front surface area facing surrounding streets and adjacent properties that
exceeds 50 square feet in area;
b. A device for customary private household use such as a conventional chimneymount
television antenna or home satellite dish not over 3 feet in diameter in
conjunction with a single or two-family dwelling; provided that in the case of a
home satellite dish that is a free-standing device, such home satellite dish shall be
installed in the rear yard only and otherwise shall be in compliance with the
provisions of Section 22C.D.1. above;
c. A device owned by and located on the property of an amateur radio operator
licensed by the FCC, which device shall be installed at the minimum height
necessary for the proper functioning of amateur radio communications in
accordance with the licensing requirements for that location, provided that in the
case of an amateur radio device that is a free-standing device, such device shall be
installed in the rear yard only and otherwise shall be in compliance with the
provisions of Section 22C.D.1. above;
d. A device installed wholly within and not protruding from the interior space of an
existing building or structure (including interior space behind existing roofs or
within existing mechanical penthouse space) or behind existing rooftop
mechanical screens in such a manner that the device would not be visible from
surrounding streets and from adjacent properties and only for so long as such
device remains wholly within such space or behind such roofs or screens.
e. A device used exclusively for non-commercial, public safety purposes.
All devices and installations not prohibited by this Section 22C, free-standing or
otherwise, shall require a special permit in accordance with Section 22C.D.3. except
those meeting the requirements of this Section 22C.D.2.
3. Special Permit Provisions
The Special Permit Granting Authority may issue a special permit under the
provisions of Section 25 for:
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 235 of 265
? A device or combination of devices (including its supports) installed on land, a
building or structure, if such device or devices exceeds any one or more of the
dimensional requirements of Section 22C.D.2.a. above;
? A free-standing device in accordance with Section 22C.D.3.c. below;
? All other devices and installations not prohibited by this Section 22C and not
otherwise prohibited;
provided the Special Permit Granting Authority finds:
a. that the requested installation is essential to the proper functioning of the
telecommunications services to be provided by the device at that location and that
an alternative installation meeting the By-Right limitations of Section 22C.D.2. is
not workable; and
b. that the requested installation will not adversely impact adjacent property
materially; and
c. in the case of a free-standing device, that the center point of the base of the
monopole shall be set back from the property lines of the lot on which such
device is located by a distance equal to the overall vertical height of the monopole
and mounted device plus five feet, unless the applicant demonstrates that due to
topography and/or other characteristics of the site lesser setbacks shall not pose
any public safety danger to any adjacent properties; and
d. that the overall height does not exceed 45 feet, unless the applicant demonstrates
that a greater height is essential to the proper functioning of the
telecommunications services to be provided by the device at that location and that
an alternative installation meeting the requirements of this Section any less
invasive is not workable; and
e. that the report of the Design Review Board has been received and the installation
and the special permit are consistent with that report under the guidelines
established in Section 22C.D.1.
4. Prohibitions
a. Lattice style towers and facilities requiring three or more legs and/or guy wires for
support shall not be allowed.
b. Advertising signs shall not be allowed. Other signs shall not be allowed except in
accordance with Section 22C.D.1. and Section 22A.
c. Fences utilizing razor wire or barbed wire or similar wire types shall not be
allowed.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 236 of 265
E. Certification and Evidence
In all cases, whether use is By-Right or otherwise, the owner and/or operator of any device
except as described in Section 22C.D.2.b. above shall, prior to installation of any device,
and, if requested by the Inspector of Buildings, but not more than once each year, file with
the Inspector of Buildings a certificate and evidence that the device complies with the
applicable standards of the Federal Communications Commission, Federal Aviation
Administration and the American National Standards Institute and a periodic (at least
annual) maintenance schedule for the device and, in the case of existing devices, that the
device remains in use.
F. Cessation of Use
Devices shall be removed by the owner and/or operator of any device within one (1) year of
cessation of use. Cessation of use shall be determined by the Inspector of Buildings.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 237 of 265
SECTION 22D. Retaining Walls
A. Purpose and Intent
The Town of Wellesley adopts this section to accomplish and ensure the following:
1. To allow for the review of retaining walls of a size that may impact surrounding
buildings, land, and uses;
2. To require the construction of retaining walls in a manner consistent with
engineering and construction best practices; and
3. To lessen the impact of large retaining walls on abutting properties and the public
by encouraging the use of landscaping and aesthetically pleasing design elements.
B. Applicability and Exemptions
The regulations and requirements contained herein shall apply to all retaining walls
erected in the Town of Wellesley, except the following:
1. Retaining walls that retain less than four (4) feet of unbalanced fill shall be
exempt from the requirements of this section.
2. A terraced combination of walls, in which each separate wall retains less than four
(4) feet of unbalanced fill and in which each successive wall is separated by a
distance at least two times (2x) the height of the highest wall.
C. General Provisions
1. Determining Retaining Wall Height - The height of a retaining wall shall be the
distance from the grade at the base of the face of the wall, exclusive of any fill, to
the grade at the back of the wall at the same section. For walls that are not a
constant height the largest of these measurements shall be used to determine the
height of the wall.
For the purpose of determining the height of terraced retaining walls, walls
determined to constitute separate walls shall be measured in the manner described
above, independent of other walls. Multiple walls determined to constitute a
single wall shall be measured from the grade at the front of the lowest wall to the
grade at the back of the highest successive wall.
2. Terracing - Terracing of retaining walls is allowed and encouraged. In a terraced
retaining wall system, if two (2) retaining walls are separated by a distance at
least two times (2x) the height of the higher of the two (2) walls, the walls shall be
considered as separate walls; if two (2) retaining walls are separated by a distance
less than two times (2x) the height of the higher of the two (2) walls, the walls
shall be considered as a single wall.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 238 of 265
3. Setback - Retaining walls four (4) feet or greater in height shall not be located
within ten (10) feet of a property line, with the exception that portions of such
walls which are less than four (4) feet in height shall not be subject to such
requirement. No wall shall encroach on the required setback as required herein,
except by a Special Permit issued in accordance with Section 22D.E.
4. Height Limitation - No retaining wall shall exceed fifteen (15) feet in height,
except by a Special Permit issued in accordance with Section 22D.E.
5. Nonconforming Retaining Walls - Retaining walls constructed and/or permitted
prior to the adoption of these regulations shall be allowed to remain in their
existing state; however, significant changes or alterations to such walls shall be
made in conformity with these regulations. The repair and routine maintenance, as
determined by the Inspector of Buildings, of nonconforming retaining walls shall
be allowed without requiring conformity with these regulations.
D. Design Review and Permitting
1. Design Review - Design Review shall be required for all retaining walls requiring
a permit, as determined by the Inspector of Buildings, and retaining seven (7) feet
or more of unbalanced fill. The Design Review Board shall review retaining walls
in accordance with Section 22, and shall consider such requests under those
criteria contained in Section 22.C. The Design Review Board shall submit an
advisory recommendation to the Inspector of Buildings prior to the issuance of a
permit.
2. Permitting - A permit shall be required, consistent with the requirements of the
Town of Wellesley Building Department, for all retaining walls that retain four
(4) or more feet of unbalanced fill.
E. Special Permit Provisions
The Special Permit Granting Authority shall consider requests for special permits in
accordance with this Section and Section 25 of the Zoning Bylaw.
1. Circumstances Under Which A Special Permit May Be Granted - The Special
Permit Granting Authority may grant a Special Permit in the following situations:
a. Retaining walls not meeting the Setback requirements indicated in Section
22D.C.3.
b. Retaining walls greater than fifteen (15) feet in height as indicated in Section
22D.C.4.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 239 of 265
2. Required Findings - A Special Permit for a retaining wall may be issued provided
the Special Permit Granting Authority finds:
a. That the retaining wall is otherwise in compliance with the provisions of this
Section;
b. That the requested retaining wall will not adversely impact adjacent property
or the public;
c. That the report of the Design Review Board has been received and the
requested retaining wall is consistent with that report and those criteria
contained in Section 22.C. of the Zoning Bylaw; and
d. That the proposed retaining wall is the minimum structure necessary to allow
a subject property to be reasonably utilized.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 240 of 265
Editor’s Note: Page intentionally left blank
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 241 of 265
SECTION 22E. TEMPORARY MORATORIUM ON MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS
(Editor’s Note: Section XXIIE added March 27, 2018 to reflect new provisions adopted under Article 30
at 2017 ATM)
A. Purpose
By vote at the State election on November 8, 2016, the voters of the Commonwealth
approved a law regulating the cultivation, manufacture, processing, distribution, sale,
possession, testing and use of marijuana. The law provides that it is effective on
December 15, 2016, and that a new state agency, the Cannabis Control Commission
(CCC), is required to issue regulations regarding implementation by March 15, 2018.
The regulation of such Marijuana Establishments raises novel and complex legal,
planning, and public safety issues. The Town needs time to consider and address these
issues, as well as the potential impact of the forthcoming Cannabis Control Commission
regulations, by means of a comprehensive planning process to consider amending the
Zoning Bylaw to regulate Marijuana Establishments. The temporary moratorium
provided in Section 22E is intended to allow sufficient time for the Town to engage in
such a planning process and to adopt suitable Zoning Bylaw provisions in a manner
consistent with sound land-use planning objectives.
B. Definition
As used in Section 5.6.6, the term “Marijuana Establishment” shall mean a marijuana
cultivator, marijuana testing facility, marijuana product manufacturer, marijuana retailer,
or any other type of marijuana-related business, subject to regulation under Chapter 94G
of the Massachusetts General Laws; provided, however, that a Registered Marijuana
Dispensary shall not be deemed to be a Marijuana Establishment.
C. Temporary Moratorium
For the reasons set forth above and notwithstanding any other provision of the Zoning
Bylaw to the contrary, the Town hereby adopts a temporary moratorium on the use of
land or structures as a Marijuana Establishment. The moratorium shall be in effect
through December 31, 2018, unless extended, continued, or modified as a subsequent
Town Meeting. During the moratorium period, the Town shall undertake a planning
process to address the potential impacts of Marijuana Establishments and other related
land uses and structures, consider the Cannabis Control Commission regulations
regarding Marijuana Establishments when they are issued, and shall consider adopting
new provisions of the Zoning Bylaw governing the location, operation and effects of
Marijuana Establishments for consideration by the 2018 Annual Town Meeting.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 242 of 265
Editor’s Note: Page intentionally left blank
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 243 of 265
SECTION 23. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
A. The Inspector of Buildings shall be charged with the enforcement of this Zoning Bylaw
and shall withhold a permit for the construction, alteration, or moving of any building or
structure if the building or structure as constructed, altered or moved would be in
violation of this Zoning Bylaw; and no permit or license shall be granted for a new use of
a building, structure, or land which use would be in violation of this Zoning Bylaw.
B. Before issuing any permit, except for work on an existing building or structure or for a
new structure of less than 300 square feet of floor area, the Inspector of Buildings shall
cause to be published at the expense of the applicant in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town, under the heading, "Building Permits" the name of the applicant,
the name of the street on which the property to which the permit relates is located or by
which it is approached, the street number (or if no street number has been assigned, an
approximation thereof made by the Inspector for this purpose only) and the nature of the
work to be done.
C. At least ten (10) days before issuing any permit, except a permit for work on an existing
building or structure or for a new structure of less than 300 square feet of floor area, the
Inspector of Buildings shall at the expense of the applicant send notice by mail, postage
prepaid, to the abutters and abutters to the abutters within 300 feet of the property line of
the applicant, including owners of land directly opposite on any public or private street or
way, as they appear on the most recent applicable tax list. Owners of land directly
opposite the applicant on any public or private street or way, shall be considered abutters
under this Section.
D. The two preceding paragraphs shall not apply to the issue of a permit by, or under the
direction of, the Permit Granting Authority upon an appeal duly taken in the particular
case.
E. If the Inspector of Buildings shall be informed, or have reason to believe that any
provision of this Zoning Bylaw or of any permit or decree thereunder has been, is being,
or is likely to be violated, he shall make or cause an investigation to be made of the facts,
including an inspection of the property where the violation may exist, and, if he finds any
violation, he shall give immediate notice in writing to the owner or his duly authorized
agent and to the occupant of the premises, and shall order that any violation of the
provisions of this Zoning Bylaw shall immediately cease.
F. If the Inspector of Buildings is requested in writing to enforce the provisions of this
Zoning Bylaw against any person allegedly in violation of the same and such officer acts
or declines to act, he shall notify, in writing, the party requesting such enforcement of any
action or refusal to act, and the reasons therefore, within fourteen (14) days of receipt of
such request.
G. If, after such notice and order, such violation continues, or if any owner, agent, or
occupant fails to obey any lawful order of the Inspector of Buildings with respect to any
violation or any use contrary to the provisions of this Zoning Bylaw, the Inspector shall
forthwith revoke any permit issued for the occupation of the premises, shall make
complaint to the Superior Court or any court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 244 of 265
or order restraining the further use of the premises, and shall take such other action as is
necessary to enforce the provisions of this Zoning Bylaw.
H. Whoever violates any provision of this Zoning Bylaw or any of the conditions under
which a permit is issued by the Inspector of Buildings or permission is granted by the
Permit Granting Authority or special permit Granting Authority, or any decision rendered
by the Permit Granting Authority under the provisions of this Zoning Bylaw, shall be
liable to a fine of not more than three hundred ($300) dollars for each day such violation
continues. The Inspector of Buildings is authorized to allow a reasonable period of time,
not to exceed ten (10) days, for correction of a zoning violation prior to issuing a citation;
however, this period of time may be extended for up to thirty (30) additional days if the
Inspector of Buildings determines that the purpose and intent of the Zoning Bylaw would
be served by so doing.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 245 of 265
SECTION 24. PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY
A. Zoning Board of Appeals
The Zoning Board of Appeals (hereinafter termed the ZBA)
shall consist of three members appointed by the Board of Selectmen. Appointment shall
be for three year terms, so arranged that the term of one member shall expire each year.
There shall be one Associate Member of the ZBA for each Member appointed by the
Board of Selectmen for a three-year term.
Any Member or Associate Member may be removed for cause by the appointing
authority upon written charges and after a public hearing.
Vacancies shall be filled for unexpired terms in the same manner as in the case of the
original appointments.
The Chairman of the ZBA shall designate the corresponding Associate Member to sit on
the ZBA in the case of absence, inability to act, or conflict of interest on the part of any
Member thereof, or in the event of a vacancy on the ZBA until said vacancy is filled in
the manner herein provided.
No Member or Associate Member of the ZBA shall represent before such board any party
in interest in any matter pending before it.
B. Powers
The ZBA shall have the following powers:
1. To hear and decide appeals in accordance with Section 24.C.
2. To hear and decide petitions for variances as set out in Section 24.D.
3. To hear and decide applications for special permits upon which the ZBA is
empowered to act as Special Permit Granting Authority under this Zoning Bylaw
under the procedures set forth in Section 25 in exercising these powers, the ZBA may
make orders or decisions, reverse or affirm in whole or in part, or modify any order or
decision, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the
appeal is taken and may grant or direct the granting of a permit.
4. To hear and decide appeals from decisions of the Planning Board pursuant to Section
16D.H.
C. Appeals
1. An appeal to the Permit Granting Authority, as herein provided, may be taken by any
person aggrieved by reason of his inability to obtain a permit or enforcement action
from any administrative officer under this Zoning Bylaw and the Zoning Act (Chapter
40A, Mass. General Laws, as amended), by the regional planning agency in whose
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 246 of 265
area the Town is situated, or of an abutting city or town aggrieved by an order or
decision of the Building Inspector, or other administrative official, in violation of any
provision of this Zoning Bylaw or of the Zoning Act (Chapter 40A, Mass. General
Laws, as amended).
2. Any appeal under this Section to a Permit Granting Authority shall be taken within
thirty (30) days from the date of the order or decision which is being appealed, by
filing a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof, with the Town Clerk, who
shall forthwith, within two business days, transmit copies thereof to such officer or
board whose order or decision is being appealed, and to the Permit Granting
Authority. Such officer or board shall forthwith, within seven (7) days, transmit to the
Permit Granting Authority copies of all documents and papers constituting the record
of the case in which the appeal is taken.
3. The concurring vote of all the members of the ZBA shall be necessary to reverse any
order or decision of any administrative official under this Zoning Bylaw, or the
Zoning Act (Chapter 40A, Mass. General Laws, as amended).
4. If the granting or denial by the ZBA of an appeal would result in or constitute the
issuance of a building permit, the ZBA shall issue to the owner and to the applicant if
other than the owner, a copy of its decision, certified by the Permit Granting
Authority, containing the name and address of the owner, identifying the land
affected, setting forth compliance with any statutory requirements for such a decision
and certifying that copies of the decision and all plans referred to in the decision have
been filed with the Planning Board and with the Town Clerk. No building permit
resulting from or constituted by such a decision shall take effect until a copy of the
decision bearing the certification of the Town Clerk that twenty (20) days has elapsed
and, pursuant to the applicable provisions contained with Chapter 40A, Mass. General
Laws, as amended, no appeal has been filed, or that if such appeal has been filed, that
it has been dismissed or denied, is recorded in the Registry of Deeds for the county
and district in which the land is located, and indexed in the grant or index under the
name of the owner of record, or is recorded and noted on the owner's certificate of
title. The fee for recording or registering shall be paid by the owner or applicant.
D. Variances
1. The Permit Granting Authority shall have the power, after a public hearing for which
notice has been given pursuant to the applicable section of this Zoning Bylaw and by
mailing to all parties in interest, to grant upon appeal or upon petition, with respect to
particular land or structures, a variance from the terms of this Zoning Bylaw where
the Permit Granting Authority specifically finds that:
a. Literal enforcement of the provisions of the Zoning Bylaw would involve
substantial hardship, financial or otherwise, to the petitioner or appellant owing to
circumstances relating to: i)soil conditions, ii) shape, or iii) topography of such
land or structures, especially affecting such land or structures but not generally
affecting the zoning district in which it is located; and the hardship shall not have
been self-created; and
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 247 of 265
b. Desirable relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good,
and without nullifying or substantially derogating from the intent or purpose of
this Zoning Bylaw.
2. The Permit Granting Authority may impose conditions, safeguards, and limitations
both of time and of use, including the continued existence of any particular structures,
but excluding any conditions, safeguards, or limitations based on the continued
ownership of the land or structures to which the variance pertains, by the applicant,
petitioner, or any owner.
3. The concurring vote of all the members of the ZBA, if a three-member Board, shall
be necessary to effect any variance in the application of this Zoning Bylaw.
4. No variance may authorize a use or activity not otherwise permitted in the zoning
district in which the land or structure is located; provided, however, that such
variance properly granted prior to January 1, 1976, but limited in time, may be
extended on the same terms and conditions that were in effect for such variance upon
said effective date.
5. If the rights authorized by a variance are not exercised within one year of the date of
grant of such variance, they shall lapse, and may be re-established only after notice
and a new hearing pursuant to this Section.
6. Application
All petitions for variance, over which the Permit Granting Authority exercises
original jurisdiction, shall be filed by the petitioner with the Town Clerk who shall
forthwith, within two business days, transmit a copy thereof to the ZBA.
7. Notification and Effectiveness of the Decision
Upon the granting of a variance, or any extension, modification, or renewal thereof,
the Permit Granting Authority shall issue to the owner and to the applicant if other
than the owner, a copy of its decision, certified by the Permit Granting Authority,
containing the name and address of the owner, identifying the land affected, setting
forth compliance with the statutory requirements for the granting of such variance and
certifying that copies of the decision and all plans referred to in the decision have
been filed with the Planning Board and with the Town Clerk. No variance or any
extension, modification, or renewal thereof shall take effect until a copy of the
decision bearing the certification of the Town Clerk that twenty (20) days has elapsed
and, pursuant to the applicable provisions contained within Chapter 40A, Mass.
General Laws, as amended, no appeal has been filed, or that if such appeal has been
filed, that it has been dismissed or denied, is recorded in the Registry of Deeds for the
county and district in which the land is located, and indexed in the grantor index
under the name of the owner or record, or is recorded and noted on the owner's
certificate of title. The fee for recording or registering shall be paid by the owner or
applicant.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 248 of 265
8. Withdrawal
Any petition for a variance which has been transmitted to the Permit Granting
Authority may be withdrawn, without prejudice, by the petitioner prior to the
publication of the notice of a public hearing thereon, but thereafter be withdrawn
without prejudice only with the approval of the Permit Granting Authority.
E. General Rules and Procedures
1. The ZBA shall adopt rules, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Zoning Bylaw
for the conduct of its business and for purposes of the Zoning Act, (Chapter 40A,
Mass. General Laws, as amended), and shall file a copy of said rules with the Town
Clerk.
2. Each ZBA shall elect annually a chairman from its own number and a clerk, and may,
subject to appropriation, employ experts and clerical and other assistants.
3. Meetings of the ZBA shall be held at the call of the chairman or when called in such
other manner as the ZBA shall determine in its rules. The ZBA shall hold a public
hearing on any appeal, application, or petition transmitted to it by the Town Clerk
within sixty-five (65) days from the date of transmittal to the ZBA of such appeal,
application, or petition. The ZBA shall cause notice of such hearing to be published
and sent to parties in interest as provided within the Zoning Bylaws, and not less than
fourteen (14) days prior to said hearing, shall notify the Planning Board of the Town
and the planning boards of cities and towns adjacent, all of which may then forward
recommendations with respect to said matter for the consideration of the ZBA.
The chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths, summon
witnesses, and call for the production of papers.
4. All hearings of the ZBA shall be open to the public. The decision of the ZBA shall be
made within one hundred (100) days after the date of the filing of an appeal,
application, or petition. Failure by the ZBA to act within one hundred (100) days
shall be deemed to be grant of relief, application, or petition sought, subject to an
applicable judicial appeal. The ZBA shall cause to be made a detailed record of its
proceedings, indicating the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or
failing to vote, indicating such fact, and setting forth clearly the reason or reasons for
its decision and of its official actions, or in the event of a failure of the ZBA to act
within said one hundred (100) days, indicating such fact, copies of which shall be
filed within fourteen (14) days of the decision or action, in the offices of the Town
Clerk and of the Planning Board, and shall be a public record; and notice of the
decision and the reasonings on which such decision is based, shall be mailed
forthwith, and within two business days of the aforesaid filing, to the petitioner,
applicant, or appellant, to the parties in interest, and to every person present at the
hearing who requested that such notice be sent to him and stated the address to which
such notice was to be sent, and further, copies of all approved plans shall be sent to
the office of the Planning Board. Each notice shall specify that appeals, if any, shall
be made pursuant to the applicable section of Chapter 40A, Mass. General Laws, as
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 249 of 265
amended, and shall be filed within twenty (20) days after the date of filing of such
notice in the office of the Town Clerk.
5. No appeal, application, or petition which has been unfavorably and finally acted upon
by the Permit Granting Authority shall be acted favorably upon within two years after
date of final unfavorable action unless:
a. Said Permit Granting Authority finds, by a unanimous vote of a three-member
Board, specific and material changes in the conditions upon which unfavorable
action was based, and describes such changes in the record of its proceedings; and
b. All but one of the members of the Planning Board consents thereto; and
c. After notice is given to parties in interest of the time and place of the proceedings
when the question of such consent will be considered.
6. The required time limits for a public hearing and action to be taken may be extended
by written agreement between the applicant and the Permit Granting Authority. A
copy of such agreement shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 250 of 265
Editor’s Note: Page intentionally left blank
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 251 of 265
SECTION 25. SPECIAL PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY
(Editor’s Note: Amended 7/9/2014 to reflect amendments approved under Article 34 at 2014 ATM)
A. General Authority and Conditions
This Zoning Bylaw provides for specific types of uses which shall only be permitted in
specified districts upon the granting of a special permit, as provided herein. Special
permits may be granted only for uses which are in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of this Zoning Bylaw, and shall be subject to general or specific provisions as set
forth herein, and such permits may also impose conditions, safeguards, and limitations on
time or use, in order to further the objectives of this Zoning Bylaw.
B. Specific Powers
1. Scientific Development, Research or Related Production
The Special Permit Granting Authority may grant a special permit for uses accessory to
activities permitted as a matter of right, whether or not on the same parcel as activities
permitted as a matter of right, which activities are necessary in connection with scientific
development, research or related production, provided that the Special Permit Granting
Authority finds that the proposed accessory uses do not substantially derogate from the
public good.
2. Findings
The Special Permit Granting Authority is empowered to make findings in accordance
with Section 17 and G. L. Chapter 40A, Section 6.
3. Project Approval
The Special Permit Granting Authority is empowered to review and approve plans in
accordance with the requirements of Section 16A and this Section 25. The provisions
of Section 25.C. of this section shall apply to the review and approval of plans for
Major Construction Projects as defined in Section 16A of this Zoning Bylaw. The
approval of plans by the Special Permit Granting Authority in accordance with
Section 16A shall constitute the granting of a special permit.
4. Special Permits and Special Use Permits
The Special Permit Granting Authority may grant special permits subject to any
conditions or limitations as specifically provided in this Zoning Bylaw.
5. Adult Uses
The Special Permit Granting Authority is empowered to review and approve
applications for Adult Uses as defined in Section 1B. subject to the provisions of Section
25.D. below and subject to all of the following additional conditions and limitations:
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 252 of 265
a. The Special Permit Granting Authority shall not grant a special permit for an
Adult Use where there is another Adult Use located within a one half mile radius;
b. The Special Permit Granting Authority shall not grant a special permit for an
Adult Use where there is a school, day care center, family day care home,
parkland, playground, library or branch library, religious use, funeral home or
cemetery located within 350 feet.
c. The Special Permit Granting Authority shall not grant a special permit for an
Adult Use where there is a residential zoning district located within 350 feet;
d. Special permits granted shall be subject to annual renewal.
An application to the Special Permit Granting Authority for an Adult Use shall include the
following information:
? Name and address of the legal owner of the proposed adult Use;
? Name and address of all persons having lawful, beneficial, equity or security
interests in the Adult Use;
? Names and addresses of the manager(s) and assistant manager(s);
? The number of employees;
? Proposed security precautions; and
? The physical layout of the premises showing, among other things, the location
or proposed location of the adult books, adult paraphernalia or adult videos.
The legal owner of an Adult Use having received a special permit shall promptly
notify the Special Permit Granting Authority of any changes in the above information
within l0 days and failure to do so will be grounds for revocation of the special
permit.
6. Registered Marijuana Dispensaries
a. Purpose - The purpose of this subsection is to regulate the siting, design,
placement, security, safety, monitoring, and modifications of Registered
Marijuana Dispensaries (“RMDs”) within the Town of Wellesley to
ensure that such uses are operated in a manner consistent with the overall
health, welfare and safety of the Town in compliance with Chapter 369 of
the Acts of 2012, An Act for the Humanitarian Medical Use of Marijuana,
and 105 CMR 725.000: Implementation of an Act for the Humanitarian
Medical Use of Marijuana, and to minimize the adverse impacts of RMDs
on adjacent properties, residential neighborhoods, schools and other places
where children congregate, and other land uses potentially incompatible
with said RMDs.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 253 of 265
b. Compatibility with State Laws - These regulations pertaining to RMDs are
not intended to supersede state laws and/or regulations, including but not
limited to Chapter 369 of the Acts of 2012, An Act for the Humanitarian
Medical Use of Marijuana, and 105 CMR 725.000: Implementation of an
Act for the Humanitarian Medical Use of Marijuana; rather, these
regulations shall take precedence where they are more stringent, and
where a matter is not addressed herein, compliance with 105 CMR
725.000 shall be required. Terms used herein not defined within the
Zoning Bylaw shall be as defined in 105 CMR 725.000.
c. Applicability and Authority
i. Applicability:
(1) No RMD use shall commence unless permitted by the issuance
of a special permit as authorized by this Section and subsection.
(2) No special permit for an RMD use shall be issued unless the use
is located in one of the zoning districts established within the
Zoning Bylaw specifically authorizing such use.
(3) The establishment and operation of RMDs shall be subject to
continued compliance with all special permits, including any
conditions thereof, the provisions of this Section and subsection,
any other applicable requirements of the Zoning Bylaw, and
local and state laws and regulations.
(4) The commercial cultivation, production, processing, assembly,
packaging, retail or wholesale sale, trade, distribution or
dispensing of marijuana is prohibited unless permitted as an
RMD as required and authorized by the Zoning Bylaw.
(5) Nothing in this Bylaw shall be construed to supersede federal
and state laws governing the sale and distribution of narcotic
drugs.
ii. Authority: The Special Permit Granting Authority is empowered to
review and take action on special permit applications for Registered
Marijuana Dispensaries consistent with the procedures established in
Section 25.C.; the Special Permit Granting Authority may deny, grant,
or grant with conditions all such applications.
d. General Regulations - All RMDs shall be subject to the following
conditions and limitations:
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 254 of 265
i. Location:
(1) No special permit for an RMD shall be granted where such use
would be located within 500 feet of a:
a. Public or private elementary school, middle school, or high
school;
b. Child care facility, including family daycare homes, daycare
centers, and/or nursery schools; or
c. Any establishment catering to or providing services
primarily intended for minors, as determined by the Special
Permit Granting Authority.
(2) The 500 foot distance shall be measured in a straight line from
the nearest point of the structure within which the RMD would
operate (from the nearest point of the exterior of the tenant space
if the RMD is located in a structure occupied by multiple tenant
spaces), to the nearest point of any property on which a public or
private elementary school, middle school, or high school is
located, or to the nearest point of any structure containing or
associated with other uses noted above.
(3) The commencement of one or more of the above uses within 500
feet of a proposed RMD location during the review of a special
permit application for an RMD (beginning on the date of
submittal), following the issuance of a special permit, or
following the commencement of the RMD use shall not
invalidate the RMD use, the special permit issued therefor, or the
ability to renew any unexpired or unrevoked special permit.
ii. Configuration and Operation:
(1) An RMD shall be located in, and conduct all operations within,
an enclosed building; this shall not prohibit operations involving
the delivery or receiving of permitted goods and products, which
may involve transfer to or from a motor-vehicle outside of an
associated building.
(2) All publicly accessible entrances shall be visible from a public
way.
(3) Drive-through windows and/or any interactions or sales to
customers within vehicles are prohibited.
(4) No RMD shall be located inside a building containing residential
dwelling units, including transient housing, group housing,
hotels, motels, lodging houses, and/or dormitories.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 255 of 265
(5) The hours of operation of RMDs shall be set by the Special
Permit Granting Authority, but in no event shall an RMD be
open to the public, performing deliveries, and/or otherwise
operating between the hours of 8:00 PM and 8:00 AM; there
shall be no exemptions to the prohibited hours of operation for
emergencies.
(6) No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be permitted on
the premises of the RMD unless he or she is a qualified patient or
primary caregiver, or is accompanied by a parent or legal
guardian.
(7) No marijuana shall be smoked, ingested, or otherwise consumed
on the premises of an RMD; the term “premises” includes all
buildings, accessory structures, parking lots or parking areas,
walks and/or other immediate surroundings located on the same
lot/parcel as the RMD use.
(8) All RMDs shall be ventilated in such a manner that no pesticides,
insecticides or other chemicals or products used in cultivation or
processing are dispersed into the outside atmosphere, and so that
no odor from marijuana or its processing can be detected by a
person with an unimpaired and otherwise normal sense of smell
at the exterior of the RMD or at any adjoining use or property.
iii. Signage:
(1) All signs associated with RMDs shall comply with 105 CMR
725.000 and Section 22A.
(2) All special permit applications for RMDs shall include a
proposed exterior sign package, which may be included as a
condition of issuance of the special permit.
(3) For every publicly accessible entrance there shall be at least one
(1) sign that includes the language “Registration card issued by
the MA Department of Public Health required” with a minimum
text height of two (2) inches.
(4) Temporary signs and standard informational signs, as defined in
Section 22A shall be prohibited.
iv. Security:
(1) RMDs shall provide the Wellesley Police Department, Inspector
of Buildings and the Special Permit Granting Authority with the
names, phone numbers and email addresses of all management
staff and keyholders to whom one can provide notice if there are
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 256 of 265
operating problems associated with the establishment; this
information shall be updated when staff of the RMD changes.
(2) No operator and/or employee of an RMD shall have been
convicted of any felony under state or federal law.
(3) Trash dumpsters shall be locked and enclosed by a screening
enclosure so as not to be accessible to the public.
(4) The exterior grounds, including the parking lot and landscaped
areas, shall be lighted in such a manner that all areas are clearly
visible at all times during business hours; all light fixtures shall
have full cut off shields.
(5) The RMD shall be equipped with, and the operators of such
RMD shall maintain in working order at all times,
burglary/robbery alarms.
(6) A video surveillance system in compliance with 105 CMR
725.000 shall be installed and maintained; the system shall
monitor all areas that may contain marijuana, parking lot areas,
main building entrances and exits, and any and all transaction
areas for the dispensing of marijuana.
(7) Procedures and protocols for the delivery and transport of
marijuana and MIPs shall be in compliance with 105 CMR
725.000 and approved by the Chief of Police.
e. Procedures and Findings
i. Procedures: In addition to the procedures established in Section 25.C.,
special permits issued for RMDs shall be:
(1) Limited to the current applicant and shall lapse if the permit
holder ceases operation of the RMD; and
(2) Renewed annually.
ii. Findings: In addition to determining compliance with the above
General Regulations, all other applicable Sections of the Zoning
Bylaw, and the applicable Special Use Permit Standards contained in
Section 25.D., the Special Permit Granting Authority in their review of
any special permit application for an RMD shall find that the proposed
Registered Marijuana Dispensary:
(1) Meets a demonstrated local and regional need based on the
proximity of other RMDs serving the Town’s qualifying patients;
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 257 of 265
(2) Meets all other applicable requirements of the Zoning Bylaw and
the permitting requirements of all applicable agencies of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the Town of Wellesley,
and will otherwise comply with all applicable state and local
laws and regulations;
(3) Is designed to minimize any adverse visual or economic impacts
on abutters and other parties in interest;
(4) Provides a secure indoor waiting area for patients;
(5) Provides adequate pick up/drop off area;
(6) Provides adequate security measures to ensure that no individual
participants will pose a threat to the health or safety of other
individuals, and that the storage and/or location of cultivation of
marijuana is adequately secured in enclosed, locked facilities;
and
(7) Adequately addresses issues of vehicular and pedestrian traffic,
circulation, parking and queuing, especially during peak periods
at the RMD.
f. Severability - The provisions of this subsection (Section 25.B.6.) are severable. If
any provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause of this Section, or the application
thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances, shall be held invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this Section or the
Zoning Bylaw.
C. Procedures
The Special Permit Granting Authority shall adopt and from time to time amend rules
relative to the granting of special permits, and shall file a copy of said rules in the office
of the Town Clerk. Such rules may prescribe the size, form, contents, style, and number
of copies of plans and specifications, and the procedure for the submission and approval
of such permits.
Each application for a special permit shall be filed by the petitioner with the Town Clerk
and a copy of said application, including the date and time of filing certified by the Town
Clerk, shall be filed forthwith by the petitioner with the Special Permit Granting
Authority. The Special Permit Granting Authority shall hold a public hearing, for which
notice has been given, on any application for a special permit within sixty-five (65) days
from the date of filing such application.
The Special Permit Granting Authority shall act within ninety (90) days following a
public hearing for which notice has been given by publication and posting as provided
within this Zoning Bylaw, and by mailing to all parties in interest. Failure by a Special
Permit Granting Authority to take final action within ninety (90) days or extended time,
shall be deemed to be a grant of the special permit. The petitioner who seeks such
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 258 of 265
approval by reason of the failure of the Special Permit Granting Authority to act within
such time, shall notify the Town Clerk, in writing within fourteen (14) days from the
expiration of the time period of such approval and that notice has been sent by the
petitioner to parties in interest. The petitioner shall send such notice to parties in interest,
by mail, and each such notice shall specify that appeals, if any, shall be made pursuant to
Mass. General Laws Chapter 40A and shall be filed within twenty (20) days after the date
the Town Clerk received such written notice from the petitioner that the Special Permit
Granting Authority failed to act within the time prescribed. After the expiration of
twenty (20) days without notice of appeal, or if appeal has been taken, after receipt of
certified records indicating that such approval has become final, the Town Clerk shall
issue a certificate stating the date of approval, the fact that the Special Permit Granting
Authority failed to take action and that the approval resulting from such failure has
become final, and such certificate shall be forwarded to the petitioner.
The required time limits for a public hearing and action, may be extended by written
agreement between the petitioner and the Special Permit Granting Authority. A copy of
such agreement shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk.
Special permits granted by a Special Permit Granting Authority shall require a two-thirds
vote of boards with more than five (5) members, a vote of at least four (4) members of a
five (5) member board, and a unanimous vote of a three (3) member board.
Upon the granting of a special permit, or any extension, modification, or renewal thereof,
the Special Permit Granting Authority shall issue to the owner, and to the applicant if
other than the owner, a copy of its decision, or, in the event of a failure of the Special
Permit Granting Authority to act within ninety (90) days from the date of the aforesaid
public hearing, a copy of the application for a special permit accompanied by the
certification of the Town Clerk stating the fact that the Special Permit Granting Authority
failed to act within the time prescribed and no appeal has been filed and that the grant of
the application resulting from such failure to act has become final or that if an appeal has
been filed, that it has been dismissed or denied, is recorded in the registry of deeds for the
county and district in which the land is located and indexed in the grantor index under the
name of the owner of record or is recorded and noted on the owner's certificate of title.
No special permit nor any extension, modification, or renewal thereof shall take effect
until a copy of the decision bearing the certification of the Town Clerk that twenty (20)
days has elapsed and, pursuant to the applicable provisions contained within Chapter
40A. Mass. General Laws, as amended, no appeal has been filed, or that if such appeal
has been filed that it has been dismissed or denied, is recorded in the Registry of Deeds
for the county and district in which the land is located and indexed in the grantor index
under the name of the owner of record or is recorded and noted on the owner's certificate
of title. The fee for recording or registering shall be paid by the owner or applicant.
The Special Permit Granting Authority shall cause to be made a detailed record of its
proceedings, indicating the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or
failing to vote, indicating such fact, and setting forth clearly the reason for its decision
and of its official actions, copies of all which shall be filed within fourteen (14) days in
the office of the Town Clerk and shall be deemed a public record, and notice of the
decision shall be mailed forthwith to the petitioner, applicant or appellant, to the parties
in interest, and to every person present at the hearing who requested that notice be sent to
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 259 of 265
him and stated the address to which such notice was to be sent. Each such notice shall
specify that appeals, if any, shall be made pursuant to Mass General Laws Chapter 40A
and shall be filed within twenty (20) days after the date of filing of such notice in the
office of the Town Clerk.
Petitions for special permits shall be submitted to the Special Permit Granting Authority
and referred within seven (7) days by it for review to the following: The Board of Health,
the Planning Board (except when the Planning Board is the Special Permit Granting
Authority), the Town Engineer, the Wetlands Protection Committee, and any other Town
agency or board designated by the Special Permit Granting Authority. Any such board or
agency to which petitions are referred for review shall make such recommendations as
they deem appropriate and shall send copies thereof to the Special Permit Granting
Authority and to the applicant; provided, however, that failure of any board or agency to
make recommendations within thirty-five (35) days of receipt by such board or agency of
the petition shall be deemed lack of opposition thereto.
No application or petition which has been unfavorably and finally acted upon by the
Special Permit Granting Authority shall be acted favorably upon within two (2) years
after the date of final unfavorable action unless:
1. Said Special Permit Granting Authority finds, by a unanimous vote of a threemember
Board, specific and material changes in the conditions upon which
unfavorable action was based, and describes such changes in the record of its
proceedings; and
2. All but one of the members of the Planning Board or Board of Selectmen, when
serving as Special Permit Granting Authority, consents thereto; and
3. After notice is given to parties in interest of the time and place of the proceedings
when such consent will be considered. Any application for a special permit which
has been transmitted to the Special Permit Granting Authority may be withdrawn,
without prejudice, by the petitioner prior to the publication of a public hearing
thereon, but thereafter be withdrawn without prejudice only with the approval of the
Special Permit Granting Authority.
A special permit shall lapse within two (2) years of the effective date of grant of such
special permit, if a substantial use thereof has not sooner commenced except for good
cause or, in the case of a permit for construction, if construction has not begun by such
date except for good cause.
D. Special Use Permit Standards
The Special Permit Granting Authority may grant a special permit in accordance with this
Section only if it finds that, in addition to all other conditions which may otherwise be
required under this Zoning Bylaw, all of the following conditions are met:
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 260 of 265
1. Vehicular Circulation
That the circulation patterns for motor vehicles which would result from the proposed
use or structure which is the subject of the special permit do not create conditions that
add to traffic congestion or accident potential on the site or in the surrounding area.
2. Driveways
That new driveways are not less than 50 feet from street intersections; and that new
driveways have widths not less than the width of driveways specified in Section 21 of
this Zoning Bylaw; and that Special Permit requests for uses which would increase
the number of vehicle trips, where the property is served by an existing driveway less
than 50 feet from a street intersection, are not granted without a favorable
recommendation from the Town Traffic Engineer that the special permit use will not
create conditions referred to in Section 25.D.1. above.
3. Vehicle Queuing Lanes
That vehicle queuing lanes, including those for drive through facilities, have a width
equal to or greater than nine feet; and that vehicle storage capacity and separation are
provided so that vehicles will not encroach onto sidewalk areas or designated fire
lanes, or interfere with the travel or maneuvering of other vehicles into and out of
parking spaces, driveways or within the public way.
4. Compatibility with Surroundings
That any modification of a premises resulting from the proposed use or structure
which is the subject of the special permit is made compatible, to the extent required
by the Special Permit Granting Authority with the existing natural and man-made
features of the site and with the characteristics of the surrounding area; and that
consideration is given to the protection of trees and other natural features.
5. Pedestrian Safety
That pedestrian and bicycle circulation is provided, in accordance with nationally
recognized safety standards; and that separation, such as curbing, bollards or
landscaped buffer areas, is provided between pedestrian areas and all areas open to
vehicular traffic, such as parking spaces, vehicle queuing lanes and driveways.
6. Noxious Uses
That the proposed use or activity is consistent with the provisions of Section 16.A.
and B.
7. Intensity of Use
That any increase in: the number of vehicle trips, the number of employees or
visitors, the number of parking spaces, the amount of energy used, or the volume of
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 261 of 265
liquid or solid waste produced, likely to result from the proposed use or activity will
not adversely affect the character of the site and its surrounding area.
For the purposes of this Section 25.D., the term "surrounding area" shall mean the area
within which owners of land surrounding the site are defined as parties in interest in
accordance with Section 26.B., unless otherwise specifically determined by the Special
Permit Granting Authority.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 262 of 265
Editor’s Note: Page intentionally left blank
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 263 of 265
SECTION 26. NOTICE FOR PUBLIC HEARINGS
A. In all cases where notice of a public hearing is required, notice shall be given by
publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town once in each of two (2)
successive weeks, the first publication to be not less than fourteen (14) days before the
day of the hearing; and by posting such notice in a conspicuous place in the Town Hall
for a period of not less than fourteen (14) days before the day of such hearing.
B. As used in this Zoning Bylaw, "parties in interest" shall mean the petitioner, abutters,
owners of land directly opposite on any public or private street or way, and abutters to the
abutters within 300 feet of the property line of the petitioner as they appear on the most
recent applicable tax list, notwithstanding that the land of any such owner is located in
another city or town, the Planning Board of the Town, and the planning boards, of every
abutting city or town. Owners of land directly opposite the petitioner on any public or
private street or way, shall be considered abutters under this Section.
The assessors maintaining any applicable tax list shall certify to the Permit Granting
Authority or Special Permit Granting Authority the names and addresses of parties in
interest, and such certification shall be conclusive for all purposes.
C. In all cases where notice to individuals or specific boards or other agencies is required,
notice shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid.
The Permit Granting Authority or Special Permit Granting Authority may accept a waiver
of notice from, or an affidavit of actual notice to any party in interest or, in his stead, any
successor owner of record who may not have received a notice by mail, and may order
special notice to any such person, giving not less than five (5) nor more than ten (10)
additional days to reply.
D. Publications and notices required by this Section shall contain the name of the petitioner,
a description of the area or premises, street address, if any, or other adequate
identification of the location, of the area or premises which is the subject of the petition,
the date, time, and place of the public hearing, the subject matter of the public hearing
sufficient for identification, the place where the texts and maps thereof may be inspected,
and the nature of the action or relief requested, if any.
E. No defect in the form of any notice under this Zoning Bylaw shall invalidate this Zoning
Bylaw or amendment thereto, unless such defect is found to be misleading.
D. No such hearing shall be held on any day on which a state or municipal election, caucus,
or primary is held in the Town.
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 264 of 265
Editor’s Note: Page intentionally left blank
Town of Wellesley Zoning Bylaw Page 265 of 265
SECTION 27. INTERPRETATION
This bylaw as amended so as to include this Section 27 for the first time shall be deemed to
constitute a reenactment and continuance of the Zoning Bylaw in effect at the time of such
amendment.
RULES AND REGULATIONS
GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF
LAND IN WELLESLEY
MASSACHUSETTS
Adopted by
Wellesley Planning Board
December 13, 1971
Amended
June 2, 1975
April 20, 1976
September 24, 1979
October 25, 1983
October 28, 1986
October 13, 1987
February 16, 1988
December 13, 1988
January 10, 1989
June 26, 1990
December 10, 1991
July 27, 1993
November 27, 2001
June 5, 2017
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 2 of 40
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION
OF LAND IN WELLESLEY, MASSACHUSETTS
PURPOSE. ........................................................................................................................................................ 4
SECTION I. AUTHORITY. ............................................................................................................................. 4
SECTION II. GENERAL. ................................................................................................................................. 4
A. Definitions. ............................................................................................................................... 4
B. Compliance with Zoning Bylaw. ............................................................................................. 7
C. Compliance with other Laws, Rules, Regulations Processes. ................................................. 7
D. One Dwelling Per Lot. .............................................................................................................. 8
E. Application Forms. ................................................................................................................... 8
SECTION III. PLANS BELIEVED NOT TO REQUIRE APPROVAL. ........................................................ 8
A. Submission. .............................................................................................................................. 8
B. Contents. ................................................................................................................................... 9
C. Approval. ................................................................................................................................ 10
SECTION IV. SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION PLANS. ........................................ 10
A. Preliminary Plan. .................................................................................................................... 10
1. Submission. ................................................................................................................ 10
2. Contents...................................................................................................................... 11
3. Tentative Approval. ................................................................................................... 13
B. Definitive Plan. ....................................................................................................................... 13
1. Submission. ................................................................................................................ 13
2. Contents...................................................................................................................... 14
3. Flood Insurance Rate Zones. ..................................................................................... 22
4. Procedure. ................................................................................................................... 22
5. Performance Guarantee. ............................................................................................. 23
6. Conveyance of Utilities and Easements to the Town. ............................................... 24
7. Street Acceptance Plan and As-Built Plan. ............................................................... 24
8. Park or Playground ..................................................................................................... 25
9. Waivers ...................................................................................................................... 26
SECTION V. DESIGN REQUIREMENTS. .................................................................................................. 26
A. General. ................................................................................................................................... 26
B. Streets. .................................................................................................................................... 26
1. Location and Alignment. ........................................................................................... 26
2. Street Width. .............................................................................................................. 27
3. Grade. ......................................................................................................................... 28
4. Dead End Streets. ....................................................................................................... 28
C. Utilities. .................................................................................................................................. 29
1. Storm Drains. ............................................................................................................. 29
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 3 of 40
2. Water and Sanitary Sewer Facilities. ......................................................................... 29
3. Electric Underground Distribution System. .............................................................. 30
D. Easements. .............................................................................................................................. 31
E. Protection of Natural Features. ............................................................................................... 31
F. Erosion and Sedimentation Control. ...................................................................................... 32
G. Cut and Fill ............................................................................................................................. 32
SECTION VI. UNDERGROUND MUNICIPAL SERVICES AND C.A.T.V. ........................................... 32
A. General. ................................................................................................................................... 32
B. Storm Drainage. ...................................................................................................................... 33
C. Water and Sanitary Sewer Facilities. ..................................................................................... 33
D. Electric Underground Distribution System. ........................................................................... 34
SECTION VII. CONSTRUCTION OF STREETS. ....................................................................................... 34
A. General. ................................................................................................................................... 34
B. Excavation and Backfill. ........................................................................................................ 35
C. Bituminous Concrete Pavement Type I-1. ............................................................................. 35
D. Sidewalks. ............................................................................................................................... 35
E. Driveway Aprons. ................................................................................................................... 36
F. Curbing. .................................................................................................................................. 36
G. Grass Plots. ............................................................................................................................. 37
H. Sloping. ................................................................................................................................... 37
I. Retaining Walls. ..................................................................................................................... 37
J. Street Signs. ............................................................................................................................ 37
K. Trees........................................................................................................................................ 37
L. Monuments, Concrete or Granite Bounds. ............................................................................ 38
M. Work Notification to Town Departments. ............................................................................. 38
N. Delays in Construction. .......................................................................................................... 39
SECTION VIII. ADMINISTRATION. ......................................................................................................... 39
A. Filing of Plans in Registry of Deeds or in Land Court. ......................................................... 39
B. Waiver of Compliance. .......................................................................................................... 39
C. Modifications to Approval. .................................................................................................... 40
D. Subdivision Control Law. ...................................................................................................... 40
E. Acceptance of Streets. ............................................................................................................ 40
SECTION IX. SEVERABILITY .................................................................................................................... 40
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 4 of 40
PURPOSE.
The Planning Board has adopted the following set of Rules and Regulations governing the
subdivision of land for the purpose of protecting the safety, convenience and welfare of the
inhabitants of Wellesley. These Rules and Regulations are intended to:
1. provide for adequate access to all the lots in a subdivision by ways that will be safe and
convenient;
2. lessen congestion in such ways and in the adjacent public ways;
3. reduce danger to life and limb in the operation of motor vehicles;
4. secure safety in the case of fire, flood, panic and other emergencies
5. insure compliance with applicable zoning ordinances or bylaws;
6. secure adequate provision for water, sewerage, drainage, underground utility services, fire,
police and other similar municipal equipment, and street lighting and other requirements
where necessary in a subdivision;
7. coordinate the ways in a subdivision with each other, with the public ways in Wellesley and
with the ways in a neighboring subdivision; and
8. insure compliance with the recommendations of the Board of Health
SECTION I. AUTHORITY.
These Rules and Regulations, adopted under the provisions of Chapter 41, Sections 81K to 81GG,
inclusive, M.G.L. together with the Rules and Regulations of the Wellesley Municipal Light Board
as they apply to subdivision, shall be effective on and after January 1, 1972, and shall remain in
effect until modified or amended by the Wellesley Planning Board.
No person shall make a subdivision of any land in Wellesley unless the plan for such subdivision
has been submitted to the Planning Board for its approval, showing the lots into which such land is
to be divided and the ways already existing or which are to be provided for furnishing access to
such lots, and until the Planning Board has approved such plan in the manner hereinafter provided.
SECTION II. GENERAL.
A. Definitions.
1. Applicant: An owner, or agent, representative, or assigns (Chapter 41, Section 81L,
M.G.L.).
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 5 of 40
2. Approval:
a. Final: Approval by the Board of a definitive plan submitted in accordance
with Section IV. B. of these Rules and Regulations and Chapter 41, Section
81T, M.G.L.
b. Tentative: Approval by the Board of a preliminary plan submitted in
accordance with Section IV. A. of these Rules and Regulations and Chapter
41, Section 81S, M.G.L.
3. Board: The Planning Board of the Town of Wellesley.
4. Board of Public Works: The Board of Public Works of the Town of Wellesley.
5. Developer and/or Subdivider: An applicant who submits a preliminary or definitive
plan to the Planning Board for approval.
6. Frontage: A lot boundary line which abuts
a. a public way or a way which the town clerk certifies is maintained and used
as a public way, or
b. a way shown on a plan theretofore approved and endorsed in accordance
with the Subdivision Control Law, or
c. a way in existence when the Subdivision Control Law became effective in
the town having, in the opinion of the Planning Board, sufficient width
suitable grades and adequate construction to provide for the needs of
vehicular traffic in relation to the proposed use of the land abutting thereon
or served thereby, and for the installation of municipal services to serve such
land and the buildings erected or to be erected thereon.
7. Lot: An area of land in one ownership with definite boundaries, used or available for
use as the site of one or more buildings complying with the area, frontage and other
requirements of the Zoning Bylaw of the Town of Wellesley (Chapter 41, Section
81L, M.G.L.).
8. M.G.L.: The General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, as amended.
9. Municipal Services: Public utilities furnished by the Town of Wellesley, such as
water, sewerage and electricity (Chapter 41, Section 81L, M.G.L.).
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 6 of 40
10. Owner: The owner of record as shown by the records in the Norfolk County
Registry of Deeds or Land Registration Office.
11. Person: An individual, two or more individuals, a partnership, association or
corporation.
12. Plan:
a. Definitive: A plan of a proposed subdivision or re-subdivision submitted in
accordance with Section IV. B. of these Rules and Regulations and Chapter
41, Section 81T, M.G.L.
b. Preliminary: A plan of a proposed subdivision or re-subdivision submitted in
accordance with Section IV. A. of these Rules and Regulations and Chapter
41, Section 81T, M.G.L.
13. Profile: A vertical section of streets, storm drainage and sanitary sewer facilities.
14. Registered Mail: Registered or certified mail.
15. Registry of Deeds: The Registry of Deeds of the County of Norfolk, including when
appropriate, the recorder of the Land Court.
16. Roadway: The portion of a street intended for vehicular use.
17. Rules and Regulations: The Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of
Land in Wellesley Massachusetts as adopted and amended by the Wellesley
Planning Board pursuant to Section 81Q of the Subdivision Control Law (M.G.L.).
18. Street:
a. Suburban Arterial: A street which, in the opinion of the Board, is being or
will be used primarily as a thoroughfare between different cities and/or
towns.
b. Neighborhood Collector: A street which, in the opinion of the Board, is
being or will be used to collect traffic from several local streets.
c. Local: A street which, in the opinion of the Board, is being or will be used
primarily to provide access to the lots abutting on such street.
19. Subdivider: See Developer.
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 7 of 40
20. Subdivision: Subdivision shall mean the division of a tract of land into two or more
lots and shall include re-subdivision, and when appropriate to the context, shall
relate to the process of subdivision of the land or territory subdivided; provided,
however, that the division of a tract of land into two or more lots shall not be
deemed to constitute a subdivision within the meaning of the Subdivision Control
Law, if, at the time when it is made, every lot within the tract so divided has
frontage on:
a. a public way or a way which the clerk of the city or town certifies is
maintained and used as a public way, or
b. a way shown on a plan theretofore approved and endorsed in accordance
with the Subdivision Control Law, or
c. a way in existence when the Subdivision Control Law became effective in
the city or town in which the land lies, having, in the opinion of the Planning
Board, sufficient width, suitable grades and adequate construction to provide
for the needs of vehicular traffic in relation to the proposed use of the land
abutting thereon or served thereby, and for the installation of municipal
services to serve such land and the buildings erected or to be erected
thereon.
Such frontage shall be of at least such distance as is then required by the
Wellesley Zoning Bylaw for erection of a building on such lot.
Conveyances or other instruments adding to, taking away from or changing
the size and shape of, lots in such a manner as not to leave above set forth,
or the division of a tract of land on which two or more buildings were
standing when the Subdivision Control Law went into effect in the Town
into separate lots on each of which one of such buildings remains standing,
shall not constitute a subdivision (Chapter 41, Section 81L M.G.L.).
21. Subdivision Control Law: Chapter 41, Sections 81K to 81GG inclusive, M.G.L.
B. Compliance with Zoning Bylaw.
No plan of a subdivision shall be approved unless all of the lots shown on the plan comply
with the provisions of the Zoning Bylaw with regard to size, shape, width and frontage, and
no lot or lots shall be altered during development of the subdivision without formal action
of the Planning Board.
C. Compliance with other Laws, Rules, Regulations Processes.
Approval and endorsement of a plan by the Planning Board should not be interpreted to
represent compliance with any law, rule, regulation or permitting process of any agency
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 8 of 40
other than the Wellesley Planning Board. It is the responsibility of the applicant to secure
all other applicable permits and approvals.
D. One Dwelling Per Lot.
Not more than one building designed or available for use for dwelling purposes shall be
erected or placed or converted to use as such on any lot in a subdivision, or elsewhere in the
Town, without the consent of the Planning Board, and such consent may be conditional
upon the providing of adequate ways furnishing access to each site for such building, in the
same manner as otherwise required for lots within a subdivision.
E. Application Forms.
Application forms to accompany plans submitted to the Planning Board for review may be
obtained at the Planning Board Office.
SECTION III. PLANS BELIEVED NOT TO REQUIRE APPROVAL.
A. Submission.
Any person who wishes a plan of land to be recorded with the Register of Deeds or filed
with the Land Court and believes that the plan does not require approval under the
Subdivision Control Law, may submit the plan together with eight prints, an approved
application form, properly executed to the Planning Board together with the application
filing fee, as specified in the Planning Department Fee Schedule approved by the Planning
Board.
Once a Board endorsement is put on a plan it will be returned to the petitioner for filing.
Registered and Unregistered Land: The plan shall be accompanied by evidence designed to
show that such plan does not require approval. The applicant shall give written notice to the
Town Clerk, on a form approved by the Planning Board, by delivery or by registered mail,
postage prepaid, stating the date of submission of the plan to the Planning Board, in
accordance with Chapter 41, Section 81T, M.G.L.
The date of submission shall be the date upon which the plan and all information are
complete, accurate and in acceptable form as required herein by these rules and regulations
and the filing fee is paid.
Plans being submitted shall be prepared by a Massachusetts Registered Land Surveyor on
linen or on polyester film, single matte with a thickness of 3 mils, and must have an opacity
so as to allow consistent diazo and microfilm reproduction. All plans shall be prepared
using a compatible ink with excellent cohesiveness which will produce a permanent bond
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 9 of 40
and result in a plan with long term durability. The minimum letter size on plans shall be
one-eighth inch (1/8").
B. Contents.
All plans shall be drawn to a scale of 1"=40', shall be a minimum size of eight and one-half
inches by eleven inches (8 1/2" x 11") and a maximum size of twenty-four inches by
thirty-six inches (24" x 36") with three-quarter inch (3/4") borders, and shall show:
1. Title, North arrow, date of survey and graphic scale;
2. Name of owner of record;
3. Name and address of Registered Land Surveyor;
4. Names of all abutters as they appear on the most recent tax list;
5. Lines of existing and proposed streets, ways (including private driveways and off
street parking areas) and easements;
6. Location of all underground utilities shall be shown with indication of those existing
lines that are presently abandoned;
7. Existing and proposed boundary lines, including dimensions and areas of all lots
shown;
8. Lot and/or house numbers;
9. Location of all existing buildings, structures and bounds including distances to
nearest property boundary lines;
10. Zoning District(s) and any Zoning District Boundary lines including Flood Plain or
Watershed Protection District, Water Supply Protection District or Historic District;
11. Existing and proposed Floor Area Ratios must be shown if the plan shows changes
to property lines of lots located in whole or in part within commercial districts;
12. Existing and proposed Build Factors must be shown if the plan shows changes to
property lines in Single Residence Districts;
13. Water bodies including intermittent streams, bordering vegetated wetlands as
specified in the Wetlands Protection Act, M.G.L. chapter 131, Section 40. (only
required for plans creating new building lots).
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 10 of 40
14. Suitable space to record the action of the Planning Board and signatures of the five
members of the Board;
15. A three and one-half inch (3 1/2") blank square reserved for the use of the Registry
of Deeds;
16. A certification clause signed by the preparer stating that he/she has conformed with
the rules and regulations of the Registry of Deeds in preparing the plan; and
17. Other information as may be required by the Board.
C. Approval.
When the Planning Board determines that the plan does not require approval, it will within
21 days without a public hearing, endorse the plan in black ink under the words "Approval
under the Subdivision Control Law not required." The Planning Board may add to such
endorsement a statement as to the reason approval is not required or such other statement as
may be deemed appropriate by the Planning Board. The Planning Board will notify the
Town Clerk of its action.
If the Planning Board determines that the plan does require approval under the Subdivision
Control Law, it will so inform the applicant and return the plan, unendorsed, and will notify
the Town Clerk of its action.
Registered Land.
Once a Board endorsement is put on a plan, changes to the plan will not be permitted unless
there is prior approval by the Planning Board of the changes. After consideration of any
proposed changes, the Board will decide whether resubmission is required. Plan submission
information required under the provisions of B., above, which is not to be shown on original
plans according to the requirements of the Land Court, shall be shown, in ink, on a
duplicate original or paper print and submitted along with the original plan.
SECTION IV. SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION PLANS.
A. Preliminary Plan.
1. Submission.
Any person who submits to the Planning Board for review a Preliminary Plan of a
proposed subdivision shall file with the Planning Board, together with a properly
executed application form, twelve (12) prints of each plan and profile, and the
application filing fee, as specified in the Planning Department Fee Schedule
approved by the Planning Board.
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 11 of 40
Copies of the plans will be distributed to other Town Boards for discussion and
approval, modification or disapproval by each board. The submission of such a
Preliminary Plan will enable the developer, the Planning Board, the Board of
Health, other municipal agencies and owners of property abutting the subdivision to
discuss and clarify the problems of such a subdivision before a Definitive Plan is
prepared.
The applicant shall give written notice to the Town Clerk on a form approved by the
Planning Board, by delivery or by registered mail, postage prepaid, stating the date
of submission of the plan to the Planning Board, in accordance with Chapter 41,
Section 81S, M.G.L.
The date of submission of a preliminary plan shall be the date upon which all plans
and information are complete and accurate in acceptable form as required herein by
these rules and regulations and the filing fee is paid.
If the Planning Board deems it appropriate to engage outside engineers to review
plans and make recommendations, the disbursements for these services shall be
reimbursed by the applicant and a deposit shall be required in advance to be held as
surety by the Town, against which these disbursements shall be assessed and the
balance returned to the applicant.
2. Contents.
The Preliminary Plan shall be prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor, a Registered
Professional Engineer or a Registered Landscape Architect and shall be drawn to a
scale of 1"=40' and shall show:
a. Title and North arrow;
b. Name of owner of record;
c. Names of all abutters as they appear on the most recent tax list;
d. The location of all permanent monuments, natural objects such as
waterways, trees of 12" or more caliper (trunk diameter at 4.5 feet above the
ground) within the area to be disturbed, drainage courses, large boulders or
ledge outcroppings, stone walls and the like;
e. Proposed roads with the proposed layout of storm drains, water supply,
sewage disposal system and all necessary easements;
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 12 of 40
f. Dimensions and areas of lots, the total area devoted to lots and streets, and
the total area encompassed by the plan;
g. The general relation of the proposed roads, water, sewer and drainage
systems and easements to adjoining properties and ways.
Submitted with the Preliminary Plan shall be a profile drawn to a horizontal scale of
1"=40' and a vertical scale of 1"=4', showing all grades of all proposed streets, ways,
roads, sewer and drains. Profiles and contours shall be developed on Town of
Wellesley Base.
A contour plan, showing existing and proposed contours at intervals of 2 feet for
gentle slopes and 5 feet for steep slopes embracing at least the area included in the
petition shall be submitted. Proposed depth of cuts and fills shall be shown, in feet,
on the plan. Cuts and fills, in conjunction with street construction, in excess of 6
feet as measured from the original natural grade to the finished grade are not
allowed.
Should the plan be submitted on more than one sheet, all sheets shall be of the same
size. Each plan and profile submitted shall have the following Title Block in the
lower right hand corner:
SUBDIVISION PLAN OF LAND
IN
WELLESLEY, MASSACHUSETTS
OWNER ENGINEER
(name, address, telephone #) (name, address, telephone #)
scale: 1’’ = 40’ Date ( )
Sheet x of x
APPROVED BY
WELLESLEY PLANNING BOARD
DATE________________________
seals of engineer
and land surveyor
preliminary application filed
definitive application filed
definitive plan filed
pubic hearing date
area regulation district
project number
PB number
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 13 of 40
3. Tentative Approval.
After examination, the Planning Board will make any suggestions for revisions as it
deems desirable in the public interest and will approve or disapprove the
Preliminary Plan.
Approval of a Preliminary Plan with or without modifications shall not be
considered as approval of the subdivision and such plan shall not be recorded by the
Register of Deeds.
B. Definitive Plan.
1. Submission.
Any person who submits to the Planning Board for approval a Definitive Plan of a
proposed subdivision shall file with the Planning Board, together with a properly
executed application form, original plans and profiles, and twelve (12) prints of each
plan and profile and the application filing fee, as specified in the Planning
Department Fee Schedule approved by the Planning Board.
The fee shall be submitted to the Planning Board Office in the form of a check
payable to the Town of Wellesley.
If the Planning Board deems it appropriate to engage outside engineers to review
plans and make recommendations, the disbursements for these services shall be
reimbursed by the applicant and a deposit shall be required in advance to be held as
surety by the Town, against which these disbursements shall be assessed and the
balance returned to the applicant.
The applicant shall give written notice to the Town Clerk on a form approved by the
Planning Board, by delivery or registered mail, postage prepaid, stating the date of
submission of the plan to the Planning Board in accordance with Chapter 41,
Section 81T, M.G.L.
The date of submission of a definitive subdivision plan shall be the date upon which
all plans and information are complete and accurate in acceptable form as required
herein by these rules and regulations and the filing fee is paid.
Plans being submitted shall be on linen or on polyester film, single matte with a
thickness of 3 mils, and must have an opacity so as to allow consistent diazo and
microfilm reproduction. All plans and profiles shall be prepared using a compatible
ink with excellent cohesiveness which will produce a permanent bond and result in
a plan with long-term durability.
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 14 of 40
2. Contents.
PLAN.
The Definitive Plan shall be drawn to a scale of 1"=40' or 1"=20' on at least five
separate sheets as follows:
a. Layout of lots, which shall be prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor;
1) Subdivision name, if any, names of proposed streets (new street
names shall be subject to prior approval of the Planning Board),
boundaries, North arrow, date, graphic scale, legend and the Zoning
Classification (including overlay district designations such as Flood
Plain or Watershed Protection Districts, Water Supply Protection
Districts and Historic Districts;) (12/13/88)
2) Name of owner of record;
3) Name and address of Registered Professional Engineer, Registered
Land Surveyor and Registered Landscape Architect as applicable
with seals;
4) A locus plan drawn to a scale of 1"=500' showing the relation of the
proposed subdivision to adjoining properties within a radius of 1/4
mile and to the nearest existing streets on all sides;
5) Names of all abutters as they appear on the most recent tax list;
6) Location, name(s) and present width of any adjacent street(s);
7) Boundary lines, dimensions and areas of all proposed lots including
all bearings on the property lines, with all lots designated
numerically in sequence; (a traverse and closure of the perimeter of
the subdivision shall be provided; the traverse shall be tied in to
public and private monuments);
8) Sufficient information to locate accurately existing and proposed
streets, ways and easements as well as their connections to existing
streets in the vicinity;
9) The limit of previous approval by the Planning Board and the date of
such approval; if subdivision adjoins an accepted Public Way or
Private Way it shall be so designated; the date of acceptance for
each public way must be shown;
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 15 of 40
10) Length and direction of street boundary lines; length, radii, tangents
and intersection angles of all curves, together with the widths of
streets and/or ways;
b. Contour Plan prepared by a Registered Professional Engineer;
1) Contours developed on Town of Wellesley Base; existing and
proposed contours to be at two foot intervals for gentle slopes and at
five foot intervals for steep slopes; land areas with slopes in excess
of 15% shall be delineated along with a detailing of measures
and/or facilities to control soil erosion and sedimentation; this plan
shall indicate the square footage of disturbed land area and the
estimated time of exposure for all disturbed land; proposed lot
grading and runoff patterns shall be shown; base flood (100 year
flood) elevation data for any portion of the proposed subdivision
which is within numbered or unnumbered A zones as shown of the
Wellesley Flood Insurance Rate Map shall be shown;
A copy of the relevant section of the latest United States Soil
Conservation Service Soil Classification Map or equivalent
documentation showing soil types;
2) Water bodies including intermittent streams, bordering vegetated
wetlands as specified in the Wetlands Protection Act, M.G.L.
chapter 131, Section 40;
c. Design of roadway (plan and profile) including water, sewer, storm drain
systems and typical cross section prepared by a Registered Professional
Engineer;
1) Proposed layout of storm drainage, sanitary sewer disposal systems,
water supply and all easements (on a separate sheet);
2) Typical Cross Section showing all underground utilities, roadway
and sidewalk construction;
d. Design of underground electrical distribution system, as prepared by the;
Wellesley Municipal Light Plant (WMLP) and
e. Landscape Plan as defined in 3. Contents. below, prepared by a Registered
Landscape Architect.
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 16 of 40
The Landscape Plan is intended to assist the Planning Board in fulfilling its
responsibilities under the Subdivision Control Law and these Rules and
Regulations in determining, among other things:
that access to all of the proposed building lots is adequate,
that lot grading provides that there is no standing water,
that the coefficient of runoff for the various landscape treatments is
reasonably accommodated so that there is no adverse effect on
abutting land, and
other topographical conditions are respected.
1) The location of all permanent monuments, natural objects such as
waterways, trees of 12" or more caliper within the area to be
disturbed, drainage courses, large boulders or ledge outcropping,
stonewalls and the like;
2) The area on each lot which is subject to building;
3) Approximate proposed locations of dry wells for roof drains and any
other stormwater drainage facilities outside the right of way, the
estimated square footage of impervious surface(s) prior to
construction and the estimated square footage of impervious surface
upon completion of construction, identifying separately natural area,
roof area and pavement area;
4) Existing natural features and natural features to be preserved in
accordance with SECTION V. E. Protection of Natural Features.
below, including large trees and tree canopy, water courses, points
of scenic or historical interest, rock outcroppings;
5) Type (including common name) and proposed location of trees to be
planted in accordance with SECTION VII. K. Trees. below and the
type (including common name) and proposed location of other plant
material to be planted within the right of way, including cul-de-sac
islands and other traffic islands;
6) Location and design detail of typical street lighting fixtures;
7) Recommended landscaping and planting for the area within the
subdivision which is outside the right of way, including proposed
location, type (including common name), mature size and other
relevant characteristics of the plant materials should be shown. In
order to promote the implementation of the landscaping and planting
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 17 of 40
recommendations it is suggested that at least one copy of the
landscape and planting plan be given to purchasers of the individual
subdivision lots; and
8) One or more cross sections which shall show all above ground street
construction details including curbing, grass plots, sidewalks, street
trees, street lights, grading outside the right of way and other
landscaping features inside and outside the right of way.
Final plans and profiles shall be drawn on sheets having a minimum size of eight
and one-half inches by eleven inches (8 1/2" x 11") and a maximum size of
twenty-four inches by thirty-six inches (24" x 36"). Each sheet shall have a one and
one-half inch (1/2") clear border for binding on the left hand edge and have
three-quarter inch (3/4") borders on the other sides. All sheets shall be of the same
size. The minimum letter size on plans shall be one-eighth inch (1/8").
The plan showing the layout of lots shall contain a certification clause signed by the
preparer stating that he/she has conformed with the rules and regulations of the
Register of Deeds in preparing the plan.
Each plan and profile submitted shall have in the lower right-hand corner a title
block identical to that required on a Preliminary Plan.
PROFILE.
The final profile shall be drawn to a scale of 1"=40' horizontally and 1"=4'
vertically and contain the following:
1) Existing center line as a fine black solid line;
2) Existing right side line as a fine black long dash line;
3) Existing left side line as a fine black short dash line;
4) Proposed center line grade as a heavy black line with ground
elevations at the center and each side of all streets at every 50 foot
station;
5) Elevations referred to Town established Base, as furnished by the
Town Engineer. The location and elevation of reference bench
marks shall be indicated;
6) Street gradients shown by figures;
7) Size and location of existing and proposed storm drains and sanitary
sewers.
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 18 of 40
WATER SUPPLY PROTECTION DISTRICTS
For subdivisions involving construction of more than 10,000 square feet of
impervious surface on a lot within Water Supply Protection Districts, the
provisions and definitions of SECTION XIVE. WATER SUPPLY
PROTECTION DISTRICTS. of the Zoning Bylaw shall apply.
For subdivisions involving activities restricted within a Flood Plain or
Watershed Protection District the provisions and definitions of SECTION
XIVB. FLOOD PLAIN OR WATERSHED PROTECTION DISTRICTS. of
the Zoning Bylaw shall apply.
The Planning Board shall act as the Special Permit Granting Authority.
MUNICIPAL SYSTEMS IMPACT ANALYSIS
Municipal Systems (water, sewer, electric, storm drain and connecting street
construction adequacy) Analysis.
A municipal systems impact analysis shall be prepared for subdivision plans
proposing to divide or re-divide one or more parcel(s) of land into two or
more lots containing 5 or more dwelling units or involving 2 or more acres
by an engineer registered in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts having
expertise in civil engineering and traffic and transportation engineering. The
report(s) shall include the following information:
1) A narrative including data to show the existing capacities of water,
sewer and electric distribution systems before construction. If in the
opinion of the Town Engineer and the Planning Board the data
shows that the Town's water, sewer or electric systems will not
accommodate the maximum development potential of the
subdivision, not less than two alternative designs shall be proposed
and described to address the problem(s). The engineering and cost
of construction and implementation of these remedial measures shall
be the full responsibility of the applicant.
2) A narrative including data to show the capacity of storm drains
receiving the subdivision discharge. If in the opinion of the Town
Engineer and the Planning Board the data shows that the receiving
storm drain system will be inadequate, not less than two alternative
designs shall be proposed and described to address the problem(s).
The engineering and cost of construction and implementation of
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 19 of 40
these remedial measures shall be the full responsibility of the
applicant.
3) A narrative including data to show characteristics of the street(s)
providing access to the development measured from the entrance of
the development to the nearest cross street. If the distance from the
entrance of the development to the nearest cross street is more than
1000 feet, then the required data shall include the first 1000 feet.
The street(s), as defined in this paragraph, providing access to the
development, shall be hereinafter referred to as the "street system".
If in the opinion of the Planning Board the data shows that the street
system is not adequate, not less than two alternative designs shall be
proposed and described to address the problem(s). The engineering
and cost of construction and implementation of required
improvements shall be the full responsibility of the applicant.
The applicant is hereby notified that the following guidelines shall be
used by the Planning Board in determining the adequacy of the street
system:
Storm drainage - 12" pipe with pairs of catch basins every 250';
Water - 6" pipe with hydrant within 400' from the boundary of the
development;
Sidewalk of 5' width and curbing on both sides of the street(s);
where curbing is to be installed it shall be consistent with the
provisions of SECTION VII. F. Curbing;
Right of way width sufficient to accommodate a paved travel way
width of 24', crown of 4", minimum grade of 1%, maximum grade of
9%, a sidewalk on the side or sides that border the development and
retention of such trees in the vicinity of the sidewalk as shall be
required by the appropriate Town or other governmental agency, said
dimension to be no more than 15';
Roadway surface paved to a depth of 3" or more of bituminous
concrete.
If the Planning Board determines, based on the data submitted, that
the street system does not meet these guidelines, the Planning Board,
in the interest of public safety, shall identify those improvements
which must be made and shall give written notice to the applicant.
The Planning Board may condition a subdivision approval on these
improvements being made or legally secured or guaranteed in
accordance with the following:
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 20 of 40
Prior to improvement of a street system involving private way(s), the
applicant shall show evidence, satisfactory to the Planning Board, of
the applicant's right to perform such work within the limits of the
private way(s). In the event that the applicant does not have the right
and cannot obtain the right to make all required improvements, then
the applicant shall report these facts to the Planning Board for a
determination by the Planning Board of what further action is to be
taken. The Planning Board may propose to the Board of Selectmen
that the street(s) be accepted by the Town with the undone
improvements to be completed by or paid for by the applicant.
Prior to any improvement of a street system involving public way(s),
the applicant shall receive approval from the Town Highway
Engineers and other Town boards and other Government Agencies
or Commissions having jurisdictions over the roadways as
applicable. If the applicant does not receive approval to undertake
certain improvements then improvements shall be made to the extent
of the approvals obtained.
With respect to improvements which cannot be made by the
applicant due to the inability to obtain the necessary approvals, the
Planning Board shall be the final arbiter in determining those
improvements which are conditions of subdivision approval.
4) A narrative including data to show the projections of costs arising
from increased demands for municipal systems as a result of the
proposed subdivision.
TRAFFIC IMPACT DATA AND ANALYSIS.
a. The following items shall apply to every subdivision:
1) A description of possible hazardous pedestrian and bicycle crossings
at the proposed point of intersection of the new street system with
the public street system shall be submitted. If required by the
Planning Board at least two alternative designs shall be proposed and
described to address the problem(s). The engineering and cost of
construction and implementation of these remedial measures shall be
the full responsibility of the applicant.
2) A plan and narrative shall be submitted which delineates and
describes existing and proposed sight lines and sight distances, at the
at the proposed point(s) of intersection of the new street system with
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 21 of 40
the sideline of the public street system. Where sight lines and
distances are not sufficient for public safety purposes, in the opinion
of the Planning Board, it may require that at least two alternative
designs shall be proposed and described to address the problem(s).
The engineering and cost of construction and implementation of
these remedial measures shall be the full responsibility of the
applicant. The design to be implemented shall be approved by the
Planning Board.
b. A traffic impact analysis shall be prepared for subdivisions which will, in the
reasonable opinion of the Planning Board, generate 30 or more vehicle trips in any
single hour of the day by an engineer registered in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts having expertise in traffic and transportation. In the case of a
disagreement between the Planning Board and the applicant as to the expected
traffic generation of a subdivision, the applicant may submit evidence from a traffic
engineer, as above qualified, to support a different estimate for review.
The traffic impact analysis shall include the following information:
1) An analysis of the existing traffic conditions at the existing
connections or intersecting street(s) including average daily and peak
hour volumes, peak hour and other hour(s) speeds as determined by
the Planning Board, accident data, and levels of service (LOS) at the
proposed point(s) of intersection(s) of the new street system with the
public street system.
2) A description of the projected impacts of the proposed development
in terms of projected peak hour and daily traffic generated by the
development on roads and ways; sight lines; existing and proposed
traffic controls; and projected post-development traffic volumes and
levels of service of intersections and streets at the proposed point of
intersection of the new street system with the public street system. If
in the opinion of the Planning Board the data shows that the street
system does not have adequate construction or will not have
adequate capacity to accommodate the maximum development
potential of the subdivision or has vehicular safety hazards or
concerns, not less than two alternative designs shall be proposed and
described to address the problem(s). The engineering and cost of
construction and implementation of these remedial measures shall be
the full responsibility of the applicant.
3) Locations through which 30 or more vehicles approach from a single
direction in one or more hour(s) of the day. If in the opinion of the
Planning Board the data shows that any such location will
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 22 of 40
experience operational problems as a result of the subdivision then
not less than two alternative designs shall be proposed and described
to address the problem(s). The engineering and cost of construction
and implementation of these remedial measures shall be the full
responsibility of the applicant.
3. Flood Insurance Rate Zones.
All plans submitted under this section shall be reviewed to determine whether the
improvements to be constructed will be reasonably safe from flooding. If any part
of a subdivision is located within numbered or unnumbered A zones as shown on
the Wellesley Flood Insurance Rate Map, the delineation of the zone(s) shall be
shown on the subdivision plans which shall be reviewed to assure that:
a. the proposal is designed to be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
b. all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage; and
c. adequate drainage systems shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
4. Procedure.
a. Review by Board of Health.
At the time of filing of the Definitive Plan, the applicant shall also file with
the Board of Health a print of the subdivision plan and profile.
The Board of Health shall report to the Planning Board in writing its
approval or disapproval of said plans, in accordance with Chapter 41,
Section 81U, M.G.L.
b. Public Hearing.
Upon the receipt of a properly executed application form approved by the
Planning Board together with the final or Definitive Plan the Planning Board
will set a date for the required public hearing. Notice of the public hearing
shall be given in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 41, Section
81T, M.G.L.
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 23 of 40
Notices will be mailed or delivered prior to the public hearing to owners of
land abutting upon the land included in the subdivision plan.
All expenses incurred for plans, surveys, advertisements of hearings,
mailing, etc. shall be the responsibility of the developer or owner submitting
said plans for approval.
The applicant is responsible for arranging for the attendance at the Public
Hearing of the Registered Land Surveyor and the Registered Professional
Engineer who prepared and stamped the definitive plan or any other
individuals who prepared elements of the submission package such as the
persons responsible for the preparation of the runoff calculations or the
traffic analysis, unless such attendance shall not be required by the Planning
Board.
c. Certificate of Approval.
The action of the Planning Board with respect to such plan shall be by voice
vote, copies of which shall be filed with the Town Clerk and sent by hand
delivery or by registered mail to the applicant. Final approval, if granted,
shall be endorsed on the originals of the Definitive Plan by the signatures of
at least three members of the Planning Board.
d. Final Submission Requirements.
After endorsement by the Planning Board of the definitive subdivision plan
an additional set of plans and profiles on linen or on polyester film as
specified above, and 14 sets of prints shall be filed with the Planning Board.
5. Performance Guarantee.
Before endorsement of its approval of a plan, the Planning Board will require that
the construction of ways and installations of municipal services be secured by one,
or in part by one and in part by the other, of the following methods:
a. Bond or Securities.
By a proper bond or a deposit of money or negotiable securities, sufficient in
the opinion of the Planning Board to secure performance of the construction
of ways and installations of municipal services required for lots in the
subdivision shown on the plan. The status of such security will be reviewed
at least annually by the Planning Board and may be increased to reflect
increases in estimated costs for completion of construction.
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 24 of 40
The Board may refuse security based on advice from the Town Treasurer as
to the financial status of the bank, company or institution involved. Letters
of credit shall not be accepted as security for required subdivision work.
b. Covenant.
By a covenant, executed and duly recorded by the owner of record, running
with the land, whereby the ways and services shall be provided to serve any
lot before said lot may be built upon.
6. Conveyance of Utilities and Easements to the Town.
Before the Board will release a surety bond or deposit, or, in the case of conditional
approval, issue a certificate of performance, the applicant shall execute an
instrument, on a form approved by the Planning Board, transferring to the Town,
without cost, valid unencumbered title to all common sewers, storm drains and
water mains, the underground electrical distribution system and appurtenances
thereto, constructed and installed in the subdivision or portion thereof to be
approved, and conveying to the Town without cost and free of all liens and
encumbrances, perpetual rights and easements to construct, inspect, repair, renew,
replace, operate and forever maintain the aforesaid underground utilities, with any
manholes, pipes, conduits and other appurtenances, and to do all acts incidental
thereto, in, through and under the whole of all streets in the subdivision or portion
thereof to be approved, and if any such utilities have been constructed and installed
in land not within such street, then in, through and under a strip of land extending
ten (10') feet in width on each side of the center line of all such sewers and water
mains.
7. Street Acceptance Plan and As-Built Plan.
The following plans and profiles, drawn on linen or on polyester film as specified
above, prepared by a Registered Professional Engineer qualified in the branch and
Registered Land Surveyor, shall be submitted to the Planning Board following the
completion of construction.
Street Acceptance
A plan and profile, suitable for submission to the Town Meeting for street
acceptance purposes including any and all easements, house numbers and/or lot
numbers.
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 25 of 40
As-Built
A plan and profile, detailing the location and elevation of all underground utilities
and appurtenances, including rim grades, percent of slope for sewer and drain lines
"as-built" if different than as shown on the approved definitive plan.
The Street Acceptance Plan and As-Built Plan are to be drawn on separate sheets.
Final lot grading contours are to be shown in red on a print of the approved
definitive subdivision plan if different than as shown on said plan.
8. Park or Playground
The Planning Board may designate, on the plan, land to show a park or playground
in accordance with the following; land so designated on the plan shall not be sold or
built upon for a period of not more than three years, pending acquisition by the
Town, without the approval of the Planning Board:
For subdivisions:
where there is a development potential of 1-9 Dwelling Units and the
development site or combined total area of the parcel(s) to be divided or
redivided is 10 acres or less there is no requirement;
where there is a development potential of 10 or more Dwelling Units or
where the development site or combined total area of parcel(s) to be divided
or redivided is more than 10 acres the requirement is 10% of the total land
area.
If the land so designated is not acquired by the Town within three years from the
date of approval of the subdivision the park or playground designation shall be
withdrawn and, consistent with any other subdivision requirements, conditions or
restrictions still in effect, the land may be sold, developed or otherwise used by the
land owner in accordance with zoning.
In making this designation the Planning Board may consider the use of the land
abutting the subdivision area and the desirability of enlarging existing parks or
playgrounds and providing pedestrian and bicycle paths to those areas.
The Planning Board may waive this park or playground reservation for cluster
subdivisions incorporating park or playground in the required common open land
area.
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 26 of 40
9. Waivers
All requests for waivers shall be accompanied by a letter signed by the applicant
listing requested waivers from the terms of these Rules and Regulations. This letter
shall include, for each waiver request, an estimate of the cost savings in initial cost
and annual maintenance and an explanation of any public benefit served. Plans
shall include a sheet listing the waivers requested and approved by the Planning
Board. If in the public interest, the Planning Board may grant waivers not requested
by the applicant.
Any request for waiver of sidewalk shall be accompanied by a letter transmitting the
recommendation of the Town Public Safety Committee relative to the request.
Sidewalk requirements may be amended, by the Planning Board, in cases where
topography, outcropping ledge, significant trees or other circumstances are present.
(See Section V.B.2. for street width waiver requirements)
SECTION V. DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
A. General.
All lots shown on Subdivision Plans submitted to the Board for approval shall be the
regular shape and shall contain at least the minimum area requirement for the area
regulation district in which the land is located.
B. Streets.
1. Location and Alignment.
When adjoining property is not yet subdivided, consideration shall be given to the
projection of proposed ways. Proposed ways shall be constructed to the boundary of
the development. If any street submitted for approval does not extend through to
another street, possible extension to nearby proposed or existing streets must be
shown.
a. Horizontal Alignment
1) Reverse curves shall have a 100' straight section between them.
2) Minimum centerline radius shall be 75 feet for a local street, 200 feet
for a collector street and 300 feet for an arterial street.
3) There shall be a minimum distance of 300' between intersecting
streets; or they must be directly opposite one another.
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 27 of 40
4) Streets shall not intersect at an angle of less than 60 degrees.
2. Street Width.
Street width shall be 54 feet or as determined by the Planning Board, in accordance
with the Optional Street Width Requirement below, but in no case less than forty
feet (refer to Typical Cross Section). In extending a street from one of different
width the adjustment shall be gradual and subject to the approval of the Planning
Board.
Corners at street intersections shall be of a radius satisfactory to the Board, but in no
cases shall the radius at the street line be less than 40 feet; nor the distance between
tangent points on intersecting streets less than the width of the entering street plus
eighty feet.
Optional Street Width Requirement
If the Planning Board approves a street right of way width of less than 54 feet, a plan
drawn by a Registered Landscape Architect shall be submitted which shall include:
a. A calculation of the difference in the area devoted to street tree planting (tree
lawn) between the standard street layout and the proposed layout;
b. Alternative landscaped area or areas equal to or exceeding the requested
reduction in tree lawn area. Alternative landscaped area(s) shall abut one or
more of the following:
the proposed street;
an existing public or private street or way;
a Town footway; or
any public land or private conservation land;
Alternative landscaped area(s) shall be permanently set aside for landscaping
and or tree planting and shall not be included in any building lot
calculations. The land may be deeded to the Town or to abutting
conservation land, subject to acceptance by the Town or the owner of the
abutting land. The alternative landscaped area may be retained as a portion
of one or more building lot(s), in which case it shall have a permanent
conservation restriction imposed.
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 28 of 40
Area devoted to landscaped cul-de-sac islands, conforming to the standards
set forth below, may be used to satisfy the requirements of this
paragraph,provided approval for such a landscaped island is received from
the Planning Board and arrangements for maintenance of the center island
have been approved by the Planning Board.
3. Grade.
The maximum grade for any street shall not exceed 9 percent in any part of its
length and shall not exceed 6 percent except for distances of no more than 200'.
Approaches to intersections shall have a grade not to exceed 2 percent for a distance
of 100' from the intersection. The minimum grade shall be 1.00 percent except
within a cul-de-sac (turnaround) when the center line grade shall be not less than 2
percent.
Vertical Curves
All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of sufficient length to
afford adequate sight distances. Minimum lengths of crest or sag curves is
determined by the formula L = KA, where:
L= length of vertical curve
K= constant for design speed
A= algebraic difference in percent of grade(s).
Design controls for crest and sag curves based on stopping sight distances for safe
vehicle operation shall be as follows:
Design Speed 30 M.P.H. Crest K = 30, Sag K = 40.
4. Dead End Streets.
Except in cases deemed by the Board to be in the best public interest, so-called
reservation strips, which would prevent further extensions of development, will not
be approved.
Based on the need to provide dual access for emergency purposes, to reduce winter
maintenance costs, and to reduce the amount of paved impervious surface which
must be maintained, dead end streets in excess of 500' in length, from an
intersecting street, shall not be allowed.
Dead end streets shall be provided at the closed end with a cul-de-sac(turnaround)
having an outside street line diameter of 112 feet in residential subdivisions. The
cul-de-sac roadway pavement diameter shall be a minimum of 82 feet. The
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 29 of 40
Planning Board may consider central landscaped islands within cul-de-sacs. In such
instances the paved roadway around the island shall not have a pavement width of
less than 24 feet. This can be increased or decreased in specific cases for the public
interest at the discretion of the Board.
C. Utilities.
1. Storm Drains.
The storm drainage system shall be designed to the satisfaction of the Planning
Board and the Board of Public Works, who will require provision for such facilities
and arrangement thereof as in their opinion are reasonably necessary to provide
adequate disposal of surface water from all streets within the subdivision and
adjacent land.
Catch basins shall be provided at low points and at changes in direction and the
drains between catch basins shall be in a straight line. Maximum spacing of catch
basins shall be 250 feet in length, drains and catch basins shall be constructed only
as deemed necessary by the Planning Board.
Catch basins shall be constructed utilizing salt resistant, high strength concrete
(5,000 PSI) blocks.
Drainage pipe shall be at least 12" diameter. Granite Curb Inlets shall be shown for
all catch basins. Proper connections with existing drains in adjacent streets or
easements shall be shown on the plans. Where property adjacent to the subdivision
is not yet subdivided, provision shall be made for proper extension of the drainage
system by continuing drains to the exterior boundaries of the subdivision of such
size and at such grade as will allow for the extension.
Run-off calculations must be submitted to substantiate the adequacy of the proposed
storm drainage system within and outside of the subdivision together with the
existing system to be utilized for discharge from the subdivision.
Reinforced concrete or stone masonry head walls shall be provided where, in the
opinion of the Planning Board, it is deemed necessary to support the street or the
adjacent land for the protection and safety of the general public or the adjacent
property owners. When retaining walls are proposed detailed structural design shall
be provided (see Sect. VII.,I. relative to the construction of retaining walls).
2. Water and Sanitary Sewer Facilities.
Water mains, with hydrants, gate valves and other fittings, and sanitary sewers, with
manholes and other appurtenances, shall be constructed and installed within the
subdivision as necessary to provide to all lots therein adequate water supply for
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 30 of 40
domestic and fire protection use and adequate sewage disposal. The size and
arrangement thereof shall be designed to the satisfaction of the Planning Board and
the Board of Public Works.
When property adjacent to the subdivision is not yet subdivided, provision shall be
made for proper extension of the systems by continuing water and sewer mains to
the exterior boundaries of the subdivision of such size and at such grade as will
allow for the extensions.
Water supply systems shall be designed to prevent infiltration of flood waters into
the systems; sanitary sewer systems shall be designed to prevent infiltration of flood
waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters.
Above ground sewer pumping stations shall be screened from view with suitable
plant materials to the satisfaction of the Planning Board.
3. Electric Underground Distribution System.
When no electric distribution system exists in an area contemplated for subdivision
the developer shall request that the Wellesley Municipal Light Plant (hereinafter
called the WMLP) provide the design of an underground distribution system in
public or private ways, easements or rights-of-way to service the proposed
development and adjacent undeveloped areas.
The developer shall furnish to the: WMLP:
a. a plan showing the layout of lots and ways with grading contours;
b. a plan showing the proposed construction of the underground utilities and
streets;
c a plan showing the outline of lots, ways and easements on which such a
system may be overlaid for reproduction of the plan; and
d. proposed electrical loads, service size and service voltage class.
These plans shall be drawn on linen or on polyester film as specified above.
The developer shall also furnish in writing to the WMLP the anticipated schedule
for construction of houses on a lot by lot basis. Details of the design of the
Underground Electric System shall conform with the policy of the WMLP as
adopted by the Wellesley Municipal Light Board.
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 31 of 40
Upon receipt of plans for the electrical layout the developer shall submit two copies
to the Telephone Company for their review and concurrence to enable installation of
telephone wires underground in the same trench as for electrical service. Telephone
and electric facilities shall be offset by a minimum distance of one foot.
Above ground electrical transformers shall be screened from view with suitable
plant materials to the satisfaction of the Planning Board, but not in a manner to
inhibit safe installation and operation of the transformer by WMLP staff.
D. Easements.
1. Easements for storm drains and their appurtenances, common sewers and their
appurtenances, water mains and their appurtenances, electric facilities and their
appurtenances, and any other utility across lots or centered on rear of side lot lines
shall be provided by the developer where necessary, shall be at least twenty feet
wide; easements for electric transformers shall be a minimum of fifteen feet by
fifteen feet (225 square feet); and shall be shown on the plan.
2. Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way, channel or
stream, the Board may require that there be provided an easement or right-of-way of
adequate width to conform substantially to the lines of such water course, drainage
way, channel or stream, and to provide for construction or other necessary purposes.
In general, such easements or rights-of-way shall extend 10 feet from the side lines
of such watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream.
E. Protection of Natural Features.
Due regard shall be shown for all natural features such as large trees and tree canopy, water
courses, points of scenic or historical interest, rock outcroppings, significant habitats of
plant or animal species which are endangered, threatened or of special concern as so
designated pursuant to the Massachusetts Endangered Species Act (Chapter 408 Acts of
1990) and in accordance with the regulations of the Massachusetts Division of Fisheries and
Wildlife Natural Heritage and Endangered Species Program, and similar community assets,
which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the subdivision.
Existing trees may be preserved to satisfy the street tree planting requirement provided that
they are inspected and approved by the Superintendent of the Park and Tree Division. It is
strongly encouraged that healthy trees on the site should be preserved. The developer
should consider on-site reuse of healthy trees which must be removed in conjunction with
construction activity.
Existing trees to be preserved on the site shall be protected from potential construction
damage in a manner satisfactory to the Planning Board.
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 32 of 40
F. Erosion and Sedimentation Control.
An Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan prepared by a Registered Landscape Architect
or a Registered Professional Engineer shall be submitted when a tract of land, to be
developed, contains slopes in excess of 15%. In preparing such plan due regard shall be
given to minimizing the amount of clearing, grading and slope modifications and making
use of existing topography and natural land features and preservation of existing vegetative
cover. Permanent vegetative plantings to control erosion shall be of a variety compatible
with specific soil and site conditions. Adjacent property, public and private, shall be
protected from damage, hazard or pollution which may result from land disturbing
operations. Consideration shall be given to protection of surface and sub-surface waters
from the effects of land disturbing operations. Stock piles of soil, fill and loam shall be
protected from wind and water erosion. Dust shall be controlled in the entire development.
G. Cut and Fill
Cuts and/or fills in conjunction with subdivision construction in excess of 6 feet as
measured from the original natural grade to the finished grade shall not be allowed.
SECTION VI. UNDERGROUND MUNICIPAL SERVICES AND C.A.T.V.
A. General.
1. Underground municipal services shall be installed to the satisfaction of the Board of
Public Works (acting through the Town Engineer) and the Planning Board, in
accordance with the approved plans (including profile, Typical Cross Section and
any supplementary sketches), the current standard specifications of the Town of
Wellesley and/or the Massachusetts Department of Public Works when so
designated and these specifications.
2. All storm drains, sanitary sewer and water facilities, and gas pipes (if any) shall be
installed prior to excavation of the trench for underground electric and telephone
conduits and manholes.
3. Underground electric and telephone conduits and all service connections for any and
all utilities from the main structures in the street to the exterior lines thereof for each
lot shown on the plan whether or not there is a building thereon, shall be installed
before final surfacing with Bituminous Concrete Pavement. Any deviation from
this requirement necessitated by unusual topographic or technical difficulties must
have the specific approval of the Planning Board, the Board of Public Works and
the Municipal Light Board.
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 33 of 40
4. Underground cable television service connections to each house lot shall be installed
to the satisfaction of the Board of Public Works (acting through the Town Engineer)
and the Planning Board.
5. The subdivider shall protect all utilities and appurtenances installed under these
Rules and Regulations from any and all damage, until the entire subdivision is
completed and approved as a whole by the Planning Board. Any street excavations
shall be patched immediately in conformity with the rules and regulations of the
Board of Public Works for street excavations. Except as expressly directed by the
Board of Public Works or an authorized representative, patches of street excavations
shall be overlaid with bituminous concrete, properly sealed at the edges of the
overlay, for the full width of the travel way (curb to curb). Any damage to these
utilities and appurtenances, prior to the approval by the Planning Board shall be
repaired in a manner satisfactory to the Planning Board, the Board of Public Works
and the Municipal Light Board the full cost of which shall be borne by the
subdivider. Utilities to all lots shall be installed prior to the installation of the top
course of bituminous concrete pavement.
6. Major roots of trees to be preserved shall not be cut during installation of
underground utilities except in the presence of a representative of the Park and Tree
Division.
B. Storm Drainage.
1. Storm drains, culverts, catch basins with curb inlets and manholes shall be installed
as shown on the approved plans.
2. At least four feet of cover shall be required over drains. Catch basins and manholes
shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications of the Board of Public
Works. Drains and catch basins and manholes shall not be backfilled until
inspected and approved by the Town Engineer or designate. The installation of the
storm drainage system, including the method of construction and the quality of
materials used, shall conform to the current standard specifications of the
Massachusetts Department of Public Works.
3. The construction of any headwall shall conform to the current standard
specifications of the Board of Public Works.
C. Water and Sanitary Sewer Facilities.
1. All underground installations of water and sanitary sewer systems shall be installed
as shown on the approved plans.
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 34 of 40
2. The installation of water and sanitary sewer systems, with their appurtenances,
including the methods of construction and the quality of materials used, shall
conform to the current standard specifications of the Board of Public Works.
3. All such installations shall be under the direction and supervision of the Town
Engineer or designate, including the layout and establishment of grades, at the
expense of the applicant or developer.
4. Any sewage pumping station shall be suitably screened by shrubbery to the
satisfaction of the Planning Board and the Board of Public Works.
D. Electric Underground Distribution System.
Prior to construction of the underground electrical system the developer's engineer shall
establish finish grade and furnish (and protect) offset lines and grade stakes for use of the
WMLP.
The developer shall perform the following work under the direction of the WLMP after the
other utilities have been installed for a period of at least two weeks:
Excavate a trench of a sufficient width to accommodate electric and telephone (if the same
trench is used consistent with Section V. , C., 3.) and a minimum of 40" below finish grade,
for conduit (for primary and secondary cables). Excavate for manholes, street light bases,
and similar items as shown on the construction plans as directed by the WMLP. The trench
shall be graded to a smooth bed, free of stones. Excavation in rock foundation or ledge
shall be made to a greater depth and the developer shall provide a 10" depth of fine fill prior
to the installation of conduit and cables. Trenches shall be maintained by the developer
until backfilling is completed. Such trenches and other excavations shall be excavated in an
orderly sequence so as to allow for installation of underground structures and ducts
followed by backfilling with fine material acceptable to the WMLP. No trench shall be
backfilled until the installation has been approved by the WMLP. Backfilling shall be done
in layers of not more than twelve inches and shall be carefully and thoroughly tamped.
When all preparatory conditions are met, the developer will be required to install all
manholes, conduit, transformer pads, street light bases as specified by the WMLP. Once this
work is complete the WMLP. Will install all cables, transformers, street light poles and
fixtures, and fire and police alarm cable as required. The applicant is responsible for the
cost of all work done by the WMLP for the developer, which work will be performed on a
billable basis, as specified in the Rules and Regulations of the Wellesley Municipal Light
Plant.
SECTION VII. CONSTRUCTION OF STREETS.
A. General.
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 35 of 40
All streets including sidewalks and grass plots within a subdivision shall be constructed in
conformity with the Typical Cross Section as shown on the final approved subdivision plan
and shall not deviate therefrom without written permission form the Planning Board.
B. Excavation and Backfill.
All frost susceptible material, loam, muck or other soft material shall be excavated to hard
bottom from within the limits of the proposed street for its full length and width or as
otherwise designated by the Board of Public Works. No soft or inferior material shall be
used below subgrade. The subgrade shall be thoroughly compacted before applying the
gravel surface. The sub-base shall consist of 9" of thoroughly compacted well graded bank
gravel and 3" of Dense Graded Aggregate.
The gravel sub-base shall be penetrated with RC-250 at the rate of 0.5 gallons per square
yard, or other equivalent material approved by the Planning Board and the Board of Public
Works. (Note: to be omitted if Dense Graded Aggregate utilized.)
C. Bituminous Concrete Pavement Type I-1.
1. The Bituminous Concrete Pavement shall be laid in two courses, i.e., standard
Bottom (binder) Course and standard Top Course with a finished pavement depth
after compaction as shown on the Typical Cross Section.
2. Methods of construction and the quality of materials used shall conform to the
specifications for Class I Bituminous Concrete Pavement Type I-1 contained in
Section 460 of the 1973 Standard Specifications for Highways,Bridges and
Waterways of the Massachusetts Department of Public Works or the revised
specifications currently in effect.
D. Sidewalks.
Bituminous concrete sidewalks shall be constructed on both sides of the roadway within the
subdivision except when otherwise determined by the Planning Board.
Sidewalk and grass plots shall pitch from the property line toward the gutter.
Bituminous concrete sidewalks shall be constructed on a sub-base consisting of at least
eight inches of thoroughly compacted good gravel. Bituminous concrete for sidewalks shall
be laid in two courses, namely base course and top course. Base course shall consist of
Class I-1 Roadway Binder and shall be two inches thick after rolling. Top course shall
consist of Class I-1 Dense Mix and shall be one inch thick after rolling. In no case shall the
surface be laid until the sub-base shall have been inspected and approved by the Town
Engineer or designate. At all intersections the sidewalks shall be constructed across the
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 36 of 40
grass plot to the edge of the traveled way. Chapter 83, Section 25, M.G.L., requires that
slanted curbing shall be installed at all pedestrian crosswalks.
Slanted curbing shall be installed at all pedestrian crosswalks as required by Chapter 83,
Section 25, M.G.L. The number and exact location of sidewalk ramps shall be determined
by the Planning Board. Typical sidewalk Ramp Diagram is to be used as a guide in the
construction of sidewalk ramps.
E. Driveway Aprons.
Driveway Aprons shall be constructed in the same manner as sidewalks with three inches of
bituminous concrete after compaction. The elevations at the line of the back of sidewalk
(Property Line) across a driveway shall be in relation to the roadway center line and gutter
grades as shown on Typical Cross Section. The driveway grades shall be set so as to meet
the required back line of the sidewalk. In no case shall the surface be laid until the sub-base
shall have been inspected and approved by the Town Engineer or designate.
F. Curbing.
All ways within a subdivision shall have the gutter lines for their entire length curbed with
bituminous concrete spill berm 2"-3" reveal installed in accordance with the requirements of
the Board of Public Works;
the Planning Board shall require bituminous concrete curbing 4" (Cape Cod Type)
or 6" reveal, where deemed necessary in order to protect the adjacent land from
erosion, to facilitate cleaning, for traffic control, drainage control or to conform to
abutting streets; when bituminous concrete curbing is specified it shall have
polyester fiber added at the rate of 5 lbs. per ton;
the Planning Board shall require vertical granite curbing 6"x 18" at intersection
roadway roundings, grades in excess of 6 per cent and other areas subject to abuse
from heavy traffic, trucks and snow plows;
sloped granite curbing (4"x 12") shall be installed around cul-de-sac center
landscaped islands.
Bituminous Concrete curbing shall not be laid until the sub-base has been inspected by the
Town Engineer or designate.
Granite curb inlets conforming to the standards of the Board of Public Works shall be
installed at the back gutter line of all catch basins,unless otherwise designated by the
Planning Board and the Board of Public Works.
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 37 of 40
G. Grass Plots.
All areas between the curb lines of the roadway and the inside lines of the required
sidewalks shall be loamed to a depth of not less than eight inches of good quality loam,
rolled and seeded in accordance with the standard requirements or specifications of the
Board of Public works.
H. Sloping.
Unless otherwise directed by the Planning Board the area outside the street lines of a
development shall be sloped at a rate not greater than 3 feet horizontally to 1 foot vertically
to a point where it coincides with the surrounding ground. Loam shall be placed to a depth
of 6 inches on all slopes and shall be seeded. When ledge is encountered in a cut section the
slope ratio shall be 1 foot horizontally to 4 feet vertically.
I. Retaining Walls.
Where the final grade of the exterior street line is above or below the grade of the adjacent
land by 4' or more, a retaining wall of stone, brick, reinforced concrete or other suitable
material satisfactory to the Planning Board shall be constructed outside the street lines of a
development in order to support the street or the adjacent land as the case may be. If
reinforced concrete is used, the above ground portions shall be faced with brick, stone or
exposed aggregate. The construction of retaining walls shall be in accordance with the
standards of the Board of Public Works. Retaining walls shall be designed by a Registered
Professional Engineer and shall be properly fenced as required pursuant to the State
Building Code.
J. Street Signs.
The developer shall furnish and erect necessary signs to designate the name of each street in
the development, said signs to conform with the design of those used by the Town. There
shall also be placed on the same standard and immediately below the street sign, a sign of
such size as the Board of Public Works may prescribe, reading "Private Way".
(Specifications, forms and other information relating to Street Signs maybe obtained at the
office of the Town Engineer.)
K. Trees.
Existing trees should be preserved, wherever possible, to satisfy the street tree planting
requirement provided that they are inspected and approved by the Superintendent of the
Park and Tree Division.
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 38 of 40
Trees to be planted shall be at least 2 1/2 inches in trunk diameter (diameter at 4.5 feet
above grade). The specie and variety of the types to be planted shall be approved by the
Superintendent of the Park and Tree Division.
Required trees shall be certified to be in a healthy condition by the Superintendent of the
Park and Tree Division at the time of final subdivision inspection. The developer shall
guarantee each tree for a period of two years after planting and shall plant replacement trees
if required by the Planning Board.
Street trees shall be planted or existing trees retained, as specified above, so that they are not
more than 60 feet apart, not less than 4' and not more than 24' from the roadway pavement.
It is the preference of the Planning Board that the required trees shall be planted between the
roadway pavement and the sidewalk if the planting strip is at least 7 feet wide.
L. Monuments, Concrete or Granite Bounds.
Granite bounds of not less than 6" x 6" x 42" with a 3/8 inch drill hole in the center,
conforming to the standards of the Town of Wellesley Department of Public Works, shall
be set on both sidelines at all angle points, at the beginning and end of all curves, and at all
intersections. Such bounds shall be set in bank gravel with their tops at the proposed
finished surface grade to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer and the Planning Board.
Certification, in writing, shall be made by the Registered Professional Engineer or
Registered Land Surveyor for the developer, to the Town Engineer and to the Planning
Board that, as determined, by a survey after completion of construction, the bounds have
been properly set in accordance with the approved plan and Rules and Regulations of the
Planning Board. Tie sketches to Bound Points shall be furnished to the Planning Board and
to the Town Engineer on 8 1/2" x 11" sheets of paper with a suitable Title Block.
M. Work Notification to Town Departments.
The Planning Director and the Town Engineer shall be separately notified at least 24 hours
prior to the commencement of any of the following work:
1. Installation of storm drainage facilities.
2. Installation of water and sanitary sewer facilities.
3. Placing of material for sub-base.
4. Excavation for electric underground distribution system.
5. Application of gravel in or above sub-base.
6. Laying of Bituminous Concrete Bottom Course.
7. Laying of Bituminous Concrete Top Course.
8. Installation of curbing and curb inlets.
9. Spreading of gravel in sidewalks.
10. Laying of Bituminous Concrete for sidewalks and aprons.
11. Spreading of loam for grass plots.
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 39 of 40
12. Grading of slopes.
13. Construction of retaining walls.
14. Setting of bounds.
Superintendent of Parks shall be notified prior to tree planting. If any of the above
designated work is commenced without proper notification being given as specified, such
work shall be performed at the risk of the developer or owner. All supervision, inspection,
furnishing line and grades, etc., performed by the Town Engineer or designate shall be at the
expense of the developer. Subdivision bonds will not be released until all such expenses
have been paid to the department concerned.
The Planning Board and the Town Engineer shall be notified of the name, address and
telephone number of all contractors and sub-contractors performing all work covered under
signed subdivision plans.
N. Delays in Construction.
When any delay in completion of the construction of streets is anticipated in portions of a
subdivision where houses are completed and occupied, the subdivider may by required to
construct certain portions of roads to the extent at least of grading the sub-base, installing
catch basin frames and manhole covers to a temporary grade, and penetrating the gravel
with 0.5 gallon per square yard of RC-250 to provide a temporary passable surface for the
abutters.
SECTION VIII. ADMINISTRATION.
A. Filing of Plans in Registry of Deeds or in Land Court.
All plans must be prepared in accordance with the requirement of the Registry of Deeds or
Land Court and the Wellesley Planning Board.
Approval of all subdivisions are subject to the condition that, unless an appeal has been
taken from such approval as provided by Chapter 41, Section 81-BB, M.G.L., the
subdivider will record the subdivision plan in the Norfolk County Registry of Deeds of
Dedham or the Land Court within six months from date of its approval and certify to the
Planning Board, in writing, within six months from date of approval that said plan has been
so recorded and filed with the Registry of Deeds at Dedham or the Land Court giving Date
Recorded, Plan, Book and Page Number or Certificate Number. Failure to file said plan
shall render any approval null and void.
B. Waiver of Compliance.
The Planning Board may, in a particular case where such action is in the public interest and
not inconsistent with the intent and purpose of the Subdivision Control Law, waive strict
compliance with these Rules and Regulations.
Town of Wellesley
Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Adopted December 13, 1971; Last Amended June 5, 2017
Page 40 of 40
C. Modifications to Approval.
No changes or alterations shall be made to any aspect of an approved Definitive Plan
without resubmission for approval of the Planning Board in accordance with Chapter 41,
Sections 81-O and 81-W, M.G.L.
D. Subdivision Control Law.
For matters not covered by these Rules and Regulations, reference is made to Chapter 41,
Sections 81K-81GG inclusive, M.G.L. and acts in amendments thereof, in addition thereto
or in substitution therefor.
E. Acceptance of Streets.
The approval of a plan by the Planning Board does not automatically make any street shown
on such a plan a public way. Street acceptance by the Town shall be subject to compliance
with the pertinent provisions of the Massachusetts General Laws and Bylaws of the Town
of Wellesley.
Street Acceptance Plans in accordance with IV., B., 7. above shall be submitted to the
Planning Board, the Engineering Division and the Office of the Board of Selectmen for
review not less than 30 days prior to the Warrant closing date for consideration at a Town
Meeting.
SECTION IX. SEVERABILITY
The invalidity of any section or provision of these Rules and Regulations shall not affect the
validity of any other section or provision.
Index
A
animal species ........................................... 33
approval.... 4, 5, 8, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 21, 24,
25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 35, 42, 43
B
Board of Health ......................... 4, 11, 23, 24
bounds ................................................... 9, 41
C
cable television.......................................... 35
catch basins ....................... 20, 31, 35, 36, 39
centerline radius ........................................ 28
contour plan .............................................. 12
covenant .................................................... 25
cul-de-sac ................................ 17, 29, 30, 39
culverts ...................................................... 35
curbing .............................. 18, 20, 38, 39, 41
D
dead end streets ......................................... 30
definitive plan ................................. 5, 24, 26
dry wells .................................................... 17
E
easements .... 9, 12, 15, 16, 25, 26, 31, 32, 33
electric ......................... 19, 32, 33, 35, 36, 41
erosion ........................................... 15, 34, 39
F
frontage ................................................... 5, 7
G
grade ... 12, 18, 20, 29, 30, 31, 32, 34, 36, 37,
40, 41, 42
grading .................. 16, 17, 18, 26, 32, 34, 42
granite ....................................................... 39
grass plots................................ 18, 37, 38, 41
H
hydrants ..................................................... 31
I
infiltration ................................................. 32
L
lot . 5, 7, 8, 13, 14, 16, 17, 19, 25, 26, 29, 32,
33, 35
M
manholes ........................... 25, 31, 35, 36, 37
N
natural features .................................... 17, 33
P
park ..................................................... 26, 27
playground .......................................... 26, 27
preliminary plan ........................ 5, 11, 13, 14
private way .......................................... 21, 32
profile .............. 11, 12, 13, 16, 18, 24, 26, 34
public hearing...................................... 10, 24
public way ......................... 4, 5, 7, 15, 21, 43
R
retaining walls ............................... 31, 40, 41
right of way ................................... 17, 18, 29
rock outcroppings................................ 17, 33
runoff............................................. 16, 17, 24
S
sanitary sewer.... 6, 16, 19, 31, 32, 34, 36, 41
sewer ........................... 12, 16, 19, 23, 26, 32
sewer pumping stations ............................. 32
sidewalks ........................... 18, 37, 38, 39, 41
sight distances ..................................... 22, 30
sight lines .................................................. 22
standing water ........................................... 17
storm drain . 6, 12, 16, 19, 20, 25, 30, 31, 33,
34, 36, 41
storm drainage ............... 6, 16, 30, 31, 36, 41
storm drains ................. 12, 19, 20, 25, 33, 34
streams ................................................ 10, 16
street acceptance ....................................... 26
street lighting ........................................ 4, 17
street lights ................................................ 18
street trees ................................................. 18
street width ................................................ 27
sub-base............................. 37, 38, 39, 41, 42
T
telephone ................................. 33, 35, 36, 42
Town Clerk ................................................. 5
Town Engineer 18, 19, 20, 34, 35, 36, 38, 39,
40, 41, 42
traffic impact analysis ............................... 22
trees ................. 12, 17, 20, 27, 33, 34, 35, 40
typical cross section .................................. 16
V
vertical curves ........................................... 30
W
waivers ...................................................... 27
water . 4, 5, 12, 16, 17, 19, 23, 25, 31, 33, 34,
36, 41
water supply .................................. 12, 16, 31
Water Supply Protection ................. 9, 15, 19
Wellesley Municipal Light Plant .. 16, 32, 37
Z
zoning .................................................... 4, 27

ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
WELLESLEY, MASSACHUSETTS
RULES AND REGULATIONS
Pursuant to the provisions of Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 40A Section 12 and
Chapter 40B, Sections 21-23, and the Wellesley Zoning Bylaw, for the purpose of
establishing uniform procedures for conducting the business of the Board which, in
general, but without limitation, shall consist of hearing all petitions, applications and
appeals coming under its jurisdiction as both a permit granting authority and a special
permit granting authority, the Zoning Board of Appeals of the Town of Wellesley hereby
adopt the following rules:
Article I – Organization
Section 1: Members and Officers
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of three permanent and three associate
members, all of whom have been appointed by the Board of Selectmen for three year
terms. All members shall elect the officers of the Zoning Board annually, which shall
include the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman. The election shall occur at the first
meeting in July, or at the earliest possible meeting thereafter when the entire Board is
present. The Executive Secretary shall serve as Clerk.
Section 2: The Chairman – Powers and Duties
The Chairman shall preside at all meetings of the Board. He or she shall vote and be
recorded on all matters coming before the Board. He or she shall decide on all points of
order, unless overruled by a majority of the members sitting. He or she shall oversee the
work of the Executive Secretary, request necessary help and exercise general supervisory
power.
Section 3: The Vice-Chairman – Duties
In the absence, inability to act or apparent conflict of interest on the part of the Chairman,
the Vice-Chairman shall perform the duties of the Chairman.
Section 4: Clerk – Duties
The Clerk shall be subject to the direction of the Board and its Chairperson, shall
undertake all of the clerical work of the Board including all correspondence of the Board,
sending all notices required by law and the rules and orders of the Board, prepare all
application forms, receive and scrutinize all petitions and applications for compliance
with the rules of the Board, prepare dockets, keep minutes of the Board’s proceedings,
compile all required records, draft all required decisions, maintain necessary files and
indices and read the legal notices at all Public Hearings.
Section 5: Associate Members
Associate members shall sit on the Board as part of a regularly scheduled rotation of the
permanent members, or in the case of absence, inability to act, or apparent conflict of
interest on the part of any Board member.
Section 6: Quorum
Three members shall constitute a quorum.
Article II – Functions of the Board
Section 1: Public Hearings
The Board shall hold public hearings on all requests for variances, special
permit/findings, special permits, appeals from decisions of Administrative Officials, site
plan approvals and comprehensive permits. All hearings shall be open to the public. The
use of cell telephones or other electronic paging devices is prohibited at all hearings.
Section 2: Hearing Schedule
Regular meetings of the Board shall be held as necessary on Thursdays at 7:30 p.m. in the
designated room at the Wellesley Town Hall. Petitions for variances, special
permit/findings, special permits and appeals are heard at a hearing separate from the
hearing of petitions for site plan approvals and comprehensive permits. The agenda for
the former shall be limited to a maximum of ten petitions. All meetings shall be recorded
electronically and written minutes shall be prepared by the Clerk.
Section 3: Notice of Public Hearings
Notice of hearings shall be advertised in accordance with Mass General Laws, Chapter
40A, Section 11. In addition, a copy of the advertised notice shall be sent by mail so that
the postmark date is at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing to all parties in
interest, including the property owner, the petitioner (if different), abutters, owners of
land within 300 feet of the property line, all as they appear on the most recent tax list, the
Town Clerk, the Planning Board, the Inspector of Buildings, the Planning Boards of
every abutting City or Town, and all other relevant Town Departments and Boards.
Section 4: Representation and Absence
An applicant shall appear in his/her behalf, or be represented by an agent or attorney. In
the absence of any appearance without written explanation by the applicant, the Board
shall decide on the matter using the information it has received, vote unanimously to
continue the hearing, or decide by unanimous vote that the petition be denied.
Section 5: Order of Business
a. Call to order and explanation of procedures by the Chairman
b. Reading of the legal notice by the Clerk
c. Applicant’s presentation
d. Questions by the Board members
e. Comments and/or questions from the public
f. Applicant’s response, if any
2
Section 6: Disposition by the Board
The unanimous vote of all sitting members of the Board is necessary in granting
variances, special permit/findings, special permits, appeals, site plan approvals and
comprehensive permits. The Board shall set forth its reasons for its decision and any
conditions on which the decision may be subject. Once the decision is voted upon and
the public hearing adjourned, reconsideration may occur only during a duly-constituted
public hearing.
Section 7: Filing and Recording of Decisions
Decisions granted by the Board are final only when written, signed by each sitting Board
member, and filed with the Town Clerk. The petitioner bears the responsibility for
recording of the decision granted by the Board at the Norfolk Registry of Deeds.
Section 8: Withdrawal
Any application may be withdrawn by notice in writing to the Executive Secretary at any
time prior to publication of the legal notice of the hearing in the newspaper. Requests to
withdraw after publication of the legal notice must also be made in writing to the
Executive Secretary, but shall require approval by unanimous vote of the Board of
Appeals.
Section 9: Public Meetings
Public meetings shall be conducted in accordance with Mass General Laws, Chapter 39,
Section 23. Notice for each meeting shall be filed with the Town Clerk and a copy of
said notice shall be posted publicly on the official bulletin board in the Town Hall at least
48 hours prior to the meeting. Public meetings, while open to the public, are not public
hearings in which the public is allowed to participate.
Article III – Applications to the Board
Note: All reference to “days” shall mean “calendar” days, unless otherwise stated.
Section 1: Filing of Applications
Before a petition will be advertised and heard, complete copies of the appropriate official
application form, together with a filing fee and such other information and plans as
required by the Board, shall be filed in the office of the Board of Appeals. The Executive
Secretary shall file all applications, plans and other submission material with the Town
Clerk. Before an appeal will be advertised and heard, a complete copy of the appeal,
together with such information prescribed by the Board, shall have been filed in the
office of the Town Clerk. All applications shall be submitted to the office of the Board of
Appeals at least 22 days prior to the date of the Public Hearing. If the application is
incomplete, or the agenda has been closed, the application will be heard at the next
scheduled public hearing.
Section 2: Types of Applications
a. Variances – The Board shall hold a public hearing for which notice has been
given on any application for a variance within 65 days from the date of filing such
3
application. The decision of the Board shall be made within 100 days from the
date of filing the application with the Town Clerk. Failure by the Board to act
within the prescribed time shall be deemed a grant of the variance.
If the rights authorized by a variance are not exercised within one year of the date
of such grant, the variance shall lapse and may be re-established only after notice
and a new hearing, or after any extension permitted by statute.
b. Special Permit/Findings, Special Permits - The Board shall hold a Public Hearing
for which notice has been given on any application for a Special Permit/Finding
or a Special Permit within 65 days from the date of filing such application. The
decision of the Board shall be made within 90 days from the date of filing the
application with the Town Clerk. Failure by the Board to act within the
prescribed time shall be deemed a grant of the Special Permit/Finding or Special
Permit.
Substantial use or construction authorized by Special Permit/Findings or Special
Permits must commence within two years of filing of the decision with the Town
Clerk.
c. Appeals from the decision of any Administrative Officer - Any appeal taken
under MGL Section 8 and/or Section XXIV-C of the Zoning Bylaw must be taken
within 30 days from the date of the order or decision of the Administrative Officer
being appealed. The petitioner shall file the application for appeal with the Town
Clerk, specifying the grounds for the appeal. The Town Clerk shall, within 2
business days, transmit copies to the officer or board whose order or decision is
being appealed and to the Permit Granting Authority. Said Administrative Officer
shall, within 7 days, transmit to the Permit Granting Authority copies of all
documents and papers constituting a record of the case in which the appeal is
taken.
The Board shall hold a public hearing for which notice has been given within 65
days from the date of filing of the application. The decision of the Board shall be
made within 100 days of the date of filing the application with the Town Clerk.
The required time limits for a public hearing and said action may be extended by
written agreement between the petitioner and the Board. A copy of said
agreement shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk. Failure of the Board to
act within the prescribed time limits shall be deemed a grant of the appeal.
d. Site Plan Approvals for Major Construction Projects – No application for Site
Plan Approval shall be submitted to the Special Permit Granting Authority
(SPGA) prior to review by the Design Review Board. No application for Site
Plan Approval deemed to be a Project of Significant Impact shall be submitted to
the SPGA prior to the expiration date of appeal from the Special Permit granted
by the Planning Board.
4
Plans and all other submission materials submitted to the SPGA shall be filed in
accordance with the Process Schedule for Site Plan Approval Projects. Within 7
days after the date of filing of the application in the office of the Town Clerk,
copies of the complete submitted application shall be sent to the Board of Health,
Planning Board, Design Review Board, Town Engineer, Wetlands Protection
Committee, Fire Department and any other Town agencies or Boards designated
by the SPGA for review and preparation of written recommendations to the SPGA
and the applicant prior to the public hearing. Said written recommendations shall
be attached to and become part of the application.
The Board shall hold a Public Hearing for which notice has been given on any
application for Site Plan Approval within 65 days from the date of filing such
application. The decision of the Board shall be made within 90 days from the
date of filing the application with the Town Clerk. No building permit or parking
plan permit shall be issued by the Inspector of Buildings without the written
approval of plans as herein provided. Failure by the Board to act within the
prescribed time shall be deemed a grant of the Site Plan Approval.
Substantial use or construction authorized by Site Plan Approvals must
commence within two years of filing of the decision with the Town Clerk.
e. Comprehensive Permits – Any public agency, limited dividend or nonprofit
organization proposing to build low- or moderate-income housing may submit a
single application to the Board of Appeals in lieu of separate applications to other
applicable Boards. The Board of Appeals shall transmit a copy of the application
to each of the Boards or Departments noted in Section 3.d. of these Rules and
Regulations.
The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing within 30 days of receipt of the
application, and shall render a decision within 40 days after the termination of the
public hearing. If the hearing has not convened or the decision is not rendered
within the time allowed, unless extended by mutual agreement between the Board
and the applicant, the application shall be deemed to have been allowed and the
comprehensive permit shall issue. The time limits for exercising the
comprehensive permit shall be determined by law or by condition of the permit.
Section 3 – Application Requirements – All applications must include 1 application form
appropriate for the relief sought. All application forms are available in the office of the
Board of Appeals.
Variances
a. The Board has the authority to grant variances pursuant to M.G.L. Ch. 40A,
Section 10, where owning to circumstances relating to soil conditions, shape or
topography of such land or structures and especially affecting such land or
structures but not affecting generally the zoning district in which it is located, a
literal enforcement of the provisions of the bylaw would involve substantial
5
hardship, financial or otherwise, to the petitioner or appellant, and that desirable
relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good, and
without nullifying or substantially derogating from the intent and purpose of the
bylaw.
A written statement including a description of the circumstances especially
affecting the property for which a variance is sought which do not generally affect
the zoning district in which it is located; and facts which support the conclusion
that substantial hardship, financial or otherwise, would result from literal
enforcement of the applicable zoning restrictions with respect to the land or
building for which the variance is sought must be submitted with the application.
b. Seven copies of a Certified Plot Plan drawn by a Registered Land Surveyor, of
recent date, stamped, signed and dated, on an 8 ½ inch by 11 inch paper on a scale
of 1” = 20 feet, indicating the following:
• Address, square footage of the lot, and area district in which property is
located
• Names of abutting streets
• All existing structures on the lot with relevant setbacks from the affected
lot lines.
• Dimensions of the proposed addition or structure including bay windows
and chimneys and all relevant setbacks.
• Driveways
• Side-facing garages, location of garage doors, and relevant setbacks
• Where, within a distance of 500 feet, three or more dwellings are set back
more than 30 feet from the property line, the front setback of all affected
dwellings, including the property for which relief is requested.
• All easements, streams and/or wetland areas
• Existing and proposed percentage of lot coverage.
• Existing and proposed maximum building coverage expressed in square
feet.
• Compass rose
c. Seven copies of all construction plans, which shall be no larger than 11 inches by
17 inches, and which shall include the following:
• Name of designer
• Date of plan design
• Name and address of applicant
• Existing and proposed floor plans for all floors affected by the proposed
structure.
• Existing and proposed elevation drawings of all sides of the structure
affected by the proposed structure
• Height of proposed ridgeline from average ground level surrounding the
structure, if the proposed addition includes a second story.
6
d. Photographs including one of the front of the main dwelling, and all sides of the
structure affected by the proposed construction.
Special Permit/Findings
a. A written statement providing facts that, should the Board conclude that said
alteration/addition shall intensify or add to the existing nonconformance, the
addition/alteration shall not be substantially more detrimental to the neighborhood
than the existing nonconforming structure.
b., c. and d. - See requirements for variances.
Special Permits
a. All requirements listed on the individual Submission Requirements sheets
available in the office of the Board of Appeals.
Site Plan Approval
a. All plans and information as requested on the Site Plan Approval Review/Plans
and Submittal Checklist available in the office of the Board of Appeals
b. Official Development Prospectus available in the office of the Board of Appeals.
Comprehensive Permit
a. All plans and information required pursuant to Chapter 40B, Section 21.
Section 4: Filing Fees
The current filing fees, which may be amended by a unanimous vote of the Board of
Appeals at any future time, are as follows:
a. Residential Variances and Special Permit/Findings - $200.00
Special Permits - $200.00
Special Permit Renewals - $150.00
b. Commercial Special Permits - $500.00
& Municipal Signs - $300.00
Site Plan Approval without - $2,000.00 & Fire Department
Planning Board Special Permit Consulting Fee
Site Plan Approval with - $3,500.00
Planning Board Special Permit
c. Should the Board elect to have a peer review, the petitioner shall assume all costs of
said review.
7
Article IV – Decisions by the Board
Section 1. Deliberation
At the close of the hearing of each petition, the Board shall deliberate. At the conclusion
of the deliberation, a motion shall be made and seconded to approve the relief requested.
A vote on the motion shall be taken unless the Board, by a unanimous vote, has continued
the hearing to a future date, at which time a vote shall be taken.
Section 2. Voting Requirements
The concurring vote of all three members of the Board shall be necessary to decide in
favor of the applicant on any matter legally coming under the jurisdiction of the Board. If
one or more members vote not to grant the relief requested, the petition or appeal shall be
deemed to be denied.
Section 2. Reconsideration
Once a petition or appeal has been voted upon and the public hearing adjourned, there
shall be no reconsideration without a duly noticed rehearing.
Section 3. Repetitive Petition
In order to have any petition or application, which has been unfavorably acted upon by
the Board, reconsidered by the Board within two years, the petitioner must follow the
procedure outlined in Section XXIV-E.5. or Section XXV-C of the Zoning Bylaw.
In all cases in which the Board has allowed the petitioner to withdraw without prejudice,
the petitioner has the right to return to the Board with a new petition at any future
hearing.
Section 4. Notices of Decisions
Notices of decisions shall be sent to all parties receiving a Notice of Public Hearing.
Copies of each decision shall be sent to the Planning Board, the Inspector of Buildings
and any other Board or Department involved in the original petition.
Section 5. Recording of Decisions
No decision shall take effect until the Town Clerk has certified that no appeal to the
decision has been taken, and, subsequent to this certification, the decision has been filed
with the Norfolk Registry of Deeds at the applicant’s expense, and copies of the
Recording filed with the office of the Town Clerk, the office of the Board of Appeals,
and the office of the Inspector of Buildings.
8
Article V – Miscellaneous Provisions
Section 1. Adoption of Rules - These Rules and Regulations shall become effective upon
adoption by the Board of Appeals and upon filing a copy thereof with the Town Clerk.
Section 2. Amendment of Rules – These rules may be amended from time to time, as
necessary and proper, by a unanimous vote of the Board of Appeals.
AS APPROVED BY THE ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS ON April 3, 2003
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
Richard L. Seegel, Chairman
Cynthia S. Hibbard, Vice-Chairman
David G. Sheffield
Robert A. Bastille
J. Randolph Becker
Robert W. Levy
9
NOTE -THIS IS AN EXCERPT FROM THE WELLESLEY ZONING BYLAW. DEPENDING ON YOUR NEEDS YOU ARE
STRONGLY ENCOURAGED TO EXAMINE THE COMPLETE TEXT.
TABLE 1
Table 1 is applicable to lots recorded or endorsed on or before Jan. 24, 1985 and to lots in the 10,000 square foot Area Regulation District recorded or
endorsed after January 24, 1985 and prior to January 19, 1989.
Area District 10,000 15,000 20,000 30,000 40,000
Minimum Frontage 60 ft. 60 ft. 60 ft. 60 ft 60 ft.
Minimum Front Yard Width 60 ft. 60 ft. 60 ft. 60 ft. 60 ft.
Minimum Front Yard Depth 30 ft.* 30 ft.* 30 ft.* 30 ft.* 30 ft.*
(Street Setback)
Minimum Side Yard Width 20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft.
(Side Line Setback)
Minimum Rear Yard Depth 10 ft. 15 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft.
(Rear Line Setback)
TABLE 2
Table 2 is applicable to lots recorded or endorsed after January 24, 1985 and to lots in the 10,000 square foot Area Regulation District, recorded or endorsed
on or after January 19, 1989 and prior to April 8, 1997.
Area District 10,000 15,000 20,000 30,000 40,000
Minimum Frontage 75 ft. 80 ft. 100 ft. 120 ft. 140 ft
Minimum Front Yard Width 75 ft. 80 ft. 100 ft. 120 ft. 140 ft
Minimum Front Yard Depth 30 ft.* 30 ft.* 30 ft.* 40 ft.* 40ft.*
(Street Setback)
Minimum Side Yard Width 20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft.
(Side Line Setback)
Minimum Rear Yard Depth 10 ft. 15 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft 20 ft.
(Rear Line Setback)
TABLE 3
Table 3 is applicable to lots recorded or endorsed after April 8, 1997.
Area District 10,000 15,000 20,000 30,000 40,000
Minimum Frontage 90 ft. 100 ft. 110 ft. 175 ft. 200 ft
Minimum Front Yard Width 90 ft. 100 ft. 110 ft. 175 ft. 200 ft
Minimum Front Yard Depth 30 ft.* 30 ft.* 35 ft.* 40 ft.* 40ft.*
(Street Setback)
Minimum Side Yard Width 20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 30 ft. 40 ft.
(Side Line Setback)
Minimum Rear Yard Depth 18 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 30 ft 40 ft.
(Rear Line Setback)
* Where, on a frontage of 500 feet including the lot to be affected, or on a frontage between two intersecting or entering streets if such
frontage is less than 500 feet, all existing buildings (if they are not less than three in number) have front yards of a depth greater than 30
feet, the minimum depth thereof shall be the depth required.
“CORNER LOTS”
… in the 10,000 and 15,000 square foot Area Regulation Districts when a rear yard of a lot abuts the side yard of the next lot the minimum
rear yard depth shall be not less than the minimum side yard depth.
(FRONTAGE FOR LOTS ON CUL-DE-SAC BULB)
… a lot having its only frontage on the curved sideline of a cul-de-sac bulb having a sideline radius of less than 100 feet may have a
reduced frontage provided: a.) The minimum frontage shall be 50 feet; b.) The minimum front yard width is maintained at the street setback
line (house line); c.)The maximum number of lots with frontage exclusively on the bulb of any cul-de-sac shall be three; d.) All other
dimensional zoning requirements are satisfied.
DEFINITIONS
Front Yard - An area, on the same lot with the building, measured from the street line to the building extending across the entire front of the
lot, and unoccupied above ground level except by uncovered steps, eaves projecting not more than 2 feet from the wall of the building, bay
windows that do not have a foundation and do not extend more than two feet from the wall of the building and a covered or uncovered,
enclosed or unenclosed, entrance porch on the first floor which neither exceeds a total area of 50 square feet nor projects more than five feet
from the face of the building nor extends nearer than 25 feet to the street line.
Side Yard - An area, on the same lot with the building, measured from the side line of the lot to the building, extending from the front yard
to the rear yard, and unoccupied above ground level except by covered basement entrances not over four feet in height and not over 35
square feet in area, bay windows that do not have a foundation and do not extend more than two feet from the wall of the building,
uncovered steps, eaves projecting not more than 2 feet from the wall of the building, attached chimneys projecting not more than 2 feet from
the wall of the building and stair landings not over 25 square feet in area.
Rear Yard - An area, on the same lot with the building, measured from the rear line of the lot to the building, extending the full width of the
lot, and unoccupied above ground level except by covered basement entrances not over four feet in height and not over 35 square feet in
area, bay windows that do not have a foundation and do not extend more than two feet from the wall of the building, uncovered steps, eaves
projecting not more than 2 feet from the wall of the building, and covered or uncovered, enclosed or unenclosed, entrance porches on the
first floor which do not exceed a total area of 50 square feet, attached chimneys projecting not more than 2 feet from the wall of the building
and stair landings not over 25 square feet in area.
Frontage - A lot boundary line which abuts a public way; or
a way which the Town Clerk certifies is maintained and used as a public way; or
a way shown on a plan approved and endorsed in accordance with the Subdivision Control Law; or
a way in existence when the Subdivision Control Law became effective in the Town of Wellesley having, in the opinion of the Planning
Board, sufficient width, suitable grades and adequate construction to provide for the needs of vehicular traffic in relation to the proposed use
of land abutting thereon or served thereby, and for the installation of municipal services to serve the land and the buildings erected or to be
erected thereon;
Certification of the adequacy of a way by the Planning Board shall be required prior to the issuance of a building permit for:
? construction of a new one or two-family dwelling;
? reconstruction of a one or two-family dwelling in conjunction with removal of 50% or more of the existing building
coverage (footprint); or
? addition to a one or two-family dwelling where the total building coverage (footprint) would be increased by 50% or
more.
and across which line there is legal access.
Side Facing Garages - Where the entrance of an attached or detached garage, built in conjunction with a one-family dwelling faces a
property boundary line other than the street line there shall be a minimum distance of 30 feet from the garage entrance to that line. The
intent of this requirement is to ensure adequate area for vehicles entering and exiting the garage.
Build Factor - A ratio of lot perimeter to lot area which limits the degree to which a lot may have an irregular shape according to the
following formula: P2 divided ALA where: P = lot perimeter; ALA = actual lot area and RLA = required lot area.
ALA by RLA
Lots recorded or endorsed after January 24, 1985 also shall be subject to a maximum Build Factor of 20.
MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE
For lots containing less than 10,000 square feet - 25 percent;
For lots containing at least 10,000 square feet but less than 20,000 square feet – the greater of 20 percent or 2,500 square feet;
For lots containing at least 20,000 square feet but less than 40,000 square feet – the greater of 18 percent or 4,000 square feet – but not more
than 6000 square feet; and
For lots containing at least 40,000 square feet - 15 percent;
SITE PREPARATION
“There shall be no site preparation work … until all necessary permits and approval have been obtained. …”
October, 2004