Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Definitions and Rules of Construction; General Penalty
[Adopted as Ch. 1, §§ 1-102 and 1-105 of the Codified Ordinances]
§ 1-1. Definitions and rules of construction.
§ 1-2. Violations and penalties.
Whoever shall offend against or fail to comply with any of the provisions
of these ordinances shall, unless some other penalty is provided by law or
these ordinances, for each and every offense, forfeit and pay a penalty of
$25 for the first violation; $50 for the second violation; and $200 for the
third violation and each subsequent offense. Each day that a person is in
violation shall constitute a separate offense. This penalty is not intended
The following rules of construction shall be observed in construing
these ordinances, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the
context of the ordinances:
Words importing the singular shall include the plural; words
importing the plural shall include the singular; and words
importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and
neutral genders.
(1)
Words purporting to give a joint authority to three or more officers
or other persons shall be construed as granting such authority to a
majority of such officers or persons.
(2)
Words prohibiting anything from being done except in accordance
with a license, permit or authority from a board or officer shall be
construed as giving such board or officer power to license, permit
or authorize such a thing to be done.
(3)
A.
As used in these ordinances, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
OWNER — As applied to a building or land, includes any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common or joint tenant of the whole or of a part
of such building or land.
PERSON — Includes a corporation, trust, society, association,
partnership, or any other legal entity.
TENANT OR OCCUPANT — As applied to a building or land, includes
any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land,
either alone or with other persons.
WAYS, STREETS AND HIGHWAYS — Includes all public ways, private
ways, highways, Town ways, roads, bridges, streets, avenues,
boulevards, alleys, squares, lanes, courts, crosswalks and sidewalks.
B.
As used in these ordinances, the use of the word "Charter" or "HRC"
refers to the West Springfield Home Rule Charter.
C.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:3
to, in any way, limit the applicability of the provisions of the noncriminal
disposition procedures set forth in these ordinances.1
1. Editor's Note: See Art. II, Noncriminal Disposition of Violations, of this chapter.
§ 1-2 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 1-2
1:4
ARTICLE II
Noncriminal Disposition of Violations
[Adopted as Ch. 7, §§ 7-100, 7-101, 7-102, 7-200 and 7-201 of the
Codified Ordinances]
§ 1-3. Authorization to utilize noncriminal disposition procedures.
§ 1-4. Penalties for violation of ordinances, rules or regulations.
§ 1-5. Purchase, distribution and tracking of citations; report on
fines.
It shall be the responsibility of the Chief Procurement Officer or his
designee to purchase, distribute and track the citations issued under this
chapter. The Town Collector shall monthly forward a report of the fines
received pursuant to this article, showing by department, board or
committee the amount received as a result of tickets issued by each such
department, board or committee.
§ 1-6. Violations of School Committee rules and regulations.
A noncriminal disposition procedure using the civil infraction
procedure in MGL c. 40, § 21D is enacted for violations of these
ordinances and the rules and regulations currently existing or hereafter
adopted by the various boards, committees and departments of the
Town.
A.
Any officer, employee, person or entity observing a violation of an
ordinance, rule or regulation he or she is responsible for enforcing
may give to the offender a ticket in a form in compliance with the
requirements of and in the manner established by said MGL c. 40,
§ 21D, payable through the District Court having the Town of West
Springfield within its jurisdiction.
B.
The penalty under the civil infraction procedure of § 1-3 for each
violation of any ordinance, rule or regulation shall be, unless a different
penalty is specified in a particular ordinance, rule or regulation as the
noncriminal civil infraction penalty:
(1) For the first offense: $25.
(2) For the second offense: $100.
(3) For the third and all subsequent offenses: $300.
A.
Each day of violation shall be considered a separate violation. This
penalty is in addition to the criminal penalties that are set forth in this
ordinance; however, the use of either does not prevent the use of the
other for future violations.
B.
A noncriminal disposition procedure, using the civil infraction
procedure in MGL c. 40, § 21D, is enacted for violations of the School
A.
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
Committee rule and regulation prohibiting the use of tobacco products
within school buildings, the school facilities or on the school grounds or
on school buses by any individual, including school personnel.
Any authorized employee observing a violation of a rule or regulation is
empowered to enforce and shall give to the offender a ticket in a form
in compliance with the requirement of and in the manner established
by said MGL c. 40, § 21D, payable through the District Court having
jurisdiction over the Town of West Springfield.
B.
School Committee issuance of citations. Citations for violations shall be
issued by any School Committee employee (as defined in MGL c. 268A,
§ 1) authorized in writing by the School Committee which has voted to
have the above-cited rule and regulation enforced under this ordinance.
C.
§ 1-6 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 1-6
1:6
ARTICLE III
Enforcement
[Adopted as Ch. 7, § 7-1300 of the Codified Ordinances]
§ 1-7. Power to appoint constables.
The Mayor may appoint Constables pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 41,
§ 91.
§ 1-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-7
1:7

ARTICLE IV
Adoption of Code
[The Code of the Town of West Springfield was adopted by the Town
Council 8-20-2018 as follows: "ORDERED that the renumbering of the
Ordinances of the Town of West Springfield from their original numbering
to the numbering or codification, arrangement, sequence and captions, as
set forth in Division I of the Code of the Town of West Springfield, dated
May 1, 2018, and published by General Code LLC, is hereby accepted; said
codification having been done under the direction of the Town Clerk and the
Mayor, and said Code being a compilation of the present legislation of the
Town and having no substantive changes in the text thereof."]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-7
1:9
Chapter 7
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND MULTIPLE-MEMBER BODIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Town agencies — See Charter Art. 6. Departments — See Ch. 16.
§ 7-1. Election of officers. [Amended 1-16-2007 by Ord. No. 135]
§ 7-3. Removal of member from multiple-member body. [Added
2-2-2003 by Ord. No. 112; amended 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 142]
Each municipal board or commission shall annually, at its first meeting
of each calendar year, elect a Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Secretary
for the ensuing year, except that the Building and Other Facilities
Planning and Construction Committee, Board of Assessors and the
Capital Planning Committee shall elect its officers on a fiscal-year basis
at its first meeting of each fiscal year.
A.
Each municipal board or commission shall file with the Office of the
Mayor a statement identifying the newly elected officers no later than
30 days after the election of officers.
B.
Removal. The Mayor may remove a member of a multiple-member body
appointed by the Mayor, for cause.
A.
Procedure. [Amended 9-6-2012]
The Mayor shall, prior to the removal of any member of a multiplemember
body, notify said member in writing by certified mail of
the reason(s) for removal, with a copy to the Town Council. The
member may, within 10 days of the date of the notice, request a
meeting with the Town Council President, Vice President and Chair
of the Human Resource Committee to discuss the removal. Said
request shall be in writing. The member may at such meeting have
counsel or a representative of his/her own choosing present for the
purpose of advising said member only, but not for the purpose of
representation or participation in the meeting. The member may
speak in his/her own behalf.
(1)
Should any one of the above-named parties, Town Council
President, Vice President or Chair of the Human Resource
Committee, conclude, based on the evidence presented, that the
member has been removed without cause, the Council President
will schedule a discussion and vote on said removal for the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Town Council. If at the Council
meeting at least six members believe the member was removed
without cause, and there is a vote reflecting the same, the member
shall not be removed.
(2)
B.
§ 1-7 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 7-3
1:10
§ 7-5. Board of Appeals for zoning.
The Board of Appeals established in accordance with the provision of
General Laws Chapter 40A shall be responsible for interpreting the zoning
under the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of West Springfield.2 Said Board
shall be the Board of Appeals for the purposes of MGL c. 41, § 81Z.
§ 7-7. Board of Assessors. [Amended 1-16-2007 by Ord. No. 131]
Decision. The decision of the Town Council shall be final. If the Council
votes to remove the member, it shall be effective upon the Clerk of
the Council filing a notice of removal with the Town Clerk, with a
copy to the Mayor. If no meeting is requested, as provided in the prior
subsection, the Mayor shall file the notice of removal after the time to
request a meeting has expired. [Amended 9-6-2012]
C.
Property rights. No member of a multiple-member body shall have any
property interest in said membership.
D.
Membership and organization. There shall be a Principal Assessor, who
shall also be the head of the Assessing Division in the Department of
Municipal Finance, and a Board of Assessors consisting of the Principal
Assessor and two part-time Assessors appointed by the Mayor pursuant
to Section 2-10 of the Charter.
A.
Terms and compensation.
The appointment of the part-time Assessors shall be made on the
first business day of July, for a term of two years or until their
successors are appointed and qualified, staggered so that one term
expires each year.
(1)
The Principal Assessor shall be appointed pursuant to the
provisions of the Department of Municipal Finance ordinance.3
(2)
The part-time Assessors shall receive compensation for their
services as determined by the Mayor, subject to appropriation.
(3)
B.
Powers and authority. The Principal Assessor shall have no greater
authority or power in the performance of the statutory duties of
Assessors than either of the part-time Assessors, including, but not
limited to, recommending the annual tax rate to the Mayor and Council
and granting abatements.
C.
Special municipal employees. The part-time Assessors shall be special
municipal employees.
D.
2. Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Zoning.
3. Editor's Note: See Ch. 16, Departments, § 16-15.
§ 7-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-9
1:11
§ 7-9. Board of License Commissioners.4 [Added 1-16-2007 by Ord.
No. 132]
§ 7-11. Building and Other Facilities Planning and Construction
Committee.5 [Added 3-18-2002 by Ord. No. 106]
A. Title: "Board of License Commissioners."
Purpose. Pursuant to the requirements of Section 6-7 of the West
Springfield Home Rule Charter (HRC), there is hereby established a
Board of License Commissioners whose duty it shall be to issue, oversee
and enforce the various licenses issued by the Town of West Springfield.
B.
Membership. The Board shall consist of three members who shall be
appointed by the Mayor for three-year terms or until their successor
has been appointed and qualified. Appointments shall be for three years
and shall begin on the first business day in January. Said terms shall
be staggered so that one member is appointed each year. If a vacancy
occurs, the Mayor shall appoint a new member who shall serve for the
balance of the term of the member replaced.
C.
Powers. The Board shall be responsible for the issuance, renewal,
modification, suspension and revocation of licenses issued under the
authority set forth in Chapters 138 and 140 of the General Laws, and all
other licenses and permits previously issued by the Board of Selectmen
and any and all licenses and permits established by ordinance, unless
by ordinance or the HRC the issuance of such licenses has been
assigned to another municipal board, department or office. The Board
shall establish the fees for said licenses and permits, subject to the
approval of the Mayor.
D.
Rules and regulations. The Board may adopt rules and regulations,
subject to approval by the Mayor.
E.
Special municipal employees. Commission members shall be special
municipal employees.
F.
Severability. If any portion of this section is declared to be illegal or
unenforceable, it shall be deemed stricken and the remaining portions
shall remain in full force and effect.
G.
Membership and organization. There shall be a Building and Other
Facilities Planning and Construction Committee, which may be referred
to as the "Planning and Construction Committee" and which shall
consist of seven members, all of whom shall be residents of the Town. In
making appointments to the Committee, the Mayor shall seek persons
having experience in the fields of architecture, engineering,
construction, real estate or law.
A.
4. Editor's Note: See also Charter Sec. 6-7; and Ch. 175, Licenses and Permits.
5. Editor's Note: See also Charter Sec. 6-5.
§ 7-9 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 7-11
1:12
Terms and compensation. The terms of the six members appointed by
the Mayor, after the initial terms, shall be for three years and shall be
so arranged that the term of two members shall expire each year. The
seventh member of the Committee shall be designated, annually, by the
School Committee and may, but need not, be a member of the School
Committee. The initial appointment shall be two to expire January 1,
2005, two to expire January 1, 2004 and two to expire January 1, 2003.
Committee members shall serve without compensation.
B.
Powers and duties.
Whenever any construction, reconstruction or remodeling of any
municipal or school building or other Town of West Springfield
facility is proposed to be undertaken, the proposed project shall
be referred to the Building and Other Facilities Planning and
Construction Committee by the Mayor, if deemed appropriate. The
Building and Other Facilities Planning and Construction Committee
shall evaluate the proposal and shall file a written report, including
its recommendations, with the Mayor. The Mayor shall determine
what action, if any, shall be taken in connection with said
recommendations. The Building and Other Facilities Planning and
Construction Committee shall be the designer selection committee.
The Committee shall be responsible for overseeing all construction,
reconstruction or remodeling work which is authorized to be
undertaken, including, but not limited to, site acquisition, site
preparation, schematic design, preliminary design, bid
preparation, bid award, and supervision of construction.
(1)
The Building and Other Facilities Planning and Construction
Committee shall be responsible for monitoring the physical
condition of all municipal buildings and other facilities, including
schools. The Committee shall meet from time to time with
representatives of municipal agencies to evaluate the need for
the construction of new buildings or other facilities or additions,
renovations, or remodeling of any existing building or facility. The
Committee shall file an annual written report with the Mayor by
June 30 of each year. The report shall state the needs of the
community to be addressed by the project(s) and make
recommendations as to the priority of the project(s) listed. The
Committee shall make such additional reports as it deems
appropriate or as requested by the Mayor. The Committee shall
review the condition of any existing building or facility or the
components thereof or future building or facility needs as
requested by the Mayor.
(2)
The Building and Other Facilities Planning and Construction
Committee shall review all plans and proposals for capital
improvements to municipal buildings and other facilities, including
all proposals made by or on behalf of the School Committee, and
shall evaluate and assign priorities to each such proposed project
(3)
C.
§ 7-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-11
1:13
§ 7-13. Community Preservation Committee. [Amended 2-2-2009 by
Ord. No. 140]
on a continuing basis. A member of the Capital Program Planning
Committee shall serve as a liaison to said Committee.
Special municipal employees. Committee members shall be special
municipal employees.
D.
Membership and organization.
There is hereby established a Community Preservation Committee
consisting of nine voting members pursuant to MGL Chapter 44B.
The composition of the Committee, the appointment authority and
the term of office for the Committee members shall be as follows:
One member of the Conservation Commission, as designated
by the Commission for a term of three years.
(a)
One member of the Historical Commission, as designated by
the Commission for a term of three years.
(b)
One member of the Planning Board, as designated by the
Board for a term of three years.
(c)
One member of the Park and Recreation Commission, as
designated by the Commissioners for a initial term of one year
and thereafter for a term of three years.
(d)
One member of the Housing Authority, as designated by the
Authority for an initial term of two years and thereafter for a
term of three years.
(e)
One member of the Council on Aging, as designated by the
Council for an initial term of one year and thereafter for a term
of three years.
(f)
Three members who are residents of the Town of West
Springfield, to be appointed by the Mayor in accordance with
Section 3-3 of the West Springfield Home Rule Charter, one
member's initial term of one year and thereafter a term of
three years; two members' initial terms of two years and
thereafter a term of three years.
(g)
(1)
Should any of the commissions, boards, councils, committees or
authorities (hereinafter "boards") who have appointment authority
under this chapter be no longer in existence, the appointment
authority of said boards shall become the responsibility of the
Mayor in accordance with Section 3-3 of the West Springfield Home
Rule Charter.
(2)
A.
§ 7-11 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 7-13
1:14
§ 7-15. Conservation Commission. [Amended 1-16-2007 by Ord. No.
133]
Should any member of the Committee appointed by the above
boards cease to serve as a member of the appointing boards, his
term shall automatically expire.
(3)
Duties.
The Community Preservation Committee shall conduct an initial
study identifying and evaluating the community preservation needs
of the Town of West Springfield.
(1)
The Community Preservation Committee, in developing the initial
needs study and the annual reviews, shall consult with the
Conservation Commission, the Historical Commission, the Planning
Board, the Park and Recreation Commission and the Housing
Authority and, in addition, may consult with any other municipal
department.
(2)
The Community Preservation Committee shall make written
recommendations to the Town Council for funding of acquisitions
and initiatives. The recommendations shall comply with the
Community Preservation Act as set forth in MGL Chapter 44B. The
Committee shall include with its recommendations any pertinent
financial information in its possession, regarding estimated
acquisition costs, financing options, administrative expenses, debt
services and any existing or ongoing operating expenses.
(3)
The Community Preservation Committee shall hold at least one
public informational hearing as part of the initial study and a public
hearing as part of the annual review process. Notice of the public
hearing shall be posted at least two weeks before the hearing date.
Notice of the informational meeting shall also be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Town of West Springfield
for each of the two weeks before the hearing date.
(4)
B.
Quorum requirement. The Community Preservation Committee shall
not meet or conduct business without the presence of a quorum. A
majority of the members of the Community Preservation Committee
shall constitute a quorum. The Committee shall approve its actions by a
majority vote of those members present and voting.
C.
Severability. In case any section, paragraph or part of this section is
for any reason declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of last
resort, every other section, paragraph or part shall continue in full
force and effect.
D.
Membership. A Conservation Commission of seven members is hereby
established pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 8C for the
purposes set forth in said section.
A.
§ 7-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-15
1:15
§ 7-17. Council on Aging.
§ 7-19. Historical Commission; historic districts.
Terms of office. The terms of office of the members shall commence on
the first business day in January and appointments shall be staggered
so that not more than three members' terms shall expire in any one
year, or until their successors shall have been appointed and qualified.
B.
Membership. A Council on Aging consisting of 15 members is hereby
established pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 8B, for the
purpose of coordinating or carrying out programs designed to meet the
problems of the aging in coordination with programs of the Council for
the Aging established under MGL c. 6, § 73.6
A.
Residency and compensation. All members of said Council shall be
residents of the Town and shall serve without compensation.
B.
Appointment. The members of said Council shall be appointed annually,
as hereinafter provided, by the Mayor.
C.
Terms of office. The terms of office of all the members of said Council
shall commence on the first day of May following their appointment and
shall be for three years or until their successors shall have been duly
appointed and qualified.
D.
Vacancies. Any vacancy in the membership of the Council shall be filled
by the Mayor for the remainder of the unexpired term.
E.
Election of officers. The Council shall annually in the month of May
elect its Chairperson and such other officers as it deems appropriate.
F.
Membership. There shall be a West Springfield Historical Commission
which shall be a citizen-led group consisting of seven members and
four alternates, including one member from two nominees submitted
by the local historical society or, in the absence thereof, by the Society
for the Preservation of New England Antiquities, one member from
two nominees submitted by the chapter of the American Institute of
Architects covering the area, and one member from two nominees of
the Board of Realtors, if any, covering the area. If within 30 days
after submission of a written request for nominees to any of the
organizations herein named no such nominations have been made, the
Mayor may proceed to appoint the three members without nominations
by such organization; all of whom shall be residents of the Town,
appointed by the Mayor, subject to the provisions of Section 2-10 of the
West Springfield Home Rule Charter.
A.
Terms and compensation. The terms of each appointment shall be for
three years, with terms being staggered to accommodate transition
B.
6. Editor's Note: MGL c. 6, § 73 was repealed by Acts 1973, c. 1168. See now MGL c. 19A,
Department of Elder Affairs.
§ 7-15 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 7-19
1:16
of Commission members. Commission members shall serve without
compensation.
Powers and duties.
The Commission shall have the power, subject to appropriation or
receipt of money:
To conduct a survey of buildings and sites in the Town to
determine which are historically significant, revise detailed
listing of historic sites and buildings in said Town;
(a)
To devise a system of markers for historic sites and buildings,
to arrange for the manufacture and installation of such
markers, and to arrange care for such markers;
(b)
To arrange for the preparation and publication of printed
matter relating to historic sites and structures of said Town,
whether for walking tours, general public information or
otherwise; and
(c)
To collect, preserve, inventory and make available for public
view and use any and all records of historical significance. The
Commission shall also digitize archived records as appropriate
for electronic public access.
(d)
(1)
The Commission shall also have the power, in accordance with the
provision of the Historic Districts Act,7 so-called, as mentioned in
this chapter, to:
Propose the establishment of additional historic districts or
change in existing historic districts; and
(a)
To consult with and advise the Planning Board, the
Redevelopment Authority and other departments or agencies
of the Town in matters concerning historic sites and structures.
(b)
(2)
C.
Limitations on powers and duties. The Committee shall not have
authority to infringe upon the statutory or regulatory powers or
jurisdiction of any other Town department, committee or commission,
or upon those duties and jurisdictions set out in relation to such
departments, committees or commissions by state or federal law or
regulation, by the Charter or Town ordinances.
D.
Minutes and proceedings.
The Commission shall meet on an as-needed basis, but not less
frequently than quarterly;
(1)
Special meetings may be called by the Mayor, the Chair of the
Historical Commission or majority vote of the Commission;
(2)
E.
7. Editor's Note: See MGL c. 40C.
§ 7-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-19
1:17
§ 7-21. Town Historian.
(3) Minutes shall be kept of all public meetings;
The Commission may establish its own rules of procedure,
including those governing the conduct of its meetings;
(4)
The Commission may request information from various Town
departments, commissions, and committees as may be deemed
necessary to effectuate the duty of the Historical Commission. Such
requests shall be made with reasonable advance notice; and
(5)
The Commission shall observe and be subject to the Massachusetts
Open Meeting Law (MGL c. 30A, §§ 18 through 25) in regard to all
regular and special meetings.
(6)
Historic districts.
Broadway Historic District. There is hereby established under the
provisions of and in accordance with the Historic Districts Act
(MGL c. 40C), the Broadway Historic District as shown on the plan
entitled "The Broadway Historic District" dated November 1971;
said plan to be considered a part of this section.
(1)
White Church Historic District. There is hereby established under
the provisions of and in accordance with the Historic Districts Act
(MGL c. 40C), the White Church Historic District as shown on the
plan entitled "The White Church Historic District" dated February
1973; said plan to be considered a part of this section.
(2)
F.
Certificate of appropriateness. The Commission shall take action within
60 days of the filing of an application for a certificate of
appropriateness, a certificate of nonapplicability or a certificate of
hardship, as the case may be, in accordance with the provisions of
Section 11 of the Historic Districts Act,8 so-called, as mentioned in this
section, or any section relative thereto or in amendment thereof.
G.
Creation of office; appointment. There is hereby created the office of
Town Historian. The Mayor shall appoint a Town Historian.
A.
Duties. It shall be the duty of the Town Historian to preserve or to
arrange the preservation of all historical records of the Town in
cooperation with all departments and in particular in cooperation with
the Board of Library Trustees and any incorporated historical society
functioning in the Town.
B.
Custody and preservation of records. All records in the custody of
the Town boards, commissions, committees and officers required to
be so kept shall remain in such custody, but the Town Historian shall
have the right to examine the method of preservation and make
C.
8. Editor's Note: See MGL c. 40C, § 11.
§ 7-19 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 7-21
1:18
§ 7-23. Housing Authority.
The Housing Authority is established pursuant to the provisions of MGL
Chapter 121B and is a separate body politic.
§ 7-25. Park and Recreation Commission.9 [Amended 11-5-2001 by
Ord. No. 101]
recommendations to the persons concerned therewith as to proper
preservation thereof.
Membership. There shall be a Board of Park and Recreation
Commissioners consisting of seven members, all of whom shall be
residents of the Town, appointed by the Mayor and subject to the
provisions of Section 2-10 of the West Springfield Home Rule Charter
(HRC).
A.
Terms and compensation. The terms of each appointment, after the
initial terms, shall be for three years and shall be arranged so that
at least two members' terms shall expire in each odd-numbered year.
Commission members shall serve without compensation.
B.
Powers and duties.
The Commission shall act in an advisory capacity to the Mayor
under his/her supervision and control. The Commission shall
review and report to the Mayor on matters related to the operation
and functions of the parks, the Park and Recreation Department
and park and recreation facilities, including, but not limited to:
(a) Operation of programs;
(b) Viability of programs;
(c) Program needs;
(d) Adequacy of staff;
(e) Procedures for the use of facilities;
(f) Appropriateness of budget requests;
(g) Appropriateness of expenditures;
Appropriateness of policies with suggested revisions as
applicable;
(h)
(i) Appropriateness of fees;
(j) Short-term needs of the Department;
(k) Long-range planning needs and options;
(1)
C.
9. Editor's Note: See also Charter Sec. 6-8.
§ 7-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-25
1:19
(l) Appropriateness of long-term capital projects;
Policies and procedures deemed needed to be implemented or
deleted to enhance services to Town residents;
(m)
The Commission shall:
(a) Report, annually, on the adequacy of personnel and programs;
Annually assess and report the status of the fields, and play
areas, parks and park equipment, facilities and programs,
including school field and recreational areas;
(b)
Meet with the Park and Recreation Director or supervisory
staff on a regular basis, not less than once every two months;
(c)
Meet with the Director of Department of Public Works on a
regular basis, but not less than once every two months; review
and report on the status and needs of the parks and facilities
at least annually;
(d)
Perform any other duty or responsibility the Mayor may assign
to the Commission.
(e)
(2)
Meetings and proceedings.
The Commission shall meet on a regular basis, as established by it,
but not less frequently than monthly.
(1)
Special meetings may be called by the Mayor, Chairman of the
Commission or majority vote of the Commission.
(2)
(3) Minutes shall be kept of all public meetings.
The Commission may establish its own rules of procedure,
including those governing the conduct of its meetings.
(4)
The Park and Recreation Department shall supply the Commission
with any information it may request in writing in a timely manner
that is reasonably related to the responsibilities and operation of
the department.
(5)
The Director of the Department of Public Works shall provide the
Commission with any information it may request, in writing, in a
timely manner that is reasonably related to the responsibilities and
operation of the parks, recreational facilities and play areas.
(6)
The Director of Maintenance for the School Department shall
provide the Commission with any information it may request, in
writing, in a timely manner that is reasonably related to the
responsibilities and operation of indoor and outdoor school athletic
facilities, recreational areas, playgrounds and related areas.
(7)
D.
§ 7-25 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 7-25
1:20
§ 7-27. Planning Board. [Added 1-16-2007 by Ord. No. 134]
§ 7-29. Public Safety Commission.10 [Amended 3-18-2002 by Ord.
No. 108]
The Park and Recreation Department shall provide to the
Commission secretarial services, a filing cabinet and materials to
enable it to conduct its duties and responsibilities.
(8)
Special municipal employees. Commission members shall be special
municipal employees.
E.
Membership, terms and organization. There shall be a Planning Board,
which shall consist of five members and one alternate (appointed by the
Mayor for a one-year term in January) appointed by the Mayor for fiveyear
terms staggered so that one member's term will expire annually
in January. The Board shall annually, at its first meeting in the calendar
year, elect a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and Secretary who shall
keep a record of its meetings.
A.
Powers and duties.
The Planning Board shall exercise the powers provided in MGL
Chapter 40A and MGL c. 41, § 70 to 72 and §§ 81A through 81GG,
as amended, and any other powers given Planning Boards by the
general laws or ordinances.
(1)
The Planning Board shall make careful studies of the resources,
possibilities and needs of the Town and shall make plans for the
development of the Town. The Planning Board shall make, and may
from time to time amend, a comprehensive or master plan that sets
forth in graphic and textual form policies to govern future growth
and development in the Town. The Planning Board shall monitor,
and report on, progress made by the Town in implementing the
recommendations of the master plan and other plans and studies
prepared by the Board.
(2)
The Planning Board shall have the power to regulate the
subdivision of land within the Town by the adoption of rules and
regulations governing such development and the administration of
such rules and regulations upon the application of landowners for
the subdivision of land as authorized by the Subdivision Control
Law, MGL c. 41, § 81Q.
(3)
B.
Membership and organization.
There shall be a Public Safety Commission consisting of five
members, all of whom shall be residents and registered voters of
the Town, appointed by the Mayor subject to provisions of Section
2-10 of the West Springfield Home Rule Charter (HRC).
(1)
A.
10.Editor's Note: See also Charter Sec. 6-9.
§ 7-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-29
1:21
The Commission shall elect annually, at the first meeting in each
calendar year, a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and a Secretary
who shall keep a record of its meetings.
(2)
Terms and compensation. The terms of each appointment shall, after
the initial appointment, be for three years. The initial appointment shall
be two to expire January 1, 2005, two to expire January 1, 2004 and one
to expire January 1, 2003. Commission members shall serve without
compensation.
B.
Powers and duties:
The Commission shall assist the Mayor in the supervision and
oversight of the Police and Fire Departments, including the
coordination of the administration of both departments with one
another, and with other Town departments and agencies by making
recommendations to the Mayor concerning:
(a) Setting priorities within said departments;
The annual operating budgets of both departments, after the
Mayor and Commission have met with the chiefs to discuss the
proposed budgets;
(b)
The capital budget requests of both departments, after the
Mayor and the Commission have met with the chiefs to discuss
the requests; provided, however, that Commission members
may only inspect the departments on an annual basis in
connection with the budget review or in relation to a written
complaint from the public. Inspections shall be made only after
approval from the chief has been obtained to ensure it will not
unduly disrupt department operations.
(c)
Final interviews for appointments and promotions of officers
and men and women, in both departments, shall be conducted
by the Commission and the chief. The chief shall submit his/
her recommendations to the Commission and the Commission,
if it does not agree with said recommendations, shall submit
to the Mayor written reasons for not concurring with said
recommendation.
(d)
(1)
The Commission shall review written complaints made by the
public concerning:
(a) The operation of the Police and Fire Departments.
The conduct of employees of both departments. All written
complaints received by the Commission shall be forwarded to
the chief of the department to which they relate. The chief shall
investigate or cause to be investigated said complaints and
submit his/her findings and recommendations, in connection
therewith, to the Commission.
(b)
(2)
C.
§ 7-29 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 7-29
1:22
§ 7-31. Redevelopment Authority.
The Redevelopment Authority is established pursuant to the provisions of
MGL Chapter 121B and is a separate body politic.
§ 7-33. Retirement Board.
The West Springfield Retirement Board is established pursuant to the
provisions of MGL Chapter 32 and is a separate body politic.
§ 7-35. Tree and Urban Forest Committee.11
The Commission shall adopt such rules and regulations, consistent
with this section, the civil service statute and police and fire
collective bargaining agreements, as it deems necessary to
establish procedures to be followed in filing of written complaints
by the public, investigating such complaints and holding hearings
concerning such complaints made to it regarding the operation
of the Police or Fire Department and the conduct of officers and
employees of each department. Citizen complaints shall be
considered part of an employee's personnel file.
(3)
The Commission shall apply the principle of progressive discipline,
except in those instances where more severe punishment is
warranted.
(4)
Meetings and proceedings.
The Commission shall meet on a regular basis, but not less
frequently than every other month.
(1)
Special meetings may be called by the Mayor, Chairman of the
Commission or majority vote of the Commission.
(2)
(3) Minutes shall be kept of its meetings.
The Commission may establish its own rules of procedure,
including those governing the conduct of its meetings.
(4)
D.
Filing of vacancies. The Mayor shall make an appointment for balance
of said term subject to Town Council approval pursuant to Section 2-10
of the HRC.
E.
Qualification of members. No member of the Commission shall be a
past or present employee of the Police Department or Fire Department,
nor shall any member of his or her family be an employee of the Police
Department or Fire Department. "Family member" shall mean father,
mother, father-in-law, mother-in-law, spouse, child, step-child, son-inlaw,
daughter-in-law, grandchild, brother, sister, brother-in-law, sisterin-
law, aunt, uncle, nephew, and niece.
F.
Special municipal employees. Commission members shall be special
municipal employees.
G.
§ 7-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-35
1:23
Membership. There shall be a West Springfield Tree and Urban Forest
Committee ("TUFC"), which shall be a citizen-led group consisting of
a minimum of three and a maximum of seven members, all of whom
shall be residents of the Town, appointed by the Mayor, subject to the
provisions of Section 2-10 of the West Springfield Home Rule Charter
("HRC").
A.
Purpose. The TUFC shall be a citizen-led group which will work with
Town officials to improve the health of the urban and community forest
through tree plantings, advocacy, education, management and
maintenance activities. The TUFC shall also assist with education
campaigns, bringing additional resources into the community for Town
trees and forests and apply for grants. In summary, this Committee
shall raise public awareness and improve West Springfield's urban and
community forests.
B.
Terms and compensation. The terms of each appointment shall be for
three years, with terms being staggered after the initial appointment to
accommodate transition of Committee members. Committee members
shall serve without compensation.
C.
Powers and duties. The TUFC shall:
Develop and maintain, in consultation with the Mayor, the Tree
Warden, the Town Conservation Agent, and the DPW Director, a
public shade tree inventory and a public shade tree management
plan pursuant to MGL c. 132, § 16 and other applicable laws and
regulations referenced or promulgated hereunder;
(1)
Develop and maintain, in consultation with the Mayor, the Tree
Warden, the Town Conservation Agent, and the DPW Director,
ordinances and guidelines governing the management of the
Town's public trees, including planting strategies and protocols for
their care and maintenance;
(2)
(3) Seek grants and other funding to assist in the mission of the TUFC;
Oversee adherence to all applicable Massachusetts and other laws
and regulations in consultation with the Mayor, Town Attorney, and
other appropriate Town officials;
(4)
At the direction of the Mayor, the TUFC shall report to the Mayor
or to any of the Town department heads, committees, commissions,
ad hoc committees or community groups on tree-related matters;
and
(5)
Further act in an advisory capacity to the Mayor under his/her
supervision and control.
(6)
D.
11.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 240, Trees.
§ 7-35 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 7-35
1:24
§ 7-37. Veterans' Advisory Board.
Limitations on powers and duties. The Committee shall have not
authority to infringe upon the statutory or regulatory powers or
jurisdiction of any other Town department, committee or commission,
or upon those duties and jurisdictions set out in relation to such
departments, committees or commissions by state or federal law or
regulation, by the HRC or Town ordinances.
E.
Meetings and proceedings.
The TUFC shall meet on an as-needed basis, but not less frequently
than quarterly;
(1)
Special meetings may be called by the Mayor, the Chair of the
TUFC or majority vote of the Committee;
(2)
(3) Minutes shall be kept of all public meetings;
The TUFC may establish its own rules of procedure, including those
governing the conduct of its meetings;
(4)
The TUFC may request information from various Town
departments, commissions, and committees as may be deemed
necessary to effectuate the duty of the TUFC. Such requests shall
be made with reasonable advance notice; and
(5)
The TUFC shall observe and be subject to the Massachusetts Open
Meeting Law (MGL c. 30A, §§ 18 through 25) in regard to all
regular and special meetings.
(6)
F.
Special municipal employees. TUFC members shall be special
municipal employees.
G.
Membership and purpose.
There shall be a Veterans' Advisory Board (the "Board") consisting
of seven members, four of whom shall be veterans as defined in
MGL c. 115, § 1 and all of whom shall either be residents and
registered voters of the Town or be a member in good standing of a
recognized non-governmental support organization ("NGSO") that
provides support for residents of the Town, appointed by the Mayor
subject to provisions of Section 2-10 of the West Springfield Home
Rule Charter (HRC).
(1)
The Board shall elect annually, at the first meeting in each calendar
year, a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and a Secretary who shall
keep a record of its meetings.
(2)
The Board shall work together in the best interests of the veterans
of the Town of West Springfield to provide a collective voice to the
Town's executive and legislative branches.
(3)
A.
§ 7-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-37
1:25
Chapter 16
Authority. This section is adopted under the authority of MGL c. 115,
§ 12.
B.
Terms and compensation. The terms of each appointment shall be for
two years, with terms being staggered after the initial appointment to
accommodate transition of Board members. Board members shall serve
without compensation.
C.
Powers and duties. The Board shall organize and implement the
Memorial Day and Veterans' Day activities, shall organize nomination
criteria and vetting procedures for formal recognition of the Town's
"Veteran of the Year" and shall promote and assist in other patriotic
events and activities in the Town during each year. Additionally, the
Board shall have the ability to recognize a resident or local business
that it determines has been an asset to the Town's veteran community.
The Director of Veterans Services shall serve as the liaison and
resource to the Board.
D.
Limitations on powers and duties.
The Board shall not have authority to infringe upon the statutory
or regulatory powers or jurisdiction of any Town department,
committee or commission, or upon those duties and jurisdictions
set out in relation to such departments, committees or commissions
by state or federal law or regulation, by the West Springfield Home
Rule Charter or Town ordinances; and
(1)
The Board shall be subject to the published rules and regulations
as established by the Massachusetts Commissioner of Veterans'
Services.
(2)
E.
Rules and regulations. The Board may adopt rules and regulations,
subject to the approval of the Mayor.
F.
Meetings and proceedings.
The Board shall meet on an as-needed basis, but not less frequently
than quarterly;
(1)
Special meetings may be called by the Mayor, the Chair of the
Board or majority vote of all members of the Board;
(2)
(3) Minutes shall be kept of all public meetings;
The Board may establish its own rules of procedure, including
those governing the conduct of its meetings; and
(4)
The Board shall observe and be subject to the Massachusetts Open
Meeting Law (MGL c. 30A, §§ 18 through 25) in regard to all
regular and special meetings.
(5)
G.
§ 7-37 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 7-37
1:26
DEPARTMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Town departments and agencies — See
Charter Art. 4 and Art. 6.
Boards, commissions and multiple-member
bodies — See Ch. 7.
§ 16-1. Department of Emergency Management.
§ 16-3. Department of Public Works.
§ 16-5. Department of Human Resources.12 [Added 3-18-2002 by
Ord. No. 107]
Established. The Mayor shall appoint an Emergency Management and
Civil Defense Director.
A.
Powers and duties.
There shall be an Emergency Management Department under the
supervision of an Emergency Management Director.
(1)
The Emergency Management Department seeks to maximize
survival of persons and preservation of property in the Town in the
event of a natural or man-made disaster by effective planning and
by making use of all manpower, equipment, available shelter and
other resources during an actual emergency.
(2)
The Emergency Management Department provides planning,
resources, communications and recovery services in support and
coordinating and/or planning disaster or emergency responses
and/or dealing with terrorist activities in the Town, adjacent
communities, and the commonwealth. The Department functions
as the emergency preparedness department consistent with the
intent of Chapter 639 of the Acts of 1950 and is responsible for
coordinating and planning all disaster emergency functions and
services and/or terrorist response procedures with the Town
amongst all municipal and nonmunicipal agencies and
departments.
(3)
B.
Establishment. The Town establishes a Department of Public Works
under the control of a Director.
A.
Appointment of director. The Mayor shall appoint the Director, who
shall be responsible for daily operation of the Department and hire,
with the approval of the Mayor, such employees as are determined
necessary for proper operation of the Department.
B.
12.Editor's Note: See also Charter Sec. 6-6.
§ 7-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-5
1:27
Establishment.
All Town departments and all positions in the Town service, except
elected officials and employees of the School Department, shall
be subject to the provisions of this section, in pursuance of the
provisions of MGL c. 41, § 108A. The provisions of any approved
collective bargaining agreement that conflicts with any provisions
of this section with respect to employees covered under such labor
agreement shall prevail over this section.
(1)
The purpose of this section is to establish a system of personnel
management that meets the various needs of Town government. It
is the intent of this section to provide a means to recruit, select,
develop and maintain a responsive and productive work force. All
personnel actions in the Town service shall be made without regard
to sex, race, religion, color, age, sexual orientation, disability or
political affiliation and shall be based on merit, fitness for the
particular position and education.
(2)
A.
Scope of activities. The Department shall be responsible for and shall
include, but not be limited to, the following functions:
Study, develop, establish and coordinate uniform personnel
practices and procedures for Town departments.
(1)
Provide assistance to all individual employees on personnel
matters, as requested by an employee or when determined to be
beneficial by the Department.
(2)
Develop and administer a recruitment and placement program
designed to fill vacant positions in the Town with the best-qualified
persons.
(3)
Provide advice and assistance to the Mayor, department heads,
supervisors and elected and appointed officials on all personnel
matters, including position classifications, pay administration,
recruitment and placement, employee relations, performance
evaluation, disciplinary action, employee grievances and employee
training.
(4)
Develop and maintain a position classification system for all nonunion
full-time personnel, which shall include the assignment and
utilization of personnel in all departments; make recommendations
to the Mayor and the heads of such departments for changes that
may be necessary to effect the proper classification and assignment
of personnel in such duties as will permit the Town to receive
maximum benefits from the skills and capabilities of such
personnel.
(5)
Administer the position classification system providing for the
classification of all positions, other than those filled by popular
elections, into groups and classes doing substantially similar work
(6)
B.
§ 16-5 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 16-5
1:28
or having substantially equal responsibilities so as to ensure the
payment of equitable compensation.
Provide assistance to supervisory personnel at all levels in
planning, developing and conducting training programs.
(7)
Standardize forms and records to be used in the Town's personnel
administration program other than those forms and records whose
format is regulated by statute or by state agency or agencies
authorized, by law, to exercise oversight over specific elements of
personnel management.
(8)
Provide guidance and assistance to appointing authorities on civil
service law, furnish information regarding civil service
examinations, render assistance to all departments in civil service
matters, and perform liaison duties between Town departments
and the Division of Personnel Administration of the commonwealth.
(9)
Assist and participate (to the extent directed by the Mayor) in
the negotiation, implementation, and administration of the Town's
collective bargaining agreements.
(10)
Recommend to the Mayor the enactment of such ordinances as
are considered necessary to implement and administer the Town's
personnel administration program.
(11)
Maintain a centralized, secure location for the individual personnel
records of all Town employees. Said records shall contain all the
vital statistics and other pertinent data for each and every person
employed by the Town. It shall be the duty of each department head
and every other supervisory person to provide to the Director of
Human Resources such records and reports as the Director may
require.
(12)
Study, develop, establish, coordinate and oversee an occupational
safety and training program for the Town, at a minimum, as
required by state and federal laws.
(13)
Perform the duties required as affirmative action and equal
employment officer for the Town, to ensure compliance by the Town
with both affirmative action requirements applicable to the Town
and equal opportunity employment.
(14)
Administer and oversee the various insurance policies maintained
by the Town, including a review of coverage needs, insurance costs
and the handling of claims.
(15)
Provide and maintain a central information, coordination and
processing point for all employee benefit programs, including but
not limited to group insurance, "tax shelter" plans, workers'
compensation claims, and unemployment compensation.
(16)
§ 16-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-5
1:29
§ 16-7. Park and Recreation Department. [Added 11-5-2001 by Ord.
No. 102]
Develop, maintain and administer procedures for compliance with
state and federal employment rules, regulations, executive orders
and laws as they relate to all Town employees.
(17)
The duties and functions previously performed by the Advisory
Board of Review shall now be performed by the Human Resource
Department. The Advisory Board of Review shall continue to
perform its duties until notified in writing by the Mayor of the
date when its duties shall be transferred to the Human Resource
Department and on said date the Advisory Board of Review shall be
dissolved.
(18)
Director of Human Resources.
The Department shall be headed by a Director of Human Resources
who shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall serve at the
discretion of the Mayor and be removed pursuant to the provisions
of Section 3-4 of the West Springfield Home Rule Charter. The
duties and responsibilities of the Director shall be those set forth in
the position's job description.
(1)
The Director, subject to the approval of the Mayor, is authorized
and empowered to establish a personnel code, consisting of
personnel policies and regulations for the maintenance of a
personnel management system based on merit in accordance with
the provisions of this section and the HRC.
(2)
C.
Purpose.
There is hereby established a Park and Recreation Department
that shall be responsible for planning and coordinating the use
of the Town's parks and recreational facilities, including school
recreational facilities, and reviewing the needs of the Town for
recreational facilities and activities.
(1)
Priority for the use of school facilities shall be given to school
activities first, then recreational activities.
(2)
Priority for the use of any Town facility, as determined by the
Director or his/her designee, shall be given to recreation programs
first, then residents' requests, if appropriate.
(3)
A.
Department. The Department shall be headed by a Director who shall
be appointed by the Mayor and who may adopt rules and regulations
reasonably required for the operation of the Department and its
programs, subject to approval of the Mayor. The Director may hire
such staff and support personnel as he/she determines to be reasonably
required to perform the duties of the Department, subject to the
approval of the Mayor and Town Council appropriation.
B.
§ 16-5 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 16-7
1:30
§ 16-9. Planning and Development Department.13 [Added 1-16-2007
by Ord. No. 130]
Cooperation. The Director shall fully cooperate with all proper requests
made by the Park and Recreation Commission.
C.
Consultation. The Director shall consult with the Director of the
Department of Public Works and the Director of Maintenance for the
School Department on a regular basis to ensure the that parks and
recreation facilities are satisfactory and sufficient to meet the
recreational needs of the Town. The Director of the Department of
Public Works and the Director of Maintenance for the School
Department shall meet with the Director to discuss said recreational
needs and the condition of facilities, at his/her request.
D.
A. Title: "Department of Planning and Development."
Purpose. The Department shall: 1) coordinate all planning and
development activities of the Town so as to streamline planning,
development and requests related to the same, 2) avoid undue
administrative requirements in all aspects of planning and
development, 3) provide assistance to private and government project
applicants in obtaining and complying with local and state plans and
developmental requirements, 4) be responsible for all aspects of
economic development planning. The Department shall apply the
above, bearing in mind that all development is to be done so as to
enhance the amenities and overall quality and character of life of
the persons employed or residing in the community and business and
residential taxpayers of the Town.
B.
Director.
The Department shall be headed by a Director of Planning and
Development, who shall be known as the "Director.' The Director
shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall serve at his discretion
and may be removed pursuant to the provisions of Section 3-4 of
the Home Rule Charter (Charter). The duties and responsibilities of
the Director shall be set forth in the position's job description. The
Director shall have direct supervisory authority over all employees
of the Department, including division heads, and shall be the
administrative head of the Appeals Division, the Conservation
Division and the Records Division unless, with the written approval
of the Mayor, he has delegated said authority, in writing, to an
employee of the Department.
(1)
The Director may enact such rules and regulations as he deems
necessary for the proper and efficient operations of the Department
and to accomplish the purposes and objectives of the Department,
subject to the approval of the Mayor. The Director may hire such
(2)
C.
13.Editor's Note: See also Charter Sec. 6-4.
§ 16-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-9
1:31
staff and support personnel as he determines to be reasonably
required to perform the purposes, duties and responsibilities of
the Department, subject to the approval of the Mayor and
appropriation.
Department divisions. The Department shall consist of the following
divisions:
(1) Planning Division, headed by the Planning Administrator.
(2) Appeals Division.
(3) Conservation Division.
Community Development Division, headed by a Community
Development Administrator.
(4)
Economic Development Division, headed by the Economic
Development Administrator.
(5)
(6) Building Division, headed by the Building Commissioner.
(7) Records Division.
D.
Planning Division.
The Planning Division shall be responsible for all duties and
responsibilities of planning boards required or allowed by the
general law and any and all other duties and responsibilities
assigned to it by ordinance, executive order or rules and
regulations adopted by the Director. The Planning Division shall
consist of a Planning Administrator, a five-member volunteer
Planning Board and an alternate appointed pursuant to Chapter
7, § 7-27, of the Town Code, and the Building and other Facilities
Planning and Construction Committee established pursuant to
Chapter 7, § 7-11, of the Town Code. Copies of all records,
decisions and minutes of the Division shall be filed with the
Records Division. The Planning Board shall perform those duties
and responsibilities given to planning boards by general laws.
(1)
The Planning Administrator shall make careful studies of the
resources, possibilities and needs of the Town and shall make
careful plans for the development of the Town and shall inform
the Capital Improvement Program Committee and Building and
other Facilities Planning and Construction Committee of long-term
capital needs of the Department and the Town.
(2)
The Planning Board shall have, the provisions of Subsection E(1)
notwithstanding, the power to regulate the development of land
within the Town as set forth in Chapter 7, § 7-27, of the Town Code.
(3)
E.
§ 16-9 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 16-9
1:32
The Planning Board shall report to the Town Council its
recommendations for all amendments and revisions of the Zoning
Ordinance and Zoning Map as is provided in MGL c. 40A, § 5.14
(4)
The Building and other Facilities Planning and Construction
Committee shall perform the power and duties set forth in Chapter
7, § 7-11, of the Town Code.
(5)
Appeals Division. The Appeals Division shall consist of a Board of
Appeals of five members and not less than two alternates and each shall
serve for three-year terms or until his successor has been appointed
and qualified. The Board shall have all powers given to boards of
appeals by the General Laws, ordinances, local executive orders and
rules and regulations. Said appointment shall be made on the first
business day of January, and said terms shall be staggered. The Appeals
Division shall hear all appeals of municipal decisions in accordance with
the provisions of the General Laws, including MGL c. 40A, c. 40B, c.
41, and local zoning or general ordinances, local executive orders, and
rules or regulations adopted by the Director. The Division shall cause to
be filed a copy of each decision with the Records Division.15 [Amended
12-4-2017]
F.
Conservation Division.
The Conservation Division shall consist of a volunteer commission
consisting of seven members appointed by the Mayor, pursuant
to Chapter 7, § 7-15, of the Town Code and staff and support
personnel pursuant to Subsection C. The Commission shall have
all powers and may perform all duties and responsibilities required
or allowed by the General Laws to be performed by a local
conservation commission and any ordinances, local executive
orders and rules and regulations adopted by the Director, including
the provisions of MGL c. 131, §§ 40 and 40A. All applications and
related material, minutes and decisions of the Commission shall be
filed with the Records Division.
(1)
The Conservation Commission is established to protect, promote
and enhance the quantity and quality of the natural resources
within the Town, especially wetlands, wildlife and water resources,
through planning, acquisition, land management, regulation,
research and public education.
(2)
The Conservation Commission may receive gifts, bequests or
devises of personal property or interests in real property in the
name of the Town, subject to approval of the Mayor. The
(3)
G.
14.Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Zoning.
15.NOTE: The Building Code Board of Appeals, authorized by 789 CMR 122.7, is hereby
dissolved and any appeals that could have been heard by it shall be appealed to the State
Building Code Board of Appeals as set forth in 780 CMR 122.1. (Editor's Note: The current
Massachusetts State Building Code, Ninth Edition, is based on modified versions of,
among others, the 2015 International Building Code. For current Board of Appeals
provisions see Ch. 1, Sec. 113, Board of Appeals, of the 2015 International Building Code.)
§ 16-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-9
1:33
Conservation Commission may receive monetary gifts for
development of a conservation fund, and expend the same, subject
to general laws and the approval of the Mayor.
Economic Development Division. The Economic Development Division
shall consist of an Economic Development Administrator and staff and
support personnel pursuant to Subsection C. The Economic
Development Administrator shall be responsible for developing,
coordinating, implementing, and maintaining economic development
and projects throughout the community and developing, implementing
and maintaining ongoing programs, to attract new, vibrant or diverse
economic developments or projects to the Town that are compatible
with the Town's master plan and are economically beneficial to the
Town's infrastructure. The Division is also responsible for creating
a business environment which is conducive to improving investment
and job creation within the community. Researching and applying for
grants could further the goals and responsibilities of the Department.
All records of the Division shall be filed with and maintained by the
Records Division.
H.
Community Development Division. The Community Development
Division shall consist of a Community Development Administrator and
staff and personnel pursuant to Subsection C. The Community
Development Administrator shall be responsible for the development
and improvement of the residential and commercial neighborhoods of
the Town. The Division shall seek to create and stimulate economic
development and promote safe and affordable housing, provide public
improvements, create opportunity for arts and culture and deliver
public services for the benefit of those in need, consistent with the
Town's master plan. The Division shall research and apply for available
funds, including, but not limited to, federal and state grants that further
the goals and responsibilities of the Department or are deemed
beneficial to the Town. All records of the Division shall be filed with and
maintained by the Records Division.
I.
Building Division.
The Building Division shall be headed by the Building
Commissioner appointed by the Mayor, and shall perform all of
the duties required to be performed by the Building Commissioner
and local Building Inspectors under the General Laws and the
Code of Massachusetts Regulations pertaining to buildings and
other structures, known as the "State Building Code," general
ordinances, zoning ordinances, local executive orders and rules
and regulations adopted by the Director.
(1)
The Division shall be responsible for the enforcement of the
provisions of the Code of Massachusetts Regulations pertaining
to buildings and other structures (the State Building Code),
enforcement of the zoning ordinances and investigation and
enforcement of violations of general ordinances unless some other
(2)
J.
§ 16-9 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 16-9
1:34
municipal department is designated as the enforcing entity. For
administrative purposes, the fence viewers (MGL c. 49) shall be
considered to be within the Building Division. The Building
Commissioner shall be the Zoning Enforcement Officer; provided,
however, he may assign so much of his duties and responsibilities
as he determines to local inspectors. The Planning Administrator
shall be the "Municipal Hearing Officer" and shall hear appeals of
code violations of the State Building Code, 780 CMR, or the State
Fire Code, 527 CMR, pursuant to the requirements of MGL c. 148A.
All records of the Building Division shall be filed with and
maintained by the Records Division.
(3)
Records Division. The Records Division shall maintain the records of all
of the other divisions and of the Director. The Director shall directly
oversee the operation of the Division and shall ensure compliance
with the public records laws and the public posting and publication
requirements for both public meetings and public hearings held by
various divisions. Documents and decisions required to be filed with
other departments or entities by any of the divisions shall be filed with
said departments or entities by the Records Division.
K.
Licenses and inspections. A coordinated and expedited procedure shall
be established by the Director or his designee so that all license and
permit applications filed or hearings held by the various divisions are
reviewed and decisions entered so as to ensure compliance and
accuracy of information and to streamline, to the extent practical, the
time required for the review and final action on said applications.
L.
Division appointments. The Mayor shall appoint the person(s) who
shall perform the duties and responsibilities of Planning Administrator,
Community Development Administrator, Economic Development
Administrator and Building Commissioner. Each shall be the head of
the respective division and responsible for proper operation of the
division. All other divisions shall be headed by the Director unless by
rules and regulations he assigns responsibility to another division head.
The Director may assign any duties and responsibilities to any division
head, as he deems appropriate, the provisions of the job description
notwithstanding. The Director and heads of each division shall be
evaluated annually by the Mayor using a procedure developed by the
Human Resources Director and approved by the Mayor. All other
employees of the Department shall be hired by the Director subject to
approval by the Mayor. The Director or any other individual may be
appointed as head of any or all divisions.
M.
Special municipal employees. The members of the Conservation
Commission, Planning Board, Board of Appeals and the Building and
other Facilities Planning and Construction Committee shall be special
municipal employees.
N.
§ 16-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-9
1:35
§ 16-11. School Department.16 [Added 11-21-2005 by Ord. No. 123;
amended 9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 127; 12-22-2014 by Ord. No. 154]
§ 16-13. Central Municipal Maintenance Department.
Appointments of boards or commissions. Incumbents in office on all of
the boards and commissions subject to this section on the effective date
of this section shall remain in office for the balance of their term, except
that the end date of their current term shall be changed to the first
business day of January and they shall continue beyond said date only
until their successor has been appointed and qualified. The new term
for said position shall begin on the first business day of January.
O.
Severability. If any portion of this section is declared to be illegal or
unenforceable, it shall be deemed stricken and the remaining portions
shall remain in full force and effect.
P.
Salaries of School Committee members.
Salary amounts.
Pursuant to Section 4-4 of the West Springfield Home Rule
Charter, the annual salary of each member of the School
Committee, excluding the Chairperson, shall be $4,000.
(a)
The annual salary of the Chairperson shall be 125% of the
annual salary of a regular School Committee member.
(b)
(1)
Said salaries shall be reviewed by the Town Council in each year
ending in "0" and "6"; and may be reviewed in other evennumbered
years by majority vote of the Council, to determine
whether the compensation then being paid is appropriate.
(2)
Limit. At no time shall the salary of any School Committee member,
excluding the Chairperson, exceed 5% of the Mayor's salary.
(3)
A.
Pursuant to Section 9-6, Paragraph 6, of the West Springfield Home
Rule Charter, the salary of the Chair of the School Committee is
established, provided the Chair is one of the persons elected directly by
the voters as a member of the School Committee.
B.
Purpose. The creation and intent of this section, in conjunction with
the Charter, shall be to provide the municipality with improvement
opportunities for best practices related to: organizational transition,
management systems, preventative maintenance, and cost-effective
service and delivery of the same.
A.
Authority. This section is adopted under the authority of Section 4-5 of
the West Springfield Home Rule Charter.
B.
16.Editor's Note: See also Charter Art. 4.
§ 16-9 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 16-13
1:36
§ 16-15. Department of Municipal Finance.17 [Added 1-16-2007 by
Ord. No. 129]
Establishment. The Town establishes a Central Municipal Maintenance
Division within the Department of Public Works under the direction and
control of the Director.
C.
Scope. The division shall be responsible for the routine and
extraordinary maintenance and upkeep of the school buildings and
grounds as well as all other municipal buildings, grounds and
recreational facilities.
D.
A. Title: "Department of Municipal Finance."
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish and consolidate
therein various existing municipal departments to the extent not
prohibited by the General Laws of the commonwealth and the West
Springfield Home Rule Charter (Charter) dealing with the fiscal,
financial and information and technology systems activities of the Town,
including the duties of the chief procurement officer as delegated to it
by the Mayor.
B.
Establishment. The Department shall be responsible for the
performance of all of the fiscal and financial activities, except those by
the Charter imposed upon the Town Council, and informational systems
and technology activities of the Town. The Department shall assume all
of the duties and responsibilities related to municipal finance activities
which were performed by or under the authority of 1) the Town
Accountant, 2) the Town Treasurer, 3) the Town Collector and 4) the
Board of Assessors, except those by the Charter imposed upon the
Town Council and 5) Information and Technology Systems Department.
The Municipal Finance Department shall be headed by a Director of
Municipal Finance, also referred to as the "Chief Financial Officer"
(hereinafter referred to as the "Director"). The Mayor may, by written
order, assign to the Director so much of the duties and responsibilities
of the chief procurement officer as he determines appropriate. The
Director may delegate to an employee or employees of the Department
any or all of his procurement duties and responsibilities, provided said
delegation is made in writing and approved in writing by the Mayor
and filed in compliance with the procurement statute. The Director
or his designee shall perform all activities of procurement delegated
to the Department. No contract, including contracts of the School
Department, shall be valid unless signed by the Director with a
statement that an appropriation exists sufficient to pay all financial
obligations required of the Town as a result of said contract. The Mayor
shall sign all contracts, including those of the School Department,
greater than $25,000. All contracts shall also be signed by the
procurement officer or his designee as to compliance with the
requirements of MGL Chapter 30B.
C.
17.Editor's Note: See also Charter Sec. 6-3.
§ 16-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-15
1:37
Scope of Department activities. The Department of Municipal Finance
shall be responsible for and shall include but not be limited to the
following functions:
Coordination of all financial services and activities of the Town
government.
(1)
Maintenance of all accounting records and other financial
statements for all offices and agencies of the Town government.
(2)
(3) Payment of all financial obligations on behalf of the Town.
(4) Receipt of all funds due to the Town from any source.
(5) Maintenance of all property valuation records and systems.
Rendering of advice, assistance and guidance to all other Town
offices and agencies in any matter relating to financial or fiscal
affairs.
(6)
Monitoring throughout the fiscal year of the expenditure of funds
by Town offices and agencies, including the periodic reporting
on the status of all accounts with recommendation concerning
fiscal and financial policies to be implemented by such offices and
agencies.
(7)
Coordination of all financial transactions associated with the
procurement of all goods, supplies and materials by Town offices
and agencies.
(8)
Coordination of usage of computers (both networked and
standalone) and the central data processing system in accordance
with overall Town-wide data processing priorities and develop,
maintain and upgrade as necessary the specific application needs
of user departments.
(9)
Development and oversight of specialized computer transfer of
data maintained by other parties which needs to be downloaded or
uploaded to computer files on Town systems so the same can be
read and utilized.
(10)
Development and implementation of educational and support
programs for computer system users; training of staff in the use of
computers and software applications.
(11)
Recommend appropriate hardware and/or software to meet the
operating and information needs of the departments; assure that
proper documentation is maintained on all programs and systems.
(12)
Coordination of efforts of users to build, expand, and/or apply GIS
and related databases.
(13)
Development and enforcement of data standards and procedures
that will promote a GIS resource base that can be confidently
(14)
D.
§ 16-15 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 16-15
1:38
incorporated into the Town-wide applications by users and develop
protocols to optimize the utility of GIS resources.
(15)Coordination of all municipal data and voice systems.
Director of Municipal Finance.
The Department shall be headed by a Director who has the
education, experience and training to perform the duties of the
office. The Director shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall
serve at the Mayor's discretion and may be removed pursuant to
Section 3-4 of the Charter. The duties and responsibilities of the
Director shall be set forth in the position's job description. The
Director shall have direct supervisory authority over all employees
of the Department, including division heads; provided, however,
said Treasurer, Collector, Town Accountant, Principal Assessor and
Administrator of Information and Technology Systems shall have
such powers and duties as may be vested in those offices expressly
by general or special law, but shall otherwise report to and be
under the direction and supervision of the Director.
(1)
The Director, subject to the approval of the Mayor, is authorized
and directed to establish a comprehensive system of Department
administration to ensure the efficient and effective delivery,
coordination and oversight of all fiscal and financial duties and
responsibilities of the Department in accordance with all federal
and state laws, Town ordinances, rules and regulations. The
Director may enact rules and regulations he deems necessary for
the proper and efficient operations of the Department, subject to
the written approval of the Mayor.
(2)
E.
Department divisions. The Department shall consist of the following
divisions:
(1) Collector-Treasurer Division, headed by the Collector-Treasurer;
(2) Accounting Division, headed by the Town Accountant;
(3) Assessing Division, headed by the Principal Assessor; and
Information and Technology Systems Division, headed by the
Administrator of Information and Technology Systems.
(4)
F.
Collector-Treasurer Division.
The Collector-Treasurer Division shall perform all duties and
responsibilities currently performed by the Collector's Department
and the Treasurer's Department and any and all other duties and
responsibilities assigned to it by ordinance, local executive order or
rules and regulations adopted by the Director.
(1)
The Division shall be headed by a Collector-Treasurer, who shall
receive and take charge of all money belonging to the Town, and
(2)
G.
§ 16-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-15
1:39
it shall collect all accounts due to the Town. Upon receipt of a
tax list and warrant from the Board of Assessors, the Collector/
Treasurer shall collect the taxes and make a return thereon to the
Board of Assessors. The Collector-Treasurer shall, according to the
orders of the various department heads or the Mayor, make all
disbursements of funds on behalf of the Town. Except as otherwise
provided, the Collector-Treasurer shall have all of the powers,
duties and responsibilities that are given to city collectors and
to city treasurers by general law or assigned in writing by the
Director.
There shall be established the positions of Deputy Collector and
Deputy Treasurer, who shall act as the head of the Treasurer's
office or the Collector's office respectively when the Collector-
Treasurer is unavailable, and each shall have all of the powers and
responsibility of said Collector or Treasurer during his absence. In
addition, said deputies shall be responsible for aspects of collective
bargaining matters, in their respective offices, dealing with the
review of the collective bargaining agreements for changes that
will be beneficial to the operation of their respective offices, they
shall be part of the Town's bargaining team when the collective
bargaining agreements are negotiated or modifications are
requested and they shall handle all grievances and other labor
matters involving the enforcement and/or interpretations of the
collective bargaining agreements arising out of their respective
offices, subject to review by the Director, as the department head,
as set forth in said agreement(s). The deputies shall, for the
purposes of union grievances and other matters involving the
enforcement and/or interpretation of the collective bargaining
agreement, be considered the division head for matters involving
employees of their respective offices.
(3)
(4) Said deputies shall be bonded before assuming their duties.
Upon the retirement or termination of employment of the current
Parking Clerk, the Director shall designate or appoint a Parking
Clerk (MGL c. 90, § 20A 1/2). The Parking Clerk shall supervise and
coordinate the processing of parking notices in the Town (c. 90,
§§ 20A through 20E) and shall be a part of the Collector-Treasurer
Division and under the direct supervision of the Deputy Collector
unless the Director determines otherwise.
(5)
Accounting Division.
The Accounting Division shall perform all duties and
responsibilities currently performed by the Accounting Department
as required or allowed by the General Laws and any and all other
duties and responsibilities assigned to it by ordinance, local
executive order or rules and regulations adopted by the Director
and shall be responsible for, but not limited to, the following:
(1)
H.
§ 16-15 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 16-15
1:40
The maintenance of accounts for all financial transactions of
the Town;
(a)
(b) The preparation of payrolls;
The preparation of warrants for payment of all bills of the
Town;
(c)
The preparation of periodic reports on the status of
departmental receipts and expenditures;
(d)
(e) The maintenance of central grant and contract files;
The maintenance of all special accounts, gifts, trusts, all
revolving funds and enterprise funds and any other monies;
(f)
(g) Departmental audits as requested by the Mayor.
The Accounting Division shall be headed by the Town Accountant,
who shall assist all Town agencies in keeping the books and
accounts of all offices and agencies entrusted with the custody
or expenditure of money. The Division of Accounting shall provide
the Auditor/Budget Analyst (hereinafter "Auditor") appointed by
the Town Council with free access to all of its books, accounts,
bills, vouchers and other records of financial transactions as may
be necessary for the performance of the auditing and oversight
function of the Town Council. The Accountant may require the
Auditor and his employees to sign confidentiality agreements. The
Division of Accounting shall at least once in each fiscal year verify
the cash balances of all Town offices and agencies by actual count
of the case and by reconciliation of bank balances. The Division of
Accounting shall prepare all warrants for the expenditure of Town
funds before any payments made by the Division of Collection and
Treasury Management. Except as otherwise provided, the Town
Accountant shall have all of the other powers, duties and
responsibilities that are given to town accountants and town
auditors by the general law. The Accountant shall report matters of
fraud, waste, improper or illegal activity to the Mayor.
(2)
There shall be established the position of Deputy Accountant, who
shall act as the Accountant when the Accountant is unavailable and
shall have all of the powers and responsibilities of said Accountant
during his absence. In addition, said deputy shall be responsible
for aspects of collective bargaining matters, in the Accounting
Division, dealing with the review of the collective bargaining
agreements for changes that will be beneficial to the operation
of their division, he shall be part of the Town's bargaining team
when all collective bargaining agreements are negotiated or
modifications are requested and he shall handle all grievances and
labor matters involving the enforcement and/or interpretations of
the collective bargaining agreements arising out of the Accounting
Division, subject to review by the Director, as the department
(3)
§ 16-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-15
1:41
head. The deputy shall, for the purposes of union grievances and
other matters involving the enforcement and/or interpretation of
the collective bargaining agreement, be considered the division
head.
Assessing Division.
The Assessing Division shall consist of a Principal Assessor and a
Board of Assessors as set forth in Chapter 7, § 7-7, of the Town
Code. The Assessing Division shall perform all duties and
responsibilities currently performed by the Assessors Department
as required or allowed by the General Laws and any and all other
duties and responsibilities assigned to it by ordinance, local
executive order or rules and regulations adopted by the Director.
(1)
The Principal Assessor shall have all the powers, and perform
the duties of assessors in cities and towns in accordance and in
compliance with the general laws, except those responsibilities
that are given herein to the Board of Assessors. The Principal
Assessor shall review every application for exemption or abatement
of taxes and shall report his findings to the Board of Assessors.
(2)
It shall be the duty of said Board of Assessors to review the findings
of the Principal Assessor on applications for exemptions or
abatements of taxes, and to grant or deny all such applications
after such hearing as said Board of Assessors deems proper and to
make recommendations regarding the annual tax rate.
(3)
The Assessing Division shall be responsible for, but not limited to,
the following:
(a) Establishing the valuation of all real and personal property;
(b) Maintaining records substantiating all assessments made;
Preparing and issuing commitments for the collection of
property taxes and motor vehicle excise taxes by the Office of
the Collector;
(c)
Acting on abatement and exemption applications filed with it
and defending the Town in valuation proceedings before the
Appellate Tax Board.
(d)
(4)
I.
Information and Technology Systems Division. The Information and
Technology Systems Division shall perform all duties and
responsibilities currently performed by the Informational and
Technology Systems Department, including all GIS functions and any
and all other duties and responsibilities assigned to it by ordinance,
local executive order or rules and regulations adopted by the Director.
The division shall be headed by the Administrator of Information and
Technology Systems. The Administrator shall be responsible for
maintaining and upgrading the Town's computers, data storage and
J.
§ 16-15 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 16-15
1:42
Chapter 25
FINANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Finance and fiscal procedures — See Charter
Art. 5.
transfer capabilities as well as the Town's voice and electronic
communication systems and the GIS system and upgrades of the same.
The Administrator shall also be responsible for coordinating and
approving all purchases of computers and related or associated
equipment and training for all employees.
Division appointments.
The Mayor shall appoint the persons who shall perform the duties
and responsibilities of the Collector/Treasurer, Town Accountant,
Principal Assessor and the Administrator of Information and
Technology Systems and such other duties and responsibilities as
may be assigned to them by the Director. They shall be the heads
of their respective division and each shall be responsible for the
proper operation of his division.
(1)
All other employees of the Department of Municipal Finance shall
be hired by the Director, subject to the approval of the Mayor. Any
qualified person, including the Director, may be appointed as a
division head, provided that no one person shall, at the same time,
perform the duties and responsibilities of Accountant and either
Treasurer, Collector or Treasurer-Collector.
(2)
The Mayor shall perform an annual review of the Finance Director,
Accountant, Collector-Treasurer, Principal Assessor and
Information and Technology Administrator using a procedure
developed by the Human Resources Director and approved by the
Mayor.
(3)
K.
Severability. If any portion of this section is declared to be illegal or
unenforceable, it shall be deemed stricken and the remaining portions
shall remain in full force and effect.
L.
§ 16-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-15
1:43

ARTICLE I
Fees and Charges
§ 25-1. Authority to establish fees and charges.
§ 25-2. Disposition of fees received.
All Town officers shall pay all fees received by them by virtue of their office
into the Town treasury.
§ 25-3. Permission of Mayor for sale of services and materials.
No Town officer and no paid employee of the Town or any agent or partner
of any such officer or employee nor any legal entity owned or controlled
by such officer, employee, agent or partner shall sell materials or provide
services to the Town or any entity that is then a contractor for the Town
without written permission of the Mayor, which permission shall be filed
with the office of the Town Clerk and maintained in a separate volume.
§ 25-4. School Committee rental income.
The Town adopts the provisions set forth in MGL c. 40, § 3, lines 40 through
43, to permit the proceeds from renting any school facilities to remain
and accumulate in a revolving account to be expended for the upkeep and
maintenance of any facility under the control of the School Committee
rather than being returned to the general fund at the end of the first fiscal
year.
Any municipal office which is otherwise authorized to issue a license,
certificate or permit, or to render a service, or to perform work for
a person or class of persons, may from time to time fix a reasonable
fee for the license, certificate, permit or for rendering the service or
for performing the work where no fee is established by statute or
ordinance.
A.
No municipal office, except the Town Council, shall establish a fee or
charge pursuant to this section without the prior review and written
approval of the Mayor, or if appointed by the School Committee,
without the written approval of the School Committee. The fees set by
the Town Clerk shall be approved by the Council.
B.
All fees or charges in effect at the time these ordinances are adopted
shall remain in effect until otherwise changed, revised or modified.
C.
Fee schedules, once established or amended, shall be filed with the
Town Clerk, who shall maintain the current schedules in a separate
volume.
D.
§ 25-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4
1:45

ARTICLE II
Departmental Transfers and Supplemental Appropriations
§ 25-5. Intradepartmental transfers.
Intradepartmental transfers of funds from one line item to another line item
in the same department may be made when authorized, in writing, by the
Mayor.
§ 25-6. Interdepartmental transfers and supplemental
appropriations.
Interdepartmental transfers and supplemental appropriations of funds must
be approved by the Council.
Written notice of said transfer and the reason it was deemed advisable
shall be filed with the Clerk of the Council.
A.
The transfer shall be effective upon filing of said notice with the Clerk
of the Council.
B.
When the Mayor seeks an interdepartmental transfer or supplemental
appropriation, he or she shall submit a written request to the Clerk of
the Council setting forth:
(1) The amount or amounts requested;
(2) The reasons for the request;
(3) The source of the funds requested;
The department or other entity responsible for expenditure of the
funds.
(4)
A.
Said request shall be accompanied by a certificate signed by the head
of the department, from which the funds are being taken, that such
transfer will not prevent the department from performing its vital
functions and that the remaining departmental funds are sufficient to
meet the monetary needs of the department for the balance of the fiscal
year.
B.
The Council shall hold a public hearing for requests for
interdepartmental transfers and supplemental appropriations. Said
hearing shall be held within 21 days of receipt of the filing of request
with the Clerk of the Council.
C.
Notice of the public hearing for an interdepartmental transfer or
supplemental appropriation shall be posted on the Town Bulletin Board
at least 10 days before the public hearing to consider the request.
D.
Interdepartmental transfer and supplemental appropriation requests of
$25,000, or more, shall be published once in a newspaper of general
E.
§ 25-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6
1:47
§ 25-7. Notification of Council.
The Clerk of the Council shall forward a copy of each intradepartmental
transfer, interdepartmental transfer, and supplement appropriation to each
Councilor.
circulation in the Town. Said publication shall be at least 10 days prior
to the public hearing.
Approval of said requests shall require a majority vote of the Council
present.
F.
The form of the certification by the department head shall be
substantially as follows:
I, __________, being responsible for the operation of the __________
Department, certify that I approve the transfer of the sum of
$ ____________________ dollars to the __________ Department from my
current budget and certify that the approval of said transfer will not
prevent the department from performing its vital functions nor result
in the department expending funds in excess of the remaining
appropriation for the current fiscal year.
__________ __________
Date Department Head
G.
§ 25-6 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 25-7
1:48
ARTICLE III
Departmental Revolving Funds
[Added 5-7-2018]
§ 25-8. Purpose and authority.
This article establishes and authorizes revolving funds for use by Town
departments, boards, committees, agencies or officers in connection with
the operation of programs or activities that generate fees, charges or other
receipts to support all or some of the expenses of those programs or
activities. These revolving funds are established under and governed by
MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2.
§ 25-9. Expenditure limitations.
A department or agency head, board, committee or officer may incur
liabilities against and spend monies from a revolving fund established and
authorized by this article without appropriation, subject to the following
limitations:
§ 25-10. Interest.
Interest earned on monies credited to a revolving fund established by this
article shall be credited to the general fund.
§ 25-11. Procedure and reports.
Except as provided in MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2 and this article, the laws,
Charter provisions, ordinances, rules, regulations, policies or procedures
that govern the receipt and custody of Town monies and the expenditure
and payment of Town funds shall apply to the use of a revolving fund
established and authorized by this article. The Chief Financial Officer shall
include a statement on the collections credited to each fund, the
encumbrances and expenditures charged to the fund and the balance
available for expenditure in the regular report the Chief Financial Officer
provides the department, board, committee, agency or officer on
appropriations made for its use.
Fringe benefits of full-time employees whose salaries or wages are paid
from the fund shall also be paid from the fund.
A.
No liability shall be incurred in excess of the available balance of the
fund.
B.
The total amount spent during a fiscal year shall not exceed the amount
authorized by the Town Council on or before July 1 of that fiscal year,
or any increased amount of that authorization that is later approved
during that fiscal year by the Mayor and Town Council.
C.
§ 25-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-12
1:49
§ 25-12. Authorized revolving funds.
This table establishes:
Each revolving fund authorized for use by a Town department, board,
committee, agency or officer;
A.
The department or agency head, board, committee or officer authorized
to spend from each fund;
B.
The fees, charges and other monies charged and received by the
department, board, committee, agency or officer in connection with
the program or activity for which the fund is established that shall be
credited to each fund by the Chief Financial Officer;
C.
The expenses of the program or activity for which each fund may be
used;
D.
E. Any restrictions or conditions on expenditures from each fund;
F. Any reporting or other requirements that apply to each fund; and
The fiscal years each fund shall operate under this article.
Revolving
Fund
Department,
Board,
Committee,
Agency or
Officer
Authorized
to Spend
from Fund
Fees,
Charges or
Other
Receipts
Credited to
Fund
Program or
Activity
Expenses
Payable from
Fund
Restrictions
or
Conditions
on
Expenses
Payable
from Fund
Other
Requirements/
Reports Fiscal Years
Library Library
Director
Collected
library fines
Replacement
of library
collection
materials (in
all formats)
None None All years on
or after July 1,
1994, until
discontinued
by Town
Council vote
Council on
Aging
Activity
Council on
Aging
Director
Activity fees
from
program
participants
as well as
donations to
reduce
activity fees
Related
activity costs
(instructor
fees and
program
supplies)
None None All years on
or after July 1,
2004, until
discontinued
by Town
Council vote
G.
§ 25-12 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 25-12
1:50
Revolving
Fund
Department,
Board,
Committee,
Agency or
Officer
Authorized
to Spend
from Fund
Fees,
Charges or
Other
Receipts
Credited to
Fund
Program or
Activity
Expenses
Payable from
Fund
Restrictions
or
Conditions
on
Expenses
Payable
from Fund
Other
Requirements/
Reports Fiscal Years
Town
Council
Town Council
President
Fees
collected for
costs related
to public
hearings
Costs related
to public
hearings,
inclusive of
publication,
mailing and
other as
related to
providing
notice
None None All years on
or after July 1,
2003, until
discontinued
by Town
Council vote
DPW
Pavement
Restoration
Department
of Public
Works
Director
Fees charged
for roadway
cuts
Costs for
permanent
repair of
related
roadway
None None All years on
or after July 1,
2006, until
discontinued
by Town
Council vote
Health
Department
Medical
Goods and
Services
Health
Department
Director
Receipt of
direct and
third-party
payments for
vaccine
services
Related
supplies and
services as
well as
additional
medical
related
personnel
No more
than $15,000
may be
expended for
personnelrelated
expenses
None All years on
or after July 1,
2014, until
discontinued
by Town
Council vote
Health
Department
Tobacco/
Nicotine
Delivery
Devices
Health
Department
Director
Permit fees
to sell
tobacco and
nicotine
delivery
devices
Tobacco and
nicotine
delivery
devices
education and
enforcement
costs
None None All years on
or after July 1,
2013, until
discontinued
by Town
Council vote
§ 25-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-12
1:51
Revolving
Fund
Department,
Board,
Committee,
Agency or
Officer
Authorized
to Spend
from Fund
Fees,
Charges or
Other
Receipts
Credited to
Fund
Program or
Activity
Expenses
Payable from
Fund
Restrictions
or
Conditions
on
Expenses
Payable
from Fund
Other
Requirements/
Reports Fiscal Years
Police Public
Travel and
Recreation
Patrol Fund
Chief of
Police
Towing fees
generated
pursuant to
§ 249-9 of
the General
Ordinances
Purchase of
cruisers and
other vehicles
as well as
parts,
equipment,
maintenance
and service of
said police
vehicles
Expenditure
must also
have
approval of
Mayor
None All years on
or after July 1,
2014, until
discontinued
by Town
Council vote
§ 25-12 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 25-12
1:52
Chapter 42
LEGAL AFFAIRS
§ 42-1. Defense and prosecution; employment of counsel.
The Mayor is hereby authorized and instructed to defend all suits at law and
in equity that may be brought against the Town and to prosecute any suits
in the name of the Town and to employ a Town Attorney to accomplish same,
who may be the head of the Law Department; and the Town Attorney may
employ such other counsel or specialist as he/she deems in the best interest
of the Town.
Chapter 54
PERSONNEL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 63.
§ 54-1. Classification and compensation plans.
The Classification Plan Ordinance and Compensation Plan are on file in the
office of the Town Clerk for examination by the public.
Chapter 63
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Executive Branch — See Charter Art. 3. Council salaries — See Ch. 69.
§ 25-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-1
1:53

ARTICLE I
Compensation of Public Employees Serving in Armed Forces
[Adopted 3-7-2005 (Ch. 6, § 6-502, of the Codified Ordinances)]
§ 63-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as "Compensation of Public
Employees Serving in the Armed Services of the USA."
§ 63-2. Authority.
This article is adopted under the authority granted to cities and towns under
Article 89 of the Amendments to the Constitution of the Commonwealth,
MGL c. 43B and the West Springfield Home Rule Charter.
§ 63-3. Purpose and restrictions.
The purpose of this article is to protect the salaries of certain public
employees who served in or are serving in the Armed Forces by paying
them the difference between their military compensation and municipal
compensation, provided that any payments hereunder shall not exceed the
regular base municipal salary.
§ 63-4. Maintenance of benefits and compensation. [Amended
11-7-2005; 9-16-2008; 9-20-2011]
An employee in the service of the Town, including an employee of a school
district, who has been granted a military leave of absence because the
employee is a member of the Army National Guard, the Air National Guard
or a reserve component of the Armed Forces of the United States called to
active service in the Armed Forces of the United States after September 11,
2002, shall be entitled to receive pay at his regular base salary as such a
public employee, and shall not lose any seniority or any accrued vacation
leave, sick leave, personal leave, or compensatory municipal time; provided,
however, such employee shall accrue municipal vacation leave, sick leave
or personal leave while in the service of the military on active duty as set
forth in this section as if employed by the Town during the employee's time
on active service. An employee eligible under this section shall be paid his
regular base salary for each pay period of such military leave of absence
after September 11, 2001, and before September 11, 2014, reduced by any
amount received from the United States as pay or allowance for military
service performed during the same pay period, including overtime pay, shift
differential pay, hazardous duty pay or any other additional compensation,
excluding travel pay. For the purposes of this section, the words "active
service" shall not include active duty for training in the Army National
Guard or Air National Guard or as a reservist in the Armed Forces of the
United States.
§ 63-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-5
1:55
§ 63-5. Prior year payments.
The Council hereby authorizes the Treasurer to expend in the current fiscal
year associated costs incurred in prior fiscal years pursuant to this article.
§ 63-6. Conditions for receipt of payment.
In order to receive the compensation as set forth in § 63-4, the employee
must, after his/her release from active duty, return to the employ of the
Town and must provide satisfactory evidence, as determined by the Town
Accountant, of the compensation paid to said employee as a result of his/her
active service in the Armed Forces of the United States before any payment
hereunder shall be made, unless he/she is physically or mentally unable to
return to work due to said physical or mental condition and said condition
was sustained as a direct result of active service.
§ 63-7. When effective.
This article shall become effective upon approval as required by Section 3-7
of the Home Rule Charter.
§ 63-5 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 63-7
1:56
ARTICLE II
Mayor
[Adopted as Ch. 6, § 6-600, of the Codified Ordinances]
§ 63-8. Salary. [Amended 9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 128; 4-5-2010;
12-15-2014; 12-19-2016]
Pursuant to Section 3-1 of the West Springfield Home Rule Charter, the
annual salary of the Mayor shall be $125,000.
§ 63-9. Review.
The salary of the Mayor shall be reviewed by the Town Council in each year
ending in a "0" and "6," but may be reviewed in other even-numbered years
by a majority vote of the Council, to determine whether the compensation
then being paid is appropriate.
§ 63-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-9
1:57
Chapter 69
TOWN COUNCIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Legislative Branch — See Charter Art. 2.
§ 69-1. Councilors salary. [Amended 12-31-2001 by Ord. No. 104;
11-17-2003 by Ord. No. 116; 4-9-2008 by Ord. No. 139]
§ 69-2. Clerk of Council. [Amended 11-17-2003 by Ord. No. 116]
Salary amounts.
Pursuant to the requirement of Section 2-4 of the West Springfield
Home Rule Charter, the annual salary of each member Councilor
shall be $8,000 per year.
(1)
The annual salary of the Council President shall be 125% of the
annual salary of a member Councilor.
(2)
A.
Review. Salaries of the Town Councilors shall be reviewed by the Town
Council in each year ending in a "0" and a "6," but may be reviewed
in other even-numbered years by a majority vote of the Council, to
determine whether the compensation then being paid is appropriate.
B.
Limit. At no time shall the salary of any Town Councilor, excluding the
President, exceed 10% of the Mayor's salary.18
C.
Hours. The position of the Clerk of Council is a full-time position with
office hours as established by vote of the majority of the Council.
A.
Salary. The Clerk of the Council shall be paid an annual salary and shall
also be paid a stipend for attendance at all regular and special meetings
of the Town Council. Said salary and stipend of the Clerk of the Council
shall be the amount appropriated for the position of Clerk of Council
in the annual budget or any supplemental appropriation adopted by
the Council and approved by the Mayor. The salary range and annual
compensation of the Clerk of the Council shall be set forth in footnotes
to this section.19
B.
Benefits. The Clerk of the Council shall be entitled to those benefits as
approved from time to time by the Town Council.
C.
18.Editor's Note: The Mayor's salary is set forth in Ch. 63, Art. II, of the Town Code.
19.Editor's Note: The salary range for the Clerk of the Council is currently $29,000 to
$41,000. The current compensation is $36,943.53 annual salary and $4,750 stipend.
§ 63-9 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 69-2
1:58
§ 69-3. Town Clerk. [Amended 11-21-2005 by Ord. No. 126]
Absence. If the Clerk of the Council is unavailable for any reason,
the Town Clerk or his/her designee, if acceptable to the Council, shall
perform the duties of the Clerk of the Council until his/her return.
D.
Duties and responsibilities. The Clerk of the Council shall perform all
duties and responsibilities established by the West Springfield Home
Rule Charter for the office20 and described in the job description and
those assigned or delegated by the Council or the President of the
Council. The performance of the Clerk of the Council shall be evaluated
by the Council of the whole using an evaluation form adopted by it,
annually, by December 1. The evaluations shall be summarized by
the President, Vice President and Chair of the Human Resources
Subcommittee. They shall review the summary with the Clerk of the
Council by December 31.
E.
Discipline, suspension or removal.
A two-thirds vote of the Council of the whole may, after compliance
with the applicable provisions of MGL c. 39, § 23B,21 discipline,
suspend or remove the Clerk of the Council or any officer or
department head, elected or appointed by it, by filing a written
statement with the Department of Human Resources, setting forth
the action taken. A written statement setting forth the reasons
for the action taken shall be delivered or mailed by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the last and usual place of abode of
the said Clerk, officer or department head. He or she may file a
written reply, by filing it with the President of the Council, within
10 days of the date of the filing of the action by the Council with the
Department of Human Resources, and may request a meeting with
the Council, in conformity with the provisions of MGL c. 39 § 23B22
involving employee discipline, within said ten-day period by filing a
written request with the Council President if a meeting under MGL
c. 39, § 23B23 between the Council and the said Clerk, officer or
department head has not been held prior to the Council's filing the
statement with the Department of Human Resources.
(1)
The filing of a reply or request for a meeting shall have no effect
on the removal, suspension or discipline of any party subject to the
above.
(2)
The removal, suspension or discipline shall take effect on the filing
by the Council with the Department of Human Resources.
(3)
F.
20.Editor's Note: See Charter Sec. 2-8(c).
21.Editor's Note: MGL c. 39, § 23B, relating to open meetings of governmental bodies, was
repealed by L. 2009, c. 28, effective 7-1-2010. See now MGL c. 30A, §§ 18 through 25.
22.Editor's Note: See now MGL c. 30A, §§ 18 through 25.
23.Editor's Note: See now MGL c. 30A, §§ 18 through 25.
§ 69-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-3
1:59
A. Title: "Town Clerk."
Hours. The Town Clerk is a full- time position with office hours as
established by vote by a majority of the Council from time to time.
The office of the Town Clerk shall be open to the public on the same
schedule as that of other Town Hall offices.
B.
Salary. The salary and additional compensation for the position of Town
Clerk shall be the compensation appropriated for said position in the
annual Town budget adopted by the Council. The annual compensation
of the Town Clerk shall be set forth in a footnote to this section.24
C.
Benefits. The Town Clerk shall be entitled to those benefits as approved
from time to time by the Council. [Amended 12-5-2011]
D.
Absence. If the Town Clerk is unavailable for any reason, the Assistant
Town Clerk shall perform the duties of the Town Clerk until his/her
return.
E.
Duties, responsibilities and evaluation. The Town Clerk shall perform
all duties and responsibilities contained in the job description as well
as those assigned to the office of Town Clerk by the Massachusetts
General Laws, the West Springfield Home Rule Charter, the West
Springfield General Ordinances, the Executive Orders of the Mayor and
those duties and responsibilities assigned or delegated by the Council
or the President of the Council. The performance of the Town Clerk
shall be evaluated by the entire membership of the Council using an
evaluation form adopted by it annually by December 1. The evaluation
shall be summarized by the President, Vice-President and Chair of the
Human Resources Subcommittee. They shall review the summary with
the Town Clerk by December 31.
F.
Discipline, suspension or removal. The Council may, by a two-thirds
vote of the entire membership of the Council, after compliance with
the applicable provisions of MGL c. 39, § 23B,25 discipline, suspend or
remove the Town Clerk or any officer or department head, elected or
appointed by it by filing a written statement with the Department of
Human Resources, setting forth the action taken, which shall be a part
of the Town Clerk's personnel file. A written statement setting forth
reasons for the action taken shall be delivered or mailed by certified
mail, return receipt requested, to the last and usual place of abode of
the Town Clerk. The Town Clerk may make a written reply, by filing it
with the Clerk of the Council, within 10 days of the date of the filing
of the action by the Council with the Department of Human Resources,
and may request a meeting with the Council in conformity with the
G.
24.Editor's Note: The current compensation based on the job description adopted by the
Council is $55,575, including all stipends, except $1,800 as a Registrar of Voters, the total
compensation being $57,375 (effective 1-1-2013). If the Vice President and Chair is one
and the same person, the Human Resources Subcommittee shall designate another
member of its subcommittee to participate in the summary and review.
25.Editor's Note: MGL c. 39, § 23B, relating to open meetings of governmental bodies, was
repealed by L. 2009, c. 28, effective 7-1-2010. See now MGL c. 30A, §§ 18 through 25.
§ 69-3 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 69-3
1:60
§ 69-4. Regular meetings of Town Council. [Added 11-21-2012 by
Ord. No. 143]
provisions of MGL c. 39 § 23B26 involving employee discipline, within
said ten-day period, by filing a written request with the Clerk of the
Council, if a meeting under said MGL c. 39 § 23B27 between the Council
and the Town Clerk has not been held prior to the Council's filing the
statement with the Department of Human Resources. The filing of a
reply or request for a meeting shall have no effect upon the removal or
suspension. The removal or suspension shall take effect on the filing by
the Council with the Department of Human Resources.
This section shall take effect upon approval as set forth in Section 3-7
of the HRC.
H.
Dates and times established. The Town Council shall hold regular
meetings on the first and third Mondays of the month for the months
of September through June, and on the third Monday of each month for
the months of July and August, from 7:00 p.m. to not later than 10:00
p.m. When the day fixed for any regular meeting of the Council falls
upon a day designated by law as a legal holiday, such meeting shall
be held at the same hour on the next succeeding day not a holiday.
When a regularly scheduled meeting is postponed, such meeting shall
be reposted.
A.
Extension of time of meeting. The time of a meeting may be extended
by the President or by a two-thirds vote of the members of the Council
present beyond the time specified herein.
B.
Adjournment; notice. Any meeting of the Council may be adjourned to a
later date and time, provided that no adjournment shall be for a longer
period than until the next regular meeting. The Clerk of the Council is
responsible for noticing said adjourned meeting in conforming with the
Open Meeting Law (MGL c. 30A, §§ 18 through 25).
C.
Location. All regular meetings of the Council shall be held in the
Council Chambers of the Town unless otherwise specified by the
Council.
D.
Change of meeting time and/or location. The council, may by resolution,
change the time and place of the regular meeting. The resolution shall
set forth the circumstances necessitating such change. Such resolution
shall be posted at least 48 hours prior to the meeting to be held
pursuant to the change and filed with the Town Clerk. Forty-eight hours
prior to the meeting to be held pursuant to such change, the Clerk of
the Council shall give each Council member notice of any change from
the regular meeting established by this section.
E.
26.Editor's Note: See now MGL c. 30A, §§ 18 through 25.
27.Editor's Note: See now MGL c. 30A, §§ 18 through 25.
§ 69-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-4
1:61
Chapter 73
TOWN PROPERTY
Meetings open to public; exceptions. Except for executive sessions as
permitted by state Open Meeting Law (MGL c. 30A, §§ 18 through 25)
or other applicable statute or regulation, all regular meetings of the
Town Council and its committees shall be open to the public, subject
to recording by various means by notification of the Council President,
provided that such arrangements do not interfere with the orderly
conduct of the meetings and are done under such rules as the Council
may prescribe.
F.
§ 69-4 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 69-4
1:62
ARTICLE I
Real Property
[Adopted as Ch. 2, § 2-102 and 2-103, of the Codified Ordinances]
§ 73-1. Sale, conveyance and use of land.
Subject to the requirements of Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 30B
and Chapter 40, as amended, the Mayor may sell and convey in the name
and on behalf of the Town, at such prices and under such terms and
conditions as said Mayor may determine, the whole or any part of any
parcels of land which the Town has acquired or may hereafter acquire,
whether by purchase, gift, eminent domain or by any other method;
provided, however, that this section shall not limit the power of the
Treasurer under the General Laws to convey real property acquired by tax
title. The Mayor may grant licenses to use municipal real estate on such
terms and conditions as he/she deems appropriate.
§ 73-2. Gifts of land or interests therein.
The Mayor shall have the authority to accept on behalf of the Town land
in fee simple or an easement or any other interest in any land for any
municipal purpose in any case when such conveyance shall not require the
payment of any monetary consideration for said land or interest in said land
by the Town.
§ 73-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73-2
1:63

ARTICLE II
Use of Town Vehicles
[Adopted as Ch. 2, § 2-104, of the Codified Ordinances]
§ 73-3. Rate of reimbursement; turnpike tolls.
The rate to be paid for use of a motor vehicle for travel by Town officials or
employees shall be 80% (rounded to the nearest penny) of the rate allowed
by the Internal Revenue Service for each mile of travel. Turnpike tolls shall
be paid when a receipt of payment is submitted for reimbursement.
§ 73-4. Restrictions on use.
No person shall use any Town vehicles for his personal use. Said vehicle
shall only be driven by the individual to whom it has been assigned and shall
not be used outside of the Town unless on official Town business.
§ 73-5. Marking of vehicles.
All Town vehicles, except for certain Police Department vehicles as
designated by the Mayor, shall be appropriately marked with departmental
or Town seals or appropriate lettering that is highly visible and identifiable
as a Town-owned vehicle.
§ 73-6. Taking vehicles to and from work.
§ 73-7. Parking in designated areas.
All other Town vehicles shall be parked in a designated area in the
municipal parking lot across from the Municipal Office Building.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following department heads and/or
employees who have been assigned a Town vehicle shall be permitted
to take said vehicle to and from work:
(1) Mayor.
(2) Fire.
(3) Police.
(4) Water.
(5) Operations.
A.
No other employee shall be permitted to take a municipal vehicle to and
from work without written authorization from the Mayor or his or her
designee.
B.
§ 73-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73-8
1:65
§ 73-8. Violations and penalties.
The penalty for failing to comply with this article shall be governed by
Chapter 1, Article I, § 1-2, of the Ordinances of the Town of West
Springfield.
§ 73-8 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 73-8
1:66
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 105
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 73-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73-8
1:67

ARTICLE I
Public Consumption
[Adopted as Ch. 7, § 7-400, of the Codified Ordinances]
§ 105-1. Open containers in public prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, consume from and/or
transport an open container of an alcoholic beverage on any public street,
public sidewalk, public park, public playground, or public way or on any
grounds owned by the Town within the limits of the Town.
§ 105-2. Scope of prohibition.
This article shall not apply at events or festivals duly licensed by the License
Commission and approved in writing by the board, commission, department
or official of the Town of West Springfield having the care and custody of
the premises so licensed, to the extent of such license and approval.
§ 105-3. Violations and penalties.
The fine for an unlawful act as provided in this article shall be $15.
§ 105-4. Evidence of violation.
Possession of an open can, bottle or other container, which upon analysis
by the Police Department is determined to contain an alcoholic beverage
as defined in MGL c. 138, § 1, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation
of this article. All containers of alcoholic beverages being used in violation
of this article shall be seized and safely held until final adjudication of the
charge against the person or persons summoned before the court.
§ 105-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-4
1:69

ARTICLE II
Alcohol Brought onto Commercial Premises for Personal
Consumption
[Adopted 2-13-2004 by Ord. No. 117 (Ch. 10, § 10-206, of the
Codified Ordinances)]
§ 105-5. Title.
This article shall be entitled the "BYOB Ordinance."
§ 105-6. Purpose.
The purpose of this article shall be to establish a BYOB permit to be utilized
by holders of common victualler licenses as a means of expanding their
marketability by allowing alcohol brought in by patrons to be consumed on
the licensed premises.
§ 105-7. Requirements and restrictions; permit fee.
Upon approval of the License Commission following a hearing, a holder of
a common victualler-restaurant license may allow customers to consume
alcoholic beverages on their premises subject to the following
requirements:
Beverages must be brought in by the customer for consumption while
dining.
A.
The standards and practices for the issuance of a BYOB permit shall
mirror those in place for the issuance of an annual restaurant wine and
malt license.
B.
Permitted beverages shall be limited to those normally covered under a
"wine and malt" alcohol license. No other alcoholic beverages (spirits,
liqueurs, etc.) shall be permitted for BYOB consumption in any location.
C.
Patrons who bring alcohol for consumption at an establishment must
be seated in a dining area and have ordered food. At least one food
order must be placed per table per visit. No alcoholic beverages may be
consumed by patrons in a waiting area or unsupervised outdoor dining
area (i.e., picnic table). The premises covered by the BYOB permit
shall be designated during the application process. All outdoor and/or
secondary dining areas included in the premises covered under this
permit shall be accessible only by first passing through the main lobby
of the establishment. If these areas are not directly supervised by a
staff member they must be monitored while patrons are present and
consuming alcohol.
D.
It shall be the responsibility of the BYOB permit holder to ensure
all federal, state, and local laws with regard to overconsumption of
alcohol, proper training of staff for identification of overconsumption
and standards for verification of age are followed.
E.
§ 105-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-7
1:71
§ 105-8. Liability.
By exercising the privilege of allowing patrons to BYOB, the licensee is
potentially exposed to significant liability for injuries and damages to the
persons consuming alcohol or to others who are injured or damaged by
the persons consuming alcohol. Acceptance and exercise of BYOB will
be deemed to be acknowledgment of awareness of this potential liability.
Licensees are encouraged to discuss the risks associated with exercising
the privileges of BYOB and the appropriate precautions to avoid injuries,
damage and liability to others with their legal advisor. The Town of West
Springfield and the License Commission acting as the Local License
Authority shall not be liable to the licensee or to others if injury or damage
shall result from the exercise of BYOB practice. By allowing BYOB on the
licensed premises, the licensee acknowledges that he/she understands and
will comply with all applicable liquor regulations set forth by the Alcoholic
Beverages Control Commission and the licensing authority.
No permit holder shall handle, pour, hold, or otherwise aid in the
consumption of the alcohol brought onto the premises. Permit holders
may provide glassware, bottle openers, corkscrews or similar for
patrons to use.
F.
Unopened or resecured containers of alcohol must be transported in
accordance with the Massachusetts General Laws and the Alcoholic
Beverages Control Commission's regulations at 204 CMR 2.18.
G.
The permit holder may charge no fee for the service of facilitating the
consumption of alcohol in accordance with this article. Any service fee,
glass fee, table fee, or corkage fee, etc. would be considered an indirect
sale and is illegal without an alcoholic beverages license.
H.
I. No drinking games or contests shall be allowed.
Any violation of this article may result in restriction, suspension or
revocation of the BYOB permit and/or the common victualler's license.
J.
The fee for a BYOB permit shall be $500 annually, with permits eligible
for renewal in July of each year.
K.
The holder of the permit shall have no property right in said permit
and it may be revoked at the discretion of the License Commission by
majority vote.
L.
§ 105-7 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 105-8
1:72
Chapter 110
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
§ 105-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-8
1:73

ARTICLE I
Animal Control
[Adopted as Ch. 7, § 7-500, of the Codified Ordinances]
§ 110-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FARM ANIMAL — Any poultry, ungulate, species of cattle, sheep, swine,
goats, llamas, equine, or other fur-bearing animals which are raised for
commercial or subsistence purposes.
LIVESTOCK OR FOWL — Any fowl or other animal, including farm animals,
kept or propagated by the owner for food or as a means of livelihood and
deer, elk, cottontail rabbits, northern hare, pheasant, quail, partridge and
other birds and quadrupeds determined by the Department of Fisheries,
Wildlife and Environmental Law Enforcement28 to be wild and kept by, or
under a permit from, said department in proper houses or suitable enclosed
yards. Such term shall not include dogs, cats and other pets.
§ 110-2. Animals in streets or commons.
No person shall permit any sheep, goat, swine, mule, ass, horse or neat
cattle belonging to him/her or under his/her care or control to go at large
in or depasture on any street, lane or alley or to be on any common in the
Town.
§ 110-3. Animals on sidewalks.
No person shall permit any goat, sheep, swine, horse, mule, ox or cow under
his/her care to go upon any sidewalk in the Town except for the purpose of
crossing such sidewalk to go to or from some adjoining enclosure.
28.Editor's Note: Now the "Department of Fish and Game."
§ 110-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-3
1:75

ARTICLE II
Dogs and Cats
[Adopted as Ch. 7, §§ 7-600, of the Codified Ordinances]
§ 110-4. Authority.
The Town may create ordinances or bylaws relative to the licensing and
control of animals not inconsistent with MGL c. 140, §§ 136A to 174E,
inclusive, pursuant to MGL c. 140, § 173.
§ 110-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADEQUATE SHELTER — A structure that is large enough for the animal to
stand naturally, turn around and lay down inside of the structure without
being exposed to the elements of weather. During cold weather, a moveable
flap shall be placed over the entrance to a dog shelter to preserve the dog's
body heat.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — An appointed officer authorized to enforce
MGL c. 140, §§ 137 through 174E, inclusive, and this Chapter 110.
AT LARGE — Any dog which is off the owner's or keeper's property and not
under physical control of the owner or keeper, and any cat off the owner's
or keeper's property and not under physical control of the owner or keeper.
ATTACK — Aggressive physical contact initiated by an animal.
COMPANION ANIMAL — Any dog or cat. Companion animal shall not
include a "farm animal" as defined in § 110-1 of this chapter.
DANGEROUS DOG — A dog that either: without justification, attacks a
person or domestic animal, causing physical injury or death; or behaves
in a manner that a reasonable person would believe poses an unjustified
imminent threat of physical injury or death to one or more persons,
domestic or owned animals. However, no dog shall be deemed dangerous:
A. Solely based upon growling or barking;
B. Based upon the breed of such dog;
If such dog was reacting to another animal or to a person and such
dog's reaction was not grossly disproportionate to any of the following
circumstances:
Such dog was protecting or defending itself, its offspring, another
domestic animal or a person from attack or assault;
(1)
The person who was attacked or threatened by the dog was
committing a crime upon the person or property of the owner or
keeper of such dog;
(2)
C.
§ 110-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-5
1:77
EUTHANIZE — To take the life of an animal by the administration of
barbiturates in a manner deemed acceptable by the American Veterinary
Medical Association Guidelines on Euthanasia.
HEARING AUTHORITY — The hearing authority shall be comprised of the
Town Clerk, the Health Director and a designee from the Police Department
chosen by the Police Chief. The hearing authority shall create additional
procedures for the management of outdoor cat populations and the
determination of dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs and cats with
approval from the Town Council in accordance with MGL c. 140, § 173.
KEEPER — Any person, business, corporation, entity or society, other than
the owner, harboring or having in such person's possession any dog or cat.
KENNEL — One pack or collection of dogs and/or cats on a single premises,
whether maintained for breeding, boarding, sale, training, hunting or other
purposes, and including any shop where dogs are on sale, and also including
every pack or collection of four or more dogs six months of age or older,
or five or more cats six months or older (including companion animals and
pets), owned or kept by a person on a single premises irrespective of the
purpose for which they are maintained.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL —
The person attacked or threatened by the dog was engaged in
teasing, tormenting, battering, assaulting, injuring or otherwise
provoking such dog; at the time of such attack or threat, the
person or animal that was attacked or threatened by such dog had
breached an enclosure or structure in which the dog was kept apart
from the public and such person or animal was not authorized by
the owner of the premises to be within such enclosure, including,
but not limited to, a gated, fenced-in area if the gate was closed,
whether locked or unlocked; provided, however, that if a person is
under the age of seven, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that
such person was not committing a crime, provoking the dog or
trespassing.
(3)
Any premises maintained for any of (or combination of) the following:
The boarding or in-residence training of any number of dogs and/
or cats;
(1)
The day care of any number of dogs and/or cats that is not the
owner's/operator's companion animal or pets and at which such
services are rendered in exchange for consideration and in the
absence of the owner of such animal;
(2)
Ten or more dogs six months of age or older or 10 or more cats six
months of age or older kept as companion animals or pets; or for/
from breeding;
(3)
An establishment, other than a personal kennel, engaged in the
business of breeding animals for sale or for exchange to
wholesalers, brokers or pet shops in return for consideration.
(4)
A.
§ 110-5 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 110-5
1:78
KENNEL, PERSONAL — Any premises where an owner or keeper maintains
as companion animals or pets, or for breeding, four or more but not more
than nine dogs six months of age or older, and/or seven or more but not
more than nine cats six months of age or older; provided, however, that
breeding of personally owned dogs may take place for the purpose of
improving, exhibiting or showing the breed, use in legal sporting activity
or other personal reasons; provided, further, that selling, trading, bartering
or the distribution of such breeding from a personal kennel shall be to
other breeders or individuals by private sale only and not to wholesalers,
brokers or pet shops; provided, further, that personal kennels shall not sell,
trade, barter or distribute any dogs not bred from their personally owned
dogs; and provided, further, that dogs temporarily housed at a personal
kennel, in conjunction with an animal shelter or rescue registered with the
department, may be sold, traded, bartered or distributed if the transfer is
not for profit.
LICENSE PERIOD — The period of time for which the Town Clerk
prescribes the validity of a license, from date of issuance to and including
the date of expiration. The annual license period is January 1 through
December 31.
NUISANCE DOG — A dog that:
OWNER — Any person possessing, harboring, keeping, having an interest
in, or having control or custody of an animal. If a person under the age of 18
owns the animal, that person's custodial parent(s) or legal guardian(s) shall
be responsible for complying with all requirements of this article.
This definition shall not include an animal shelter or animal control
facility, a pet shop licensed under MGL c. 129, § 39A, a facility which
does not provide overnight boarding for animals but does provide dog
grooming, dog training, supervised playtime of dogs or dog walking
with not more than 12 dogs on a single premises or individuals who
temporarily, and not in the normal course of business, board or care
for animals owned by others or veterinary hospital or clinic that boards
dogs for reasons in addition to medical treatment or care; provided,
however, that this definition shall not include a hospital or clinic used
solely to house dogs that have undergone veterinary treatment,
observation, or will do so, only for the period of time needed to
accomplish the needed veterinary care.
B.
By excessive barking or other disturbance is a source of annoyance to
any sick person residing in the vicinity; or
A.
By excessive barking, causing damage or other interference, a
reasonable person would find disruptive to one's quiet and peaceful
enjoyment; or
B.
Has threatened or attacked livestock, a domestic animal or a person,
but such threat or attack was not a grossly disproportionate reaction
under all the circumstances.
C.
§ 110-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-5
1:79
SHELTER — A public animal control facility or any other facility which
is operated by an organization or individual for the purpose of protecting
animals from cruelty, neglect or abuse.
§ 110-6. Licensing of dogs.
§ 110-7. License fees.
Any person who, at the commencement of a license period, is or who,
during any license period, becomes the owner or keeper of a dog six
months old or older shall cause the dog to be licensed within 30 days.
The Town Clerk shall issue dog licenses and tags on a form prescribed
and furnished by the Town.
A.
The license record shall include the name, address, and phone number
of the owner or keeper of the dog, and the name, license number, breed,
color, age, sex, and the rabies expiration date of each dog and indicate
whether the dog has been spayed or neutered. The license tag shall
include the license number, the name of the Town and the year of issue.
B.
The owner or keeper shall cause each dog to wear around its neck or
body a collar or harness to which he shall securely attach the license
tags. In the event that any tag is lost, defaced or destroyed, a substitute
tag shall be obtained by the owner or keeper from the Town Clerk at
the cost of $5. Such monies shall be transmitted to the Town Treasurer
in the same manner as license fees. The Town Clerk shall not issue
a license for any dog unless the owner or keeper provides the Town
Clerk with a veterinarian's certificate verifying that the dog is currently
vaccinated against rabies.
C.
The Town Clerk shall not grant such licenses for any dog unless the
owner thereof provides either a veterinarian's certificate that such dog
has been certified exempt from rabies vaccination, or a notarized letter
from a veterinarian that a certificate was issued.
D.
The fees for dog licenses shall be established in the fee schedule of the
Town Clerk as voted on from time to time by the Town Council.
A.
No fee shall be charged for a license for a dog specifically trained to
lead or serve a blind, deaf or handicapped person upon presentation to
the Town Clerk of a certificate of such training.
B.
No license may be issued for any dog unless all prior overdue licenses
(i.e., licenses from prior years which were required but had not been
obtained) have been paid for, unless an amnesty period shall be in
effect, recommended by the Town Clerk and approved by vote of the
Town Council.
C.
No license fee or part thereof shall be refunded because of subsequent
death, loss, spaying, or removal from the commonwealth or other
disposal of the dog.
D.
§ 110-5 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 110-7
1:80
§ 110-8. Vaccination against rabies.
The Town Clerk shall have the authority to make reasonable
accommodations to reduce fees and fines owed in the case of financial
hardships.
E.
Any owner or keeper of a dog who moves into the Town and has a
valid dog license for his/her dog from another city or town in the
commonwealth shall, within 30 days, obtain a dog license for a fee of
$1, upon producing evidence of the previous license.
F.
The Town Clerk shall collect a late fee of $25 for every dog license
issued after March 1 of each year. This fee would be waived during
an approved amnesty period. The Town Clerk shall have the authority
to waive or reduce the late fee in cases of financial hardship or in
conjunction with participation in a Town-sponsored rabies vaccination
clinic.
G.
Whoever is the owner or keeper of a dog, cat or ferret in the Town,
six months of age or older, shall cause such dog, cat or ferret to be
vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian using a licensed
vaccine according to the manufacturer's directions and shall cause such
dog, cat or ferret to be revaccinated at intervals recommended by the
manufacturer.
A.
Unvaccinated dogs, cats or ferrets acquired or moved into the Town
shall be vaccinated within 30 days after the acquisition or arrival of
such animal into the Town or upon reaching the age of six months,
whichever last occurs.
B.
A licensing authority may grant an exemption from this section for any
dog, cat or ferret that:
The local Board of Health has declared exempt from the rabies
vaccination requirement upon presentation of a veterinarian's
certificate stating that, because of an infirmity, other physical
condition or regimen of therapy, such inoculation is considered
inadvisable for a specified period of time for such reasons;
(1)
(2) Is in transit; or
Was brought into the commonwealth temporarily for the sole
purpose of display in shows or for exhibition.
(3)
C.
This section shall not apply to dogs, cats or ferrets housed in a research
institution.
D.
Whoever violates this section shall be punished by a fine of not more
than $100.29
E.
29.NOTE: Whoever violates this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50 nor
more than $100. The Animal Control Officer shall apportion this fine based on the severity
of the violation and the time since the vaccination has lapsed.
§ 110-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-9
1:81
§ 110-9. Limit on number of dogs.
§ 110-10. Kennel licenses; fees.
No person shall keep more than three dogs over the age of six months
at any residence without complying with the requirements of the West
Springfield Zoning Ordinance,30 and obtaining a kennel license as
defined herein.
A.
Those persons who kept more than three dogs at their premises in
compliance with the applicable ordinances and regulations in effect at
the time may keep said dogs in excess of the aforesaid limit, but said
dogs may not be replaced so as to exceed the three-dog limit.
B.
Additional restrictions on the number of companion animals may be
imposed by the Animal Control Officer if, after an investigation of a
dwelling or property, it is revealed the living conditions are not healthy
and these conditions are the result of an overcrowding of animals in
said dwelling or property. An appeal of the above restriction may be
made in writing to the Town Clerk and a final decision shall be rendered
by the hearing authority designated in § 110-24 of this article.
C.
Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall receive a
written warning, issued by the Animal Control Officer or police officer,
for the first offense, and for each subsequent offense shall be liable for
payment of a fine of $50 for each day in violation of this section, which
shall be paid to the Town Clerk. A reasonable amount of time will be
allowed for proper placement of animals into alternate care before fines
are imposed. The Animal Control Officer may assist persons in need
with placement of animals as necessary.
D.
Any person or business maintained for a personal kennel or commercial
kennel as defined in this article shall obtain the appropriate kennel
license from the Town Clerk. The Town Clerk shall not issue any kennel
license for any use not in compliance with the Zoning Ordinance.31 The
Town Clerk shall not issue a personal kennel license unless the owner
or keeper provides the Town Clerk with a veterinarian's certificate
verifying that each dog or cat six months of age or older is currently
vaccinated against rabies.
A.
Issuance of a personal or commercial kennel license, and continued use
of said license, shall be contingent upon inspection and approval by the
Animal Control Officer to ensure that basic standards of cleanliness and
proper care and confinement of said dogs or cats exist on the premises.
B.
Such license shall be in a form prescribed by the Town Clerk. Such
license shall be in lieu of any other license for any dog or cat while kept
at such kennel during any portion of the period for which such kennel
C.
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Zoning.
31.Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Zoning.
§ 110-9 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 110-10
1:82
§ 110-11. Kennel inspection and regulation.
The procedure for the inspection of kennels shall be as established in MGL
c. 140, § 137C.
§ 110-12. Noise restrictions.
No person owning or keeping or otherwise responsible for a dog or cat
shall allow or permit said dog or cat to annoy another person's reasonable
right to peace or privacy by making loud and continuous noise, where such
noise is plainly audible at a distance of 150 feet from the building, premises,
vehicle or conveyance housing said dog or cat, and such noise is continuous
in excess of 10 minutes. The fact that such noise is plainly audible at
such distance and continuous in excess of 10 minutes shall be prima facie
evidence of a violation. Fines will be issued only after an investigation by
the Animal Control Officer has determined that the barking/meowing of the
animal is not the result of willful instigation from a third party.
§ 110-13. Payments to veterinarians for emergency treatment of
dogs or cats injured on ways.
Payment to veterinarians for emergency treatment of dogs or cats injured
on ways shall be made as defined in MGL c. 140, § 151B.
license is issued. The holder of a license for a kennel shall cause each
dog or cat kept therein to wear a collar or harness of leather or other
suitable material, to which shall be securely attached a tag upon which
shall appear the number of such kennel license, the year of issue and
the inscription "WEST SPRINGFIELD."
The fees for kennel licenses shall be included in the fee schedule of the
Town Clerk and shall be set by the Council from time to time.
D.
The name and address of the owner of each dog or cat kept in any
kennel, if other than the person maintaining the kennel, and a
veterinarian's certificate verifying that each dog or cat six months of
age or older is currently vaccinated against rabies, shall be kept on file
thereat and available for inspection by the Animal Control Officer, an
animal inspector, or a police officer.
E.
The Town Clerk shall, upon application, issue without charge a kennel
license to any domestic charitable corporation, incorporated
exclusively for the purpose of protecting animals from cruelty, neglect
or abuse, and the relief of suffering among animals.
F.
A veterinary hospital shall not be considered a kennel unless it contains
an area for the selling, breeding or boarding of dogs or cats for other
than medical purposes, in which case it shall apply for a kennel license.
G.
The license period for a kennel license shall be the same as for a single
license: January 1 through December 31, inclusive.
H.
§ 110-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-14
1:83
§ 110-14. Designation of Animal Control Officer; authority to
enforce regulations.
Pursuant to MGL c. 140, § 151(a), the Mayor shall annually designate an
Animal Control Officer. Pursuant to MGL c. 140, § 151A, the Mayor shall
annually issue a warrant to the Animal Control Officer directing the officer
to seek out, catch and confine all dogs within the Town which are not
licensed, collared or harnessed, or tagged, as required by these ordinances,
and to prosecute against the owners or keepers of such dogs for failure to
comply.
§ 110-15. Dogs at large prohibited; leashing required.
§ 110-16. Impounding of unleashed or at-large dogs.
No person owning, keeping or being responsible for a dog shall allow
or permit said dog to run at large on any of the streets or public places
in the Town or upon any private property, unless the owner or lawful
occupant of such property grants permission therefor.
A.
No dog shall be allowed or permitted in any public place or street
within the Town unless it is effectively restrained and controlled by a
chain or other form of leash that is sufficient to hold the dog, unless it
is within and confined to a motor vehicle.
B.
In any prosecution hereunder, the presence of such dog at large upon
premises other than the premises of the owner or keeper of such dog
shall be prima facie evidence that such knowledge and permission was
not had.
C.
Fines will be issued in accordance with Chapter 1, Article I, § 1-2, of the
Town Code.
D.
It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer, or police officer, to
apprehend any dog found running at large and to impound such dog in
the animal shelter or other boarding facility.
A.
The Animal Control Officer or impounding officer shall keep a register
and make a complete record of each impounding.
B.
The record shall contain the following information: breed, color and sex
of each dog; whether or not the dog is licensed; the license number, if
any; the name and address of the owner, if known; the date and place
of apprehension; and the location where the dog is being kept. In the
instance of an animal that has been euthanized by gunshot in case of
emergency, such record shall contain the disposition of the remains and
a description of the situation requiring the gunshot.
C.
The owner of an impounded dog, when known, shall be notified verbally
or in writing of such impoundment or, if the owner is unknown, written
notice shall be posted with the Police Department.
D.
§ 110-14 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 110-16
1:84
§ 110-17. Fee for reclamation of impounded dog; failure to claim
impounded dog or cat.
§ 110-18. Animal control facilities and shelters; spaying or
neutering required.
§ 110-19. Removal of waste from property.
No person owning or having the care, custody or control of any dog or cat
shall permit such dog or cat to soil or defile or commit any nuisance upon
any sidewalk, street, thoroughfare, wetland, in or upon any public property
or in or upon the property of persons other than the owner or persons
having the care, custody or control of such dog or cat, unless said person
picks up any such waste and disposes of same in a sanitary manner. Fines
will be issued in accordance with Chapter 1, Article I, § 1-2, of the Town
Code.
§ 110-20. Tethering or outdoor confinement of dogs.
Notice shall contain a description of the dog, date and place of
apprehension and location where the dog is being kept.
E.
The owner, or keeper or responsible person may reclaim the dog so
impounded upon payment of the license fee, if unpaid, and proof of
rabies vaccination in the form of a rabies vaccination certificate from a
certified veterinarian, and the payment of impoundment and boarding
fees and the cost relevant to such impoundment.
F.
An owner or keeper of a dog reclaiming an impounded dog shall pay
to the Animal Control Officer for deposit with the Town Treasurer an
administrative fee of $25. The reclamation fee is an administrative fee
in addition to any fine due of the owner or keeper of the animal for
violation of the animal control ordinances of the Town.
A.
Any dog whose owner or keeper fails to claim said dog or cat within
seven days from the day of impounding shall be subject to the
provisions set forth in MGL c. 140, § 151A.
B.
Any animal control facility or shelter with which the Town engages in a
contract for services related to this article shall at all times observe the
laws of the commonwealth.
A.
No shelter shall sell or give away any dog or cat that has not been
spayed or neutered, unless a written agreement is entered into and a
deposit of not less than $40 for spaying or neutering has been tendered
to the shelter. The shelter may make appropriate arrangements for the
spaying or neutering of such dog or cat by a licensed veterinarian,
or may return the deposit to the person purchasing or receiving the
dog or cat upon presentation of a written statement or receipt from a
veterinarian or clinic that the dog or cat has been spayed or neutered
by a licensed veterinarian.
B.
§ 110-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-20
1:85
§ 110-21. Inhumane treatment.
A person owning or keeping a dog may confine such dog outside,
subject to the restrictions in MGL c. 140, § 174E, and in compliance
with the following:
No person owning or keeping a dog shall chain or tether a dog
to a stationary object, including, but not limited to, a structure,
dog house, pole or tree, for longer than eight total hours during a
twenty-four-hour period.
(1)
No dog shall be penned, kenneled or kept in any other outdoor
enclosure for more than 12 total hours during a twenty-four-hour
period.
(2)
No dog shall be kept outside in any manner between 11:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m. This section shall not prevent an owner/keeper from
walking a dog on leash at any time.
(3)
No dog shall be kept outside in cases of extreme weather, when a
heat advisory is in effect or during any time in which an extreme
weather advisory has been issued by the Town or state, including
but not limited to floods, hurricanes, tornadoes and tropical storms.
(4)
A.
Fines will be issued in accordance with Chapter 1, Article I, § 1-2, of the
Town Code. Consideration may be given, at the discretion of the Animal
Control Officer, with regard to the guidelines in this section if the safety
and wellbeing of the animal are not compromised.
B.
Any person owning, keeping, in control of or otherwise responsible for a
companion animal, pet, farm animal or any other dog or cat who, in the
opinion of the Animal Control Officer, is treating the aforementioned
animals in an inhumane manner (such treatment may include, but not
be limited to, prolonged chaining or tethering of animals; extended
outdoor confinement; lack of access to food, water or shelter; exposure
to hazardous conditions) shall be subject to a written warning and/or a
fine, issued by the Animal Control Officer or police officer, as detailed
in the fee schedule of the Town Clerk, paid to the Town Treasurer, or
by imprisonment for not more than 30 days for the first offense and not
more than 60 days for a second or subsequent offense, or both.
A.
If any of the aforementioned persons violates this section more than five
times, the Animal Control Officer or police officer may, after a hearing
conducted by the Chief of Police or his/her designee, with not less than
10 days' notice to the owner or keeper, confiscate the subject animal
or animals or order the person to permanently surrender the animal
or animals for placement. If placement is not obtainable, the animal or
animals may be ordered euthanized.
B.
Where, in the opinion of the Animal Control Officer, said
aforementioned treatment of said animals places the animals at
C.
§ 110-20 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 110-21
1:86
§ 110-22. Domestic relations.
Pursuant to MGL c. 209A, § 11, relative to a domestic relations, child
custody, domestic abuse or abuse prevention proceeding or matter, a court
may include the domesticated animal(s) belonging to a petitioner or to
a member of the petitioner's family or household in the court's orders,
injunctions or warrants thereof.
§ 110-23. Regulations regarding cats.
The hearing authority shall submit regulations regarding cats pursuant to
MGL c. 140, § 173 and this article. These regulations will be in effect upon
approval of the Town Council and filing with the Town Clerk.
§ 110-24. Dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs and cats.
The hearing authority shall submit regulations regarding potentially
dangerous dogs and cats pursuant to MGL c. 140, § 173 and this article.
These regulations will be in effect upon approval of the Council and filing
with the Town Clerk.
§ 110-25. Striking, injuring or killing dogs or cats with motor
vehicle.
The operator of a motor vehicle that strikes and injures or kills a dog or cat
on the byways of the Town shall forthwith report such an accident to the
owner or keeper of said dog or cat or to a police officer or Animal Control
Officer. A violation of this section shall be punished by a fine to be paid to
the Town Clerk.
§ 110-26. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
imminent risk, the Animal Control Officer may immediately remove and
impound the animal for its own protection.
These provisions may be enforced through and pursuant to the
noncriminal disposition procedure set forth in Chapter 1, Article II, of
the Town Code.
A.
Violation of any section of this article shall be subject to the following
fines, unless otherwise specified in a specific section:
(1) First offense: $50.
(2) Second offense: $100.
(3) Subsequent offenses: $300.
B.
C. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 110-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-26
1:87
§ 110-27. Severability.
These rules and regulations are adopted with the intent that each of them
shall have force and effect separately and independently of each other,
except insofar as by express reference or necessary implication any rule or
part of any rule is made dependent upon another rule or part thereof.
A reasonable amount of time to remedy any violations will be allowed
before fines are issued, except when deemed inappropriate by the
Animal Control Officer.
D.
§ 110-26 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 110-27
1:88
Chapter 117
BEVERAGE SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 105. Licenses and permits — See Ch. 175.
§ 117-1. License required; fee.
No person shall keep open a place of business for the retail sale of
beverages derived wholly or in part from cereals or substitutes therefor and
containing less than 1/2 of 1% of alcohol, unfermented grape juice, ginger
ale, root beer, sarsaparilla, pop, artificial mineral waters, carbonated waters
or beverages and other so-called "soft drinks" until a license therefor has
been obtained from the License Commission. The fee therefor shall be $1.
§ 117-2. Contents of license; term; suspension or revocation.
Licenses granted as aforesaid shall specify the street or place and number,
if there is any, and if there is no number, then the location of the place of
business in which the license is to be exercised, and the license shall not
be valid in any other place. Licenses so issued shall expire on the 30th day
of April of each year. Any such license may be suspended or revoked at any
time after a hearing by the License Commission.
§ 117-3. Scope of requirement.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to innholders, common
victuallers, druggists, nor to dealers whose principal business is the sale of
groceries and meats or either of said products, nor to the sale of any or all
of such beverages when sold not to be drunk on the premises. This chapter
shall not apply to persons who keep open their places of business on Sunday
for the sale of soda water if they are licensed under MGL c. 136, § 7.
Chapter 122
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and protection — See Ch. 150. Zoning — See Ch. 300.
§ 110-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-3
1:89

ARTICLE I
Numbering of Buildings
[Adopted as Ch. 7, § 7-700, of the Codified Ordinances]
§ 122-1. Authority to number; records.
The Mayor may order a street to be numbered or renumbered whenever
he/she deems it necessary and shall keep a suitable record of all such
numbering and renumbering.
§ 122-2. Placement of numbers; size.
§ 122-3. Time frame for compliance.
The owner of every home, tenement and business space within the
Town limits shall cause to be placed and maintained, within a five-foot
radius of the center of the front door, building numbers (Roman Simplex
Style) as assigned by the Mayor.
A.
The sizes of the numbers are as follows:
For homes, tenements and businesses within 60 feet (measured)
from the center of the roadway in front of the building: three inches
or larger.
(1)
For homes, tenements and businesses within 100 feet (measured)
from the center of the roadway in front of the building: four inches
or larger.
(2)
For homes, tenements and businesses within 150 feet (measured)
from the center of the roadway in front of the building: FIVE inches
or larger.
(3)
Where a building is more than 150 feet from the center of the
roadway, a permanent stone or steel post shall be installed, with
three-inch numbers mounted 40 inches high, next to the driveway.
(4)
B.
The numbers will be visible at all times and contrast with the building
color.
C.
Existing buildings. Compliance with the provisions of this article shall
be completed within 30 days of the approval of this article.
A.
New buildings. New buildings shall be identified in accordance with
this article before a certificate of use and occupancy is issued therefor.
B.
§ 122-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-3
1:91

ARTICLE II
Stretch Energy Code
[Adopted as Ch. 7, § 7-1800, of the Codified Ordinances]
§ 122-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE (IECC) — A building
energy code created by the International Code Council. It is a model code
adopted by many state and municipal governments in the United States
for the establishment of minimum design and construction requirements
for energy efficiency, and is updated on a three-year cycle. The baseline
energy conservation requirements of the Massachusetts Building Code are
the IECC with Massachusetts amendments, as approved by the Board of
Building Regulations and Standards.
STRETCH ENERGY CODE — A Massachusetts building code based on
further amendments to the International Energy Conservation Code (IECC)
to improve the energy efficiency of buildings built to this code. The Stretch
Energy Code was codified by the Board of Building Regulations and
Standards as an appendix, 780 CMR Appendix 115.AA, to the 8th Edition
of the Massachusetts Building Code. For the purposes of this definition, the
Stretch Energy Code shall include any future editions of, amendments to or
modifications of said appendix.
§ 122-5. Purpose.
The purpose of the Stretch Energy Code is to provide a more energyefficient
alternative to the Base Energy Code applicable to the relevant
sections of the Building Code for both new construction and existing
buildings.
§ 122-6. Applicability.
The Stretch Energy Code applies to residential and commercial buildings.
Buildings not included in this scope shall comply with 780 CMR 13, 34, 51,
as applicable.
§ 122-7. Incorporation by reference.
The Stretch Energy Code is incorporated, by reference, into the Ordinances
of the Town of West Springfield.
§ 122-8. Enforcement.
The Stretch Energy Code shall be enforceable by the Inspector of Buildings.
§ 122-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-8
1:93
Chapter 128
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 192.
§ 128-1. Curfew established; exception; loitering prohibited.
No child under 16 years of age shall be, loiter or remain upon any street,
highway, park or other public way or place in the Town after the hour of
9:30 p.m. of any day unless accompanied by or under the control or care of
a parent, guardian or other adult person or unless in some employment or in
the performance of some duty directed in writing by said parent, guardian
or other adult person; or due to an emergency that can be verified. No such
child, while in such employment or performance of such duty, shall loiter
upon any such street, park or other public place.
§ 128-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to a
penalty not exceeding $5 for each offense.
§ 128-3. Warning for first-time violations; notification of parents.
In enforcing this chapter, a police officer may, in his discretion, warn and
send home any child who for the first time violates the provisions of this
chapter and shall report such action to the Chief of Police, who shall cause
notice thereof to be sent to the parent, guardian or other person having the
care of such child.
Chapter 134
DRUGS AND DRUG PRODUCTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public consumption of alcoholic
beverages — See Ch. 105, Art. I.
§ 122-8 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 128-3
1:94
ARTICLE I
Public Consumption of Marijuana and Tetrahydrocannabinol
[Adopted 8-17-2009 (Ch. 7, § 7-1700, of the Codified Ordinances)]
§ 134-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the use of marijuana or
tetrahydrocannabinol in public places and areas open to the public.
§ 134-2. Prohibited conduct.
§ 134-3. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by police officers of the Town of West
Springfield either by criminal disposition or noncriminal disposition. The
use of one method of disposition shall not prevent or restrict the use of the
other for subsequent violations.
§ 134-4. Violations and penalties.
No person shall smoke, ingest, or otherwise use or consume marijuana
or tetrahydrocannabinol (as defined in MGL c. 94C, § 1, as amended)
while in or upon any street, sidewalk, public way, footway, passageway,
stairs, bridge, park, playground, beach, recreation area, boat landing,
public building, public lands and grounds, school houses, school lands
and grounds, parking lot, or any area owned by or under the control
of the Town; or in or upon any bus or other passenger conveyance
operated by a common carrier; or in any retail establishment or other
place accessible to the general public.
A.
Any person using or having in his possession marijuana or
tetrahydrocannabinol shall, upon request of a police officer, provide to
said officer his legal name and current residential address.
B.
The penalty for a criminal disposition of this article shall be $300 for
each violation.
A.
The penalty for a noncriminal disposition of this article shall be $150
for the first offense and $300 for the second and subsequent offenses.
B.
The penalties imposed in this section shall be in addition to any penalty
imposed under MGL c. 94C, § 32L.
C.
§ 134-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-4
1:95

ARTICLE II
Marijuana Establishments
[Adopted 7-9-2018 (Ch. 7, § 7-1701, of the Codified Ordinances)]
§ 134-5. Nonmedical establishments prohibited.
Consistent with MGL c. 94G, § 3(a)(2), all types of nonmedical "marijuana
establishments," as defined in MGL c. 94G, § 1, including marijuana
cultivators, independent testing laboratories, marijuana product
manufacturers, marijuana retailers or any other types of licensed
marijuana-related businesses, shall be prohibited within the Town of West
Springfield.
§ 134-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-5
1:97
Chapter 141
FEES AND CHARGES
§ 134-5 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 134-5
1:98
ARTICLE I
Municipal Charges Lien
[Adopted 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 111 (Ch. 6, § 6-105, of the Codified
Ordinances)]
§ 141-1. Authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority of MGL c. 40, § 21 and MGL
c. 40, § 58 and any other relevant statutes and regulations.
§ 141-2. Purpose.
The purpose of the establishment of a municipal charges lien is to provide
a cost-effective method of collecting a charge and/or fine assessed against
an owner of real property in the Town who fails and/or refuses to pay said
charge and/or fee when due, by placing a lien upon real estate owned by the
property owner.
§ 141-3. Applicable charges and/or fees.
The municipal charges lien shall apply to the following municipal charge
and/or fees:
Charges or penalties for violations of the water use restriction
ordinance,32 including interest and all costs to record said lien(s) in the
Hampden County Registry of Deeds.
A.
Charges or penalties for violations of the zoning bylaws (ordinance),33
including interest and costs to record said liens in the Hampden County
Registry of Deeds.
B.
Charges or penalties for violations of the snow removal ordinance
including interest and costs to record said liens in the Hampden County
Registry of Deeds.
C.
Charges or penalties for violation of orders of the Building Department
for violations of the building code, including interest and all costs to
record said lien in the Hampden County Registry of Deeds.
D.
Charges or penalties for violation of the rules and regulations of the
Board of Health and the State Sanitation Code, including interest and
all costs to record said lien in the Hampden County Registry of Deeds.
E.
Charges or penalties for violation of the Ordinances of the Town of West
Springfield, including interest and all costs to record said lien in the
Hampden County Registry of Deeds.
F.
32.Editor's Note: See Ch. 257, Water, Art. I.
33.Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Zoning.
§ 141-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-3
1:99
§ 141-4. Effective date of lien.
The municipal charges lien will take effect upon the recording of a
statement of unpaid municipal charges and fees, setting forth the amount
due, including recording costs, the address(es) of the land to which the lien
is to apply and the name of the assessed owner.
§ 141-5. Collection of lien.
§ 141-6. Unpaid liens.
§ 141-7. Release of lien.
The municipal charge lien may be discharged by filing a certificate from the
Tax Collector that all municipal charges or fees constituting a lien, together
with any interest and costs, have been paid or legally abated.
Charges or penalties for violations of the illicit discharge ordinance,34
including interest and costs to record said lien in the Hampden County
Registry of Deeds.
G.
Charges and penalties for violations of the rules and regulations
adopted pursuant to Chapter 213, Article I, Recycling, including
interest and all costs to record said liens in the Hampden County
Registry of Deeds. [Added 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 118; amended
5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 136]
H.
A. The Tax Collector shall be in charge of collecting the lien.
The Town Clerk shall notify the Assessors of all unpaid tickets that have
not been paid or appealed to the court at the end of each month.
B.
The Assessor shall prepare a statement of municipal charges lien for
each person from the list(s) received from the Town Clerk or person
responsible for collecting the charge or penalty and shall forward said
statement of lien to the Tax Collector, who shall cause said statement(s)
to be recorded in the Hampden County Registry of Deeds.
C.
If a charge or fee secured by the lien is unpaid when the Assessors
are preparing the real estate tax list and warrant, the Tax Collector
shall certify the charge or penalty to the Assessors' Department and the
Assessors shall add the charge or fee to the next property tax bill to
which it relates, and commit it with the warrant to the Collector as part
of the tax.
A.
If the property to which the charge or fee relates is tax exempt, the
charge or fee shall be committed as a tax on said property.
B.
34.Editor's Note: See Ch. 204, Sewers, Art. I.
§ 141-3 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 141-8
1:100
§ 141-8. Abatement. [Amended 11-22-2005]
A municipal charges lien may be abated in whole or in part by a written
statement of the reasons for the abatement signed by the head of the
department that imposed the lien and with written approval of the Mayor.
The Tax Collector shall, upon receipt of said statement, issue the abatement
requested. Said statement of reasons shall contain an itemized list of all
charges, fees, interest and/or penalties to be abated. An abatement shall
be effective upon the filing, by the Tax Collector, of said statement with
the office of the Town Clerk. The Town Clerk shall maintain, in a separate
volume, all such abatements for six years from the date of the filing.
§ 141-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-8
1:101

ARTICLE II
Ambulance Service Fee
[Adopted as Ch. 6, § 6-200, of the Codified Ordinances]
§ 141-9. Fee imposed.
A fee, to be determined by the Mayor, shall be charged for each person
transported in the Town ambulance.
§ 141-10. Purpose; annual review.
Said fee shall result in the ambulance service being self-supporting and
shall be reviewed on an annual basis prior to the beginning of each fiscal
year by the Mayor.
§ 141-11. Reserve fund.
Said fees shall be sufficient to establish and maintain a reserve fund, and
the amount of said funds shall be determined by the Mayor.
§ 141-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-11
1:103
Chapter 146
FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk dealers — See Ch. 168.
§ 146-1. Discharge in public places prohibited; exceptions.
No person shall discharge any gun, pistol, firearm, air pipe, blowpipe, air
gun, spring gun, bow gun or crossbow in any of the streets, highways or
parks in the Town, provided that this section shall not apply to the use of
such weapons in the lawful defense of the person, family or property of
anyone or in the performance of any duty required by law, or ceremonial
salutes. The firing of a salute of cannon or artillery may be allowed by
permission of the Town Council with the consent of the Mayor.
§ 146-2. Discharge near dwellings or other buildings; exceptions.
No person shall discharge any gun, pistol, firearm, air pipe, blowpipe, air
gun, spring gun, bow gun or crossbow within 1,000 feet of a dwelling
or other building in use, except with the consent of the owner or legal
occupant thereof, provided that this section shall not apply to the use of
such weapons in the lawful defense of the person, family or property of
anyone or in the performance of any duty required by law, or ceremonial
salutes. The firing of a salute of cannon or artillery may be allowed by
permission of the Town Council with the consent of the Mayor.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a property that is appropriately zoned for
such use and for which a certificate of occupancy has been issued by
the Building Commissioner is not subject to this prohibition to the extent
the property is being appropriately used pursuant to the certificate of
occupancy.
§ 146-3. Steel-pointed darts or missiles.
No steel-pointed darts or -pointed missiles shall be sold at retail within the
limits of the Town to any persons less than 16 years of age.
§ 146-4. Steel knives, machetes or swords.
No steel knives, machetes or swords with a blade length of six inches or
more shall be sold at retail within the limits of the Town to any person less
than 16 years of age.
§ 141-11 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 146-5
1:104
§ 146-5. Projectile restrictions.
No person shall project, by means of any air pipe, blowpipe, air gun, spring
gun, bow gun or crossbow, any object whatever in or into any public street,
highway, park, avenue or place within the Town.
§ 146-6. License required for sale of inoperable firearms,
ammunition and explosive devices.
No person shall sell or expose for sale within the limits of the Town firearms,
ammunition or explosive devices which have been rendered inoperable,
until first obtaining a license to do so issued by the Chief of Police or his/her
designee.
§ 146-7. Violations and penalties.
The penalties for violation of this chapter shall be $50 for each offense and/
or confiscation of said items.
Chapter 150
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 122.
Municipal charges lien — See Ch. 141, Art. I.
Nuisances — See Ch. 183.
§ 146-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-7
1:105

ARTICLE I
Fire Prevention
[Adopted as Ch. 7, § 7-1000, of the Codified Ordinances]
§ 150-1. Detectors required in certain occupancies.
Every building or structure containing six or more dwelling units which is
not regulated by MGL c. 148, §§ 26A and 26B, shall, within six months of
the date this article is approved, be equipped with an automatic smoke or
heat detector in each dwelling unit and each hallway floor and basement.
Approved battery-powered smoke detectors shall be allowed in the dwelling
units of such buildings.
§ 150-2. Detectors in hallways and basements.
Detectors used in the hallways and basements of such buildings shall be
a series of interconnected, approved, electrically powered smoke detectors
with an AC primary source of power installed in accordance with the design
approved pursuant to 527 CMR 24:04.35
§ 150-3. Enforcement.
The head of the Fire Department shall enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 150-4. Appeals.
Whoever is aggrieved by the head of the Fire Department's interpretation,
order, requirement, direction or failure to act under the provisions of this
article may, within 45 days after the service of notice thereof, appeal from
such interpretation, order, requirement, direction or failure to act to the
Board of Appeals as provided in the State Building Code and MGL c. 23B,
§ 23.36
§ 150-5. Violations and penalties.
Any owner of a building who, within six months after having received an
order to comply with this article, fails to comply with the requirement of
such order shall be punished by a fine of $200. The imposition of a fine
shall not restrict the ability to impose noncriminal dispositions as provided
in these ordinances.
35.Editor's Note: See now 527 CMR 1.00, the Massachusetts Comprehensive Fire Safety Code.
36.Editor's Note: MGL c. 23B, § 23, was repealed by L. 1984, c. 348. See now MGL c. 143,
§ 100, Building code appeals board.
§ 150-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-5
1:107

ARTICLE II
Key Boxes
[Adopted 5-17-2004 by Ord. No. 118 (Ch. 7, § 7-1001, of the Codified
Ordinances)]
§ 150-6. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as "Fire Key Boxes."
§ 150-7. Authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority of Article 89 of the
Amendments to the Constitution of the Commonwealth, the West
Springfield Home Rule Charter, MGL c. 43B and any other relevant statutes.
§ 150-8. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide the ability for immediate access to
certain commercial and industrial buildings by the Fire Department in the
event of an emergency.
§ 150-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEM — A system of automatic sprinklers
in compliance with the provisions of the State Building Code and the
provisions of 780 CMR 918.5.37
BUILDING — Any structure containing 7,500 or more of gross space square
feet in floor area for commercial or industrial purposes.
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM — A fire protection signaling system that complies
with the requirements of 780 CMR 917.0 through 917.4, inclusive.38
KEY BOX — A metal box, either surface mounted or recessed mounted,
located on the exterior of the building accessible by the Fire Department
and approved in writing by the Fire Chief.
OWNER — The person or entity listed in the office of the Board of Assessors
as the record owner, or the actual owner if different, of the premises upon
which the building is located.
SUBSTANTIALLY RENOVATED — Any alteration to a building the costs
of which are estimated on the permit application filed with the Building
Commissioner to be $25,000 or more.
VACANT OR UNUSED — Any building that has been unoccupied, as
determined by the Building Commissioner, for a period of 60 days.
37.Editor's Note: See now the Ninth Edition of the Massachusetts State Building Code.
38.Editor's Note: See now the Ninth Edition of the Massachusetts State Building Code.
§ 150-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-9
1:109
Insignificant use during said period shall not be sufficient to overcome the
determination by the Commissioner.
§ 150-10. Installation, access and contents.
§ 150-11. Violations and penalties.
Installation requirements.
The owner of a commercial or industrial building that contains
either an automatic sprinkler system or a fire alarm system, for
which a building permit is issued after the effective date of this
article, shall install a key box in said building.
(1)
The owner of a building that contains either an automatic sprinkler
system or a fire alarm system and is substantially renovated after
the effective date of this article shall install a key box on said
building as part of said renovations.
(2)
The owner of a vacant or unused building on or after the effective
date of this article shall be required to install a key box on said
building within 60 days of said date.
(3)
A.
The owner shall provide the approved means of access to the key box
to the Fire Chief or his designee.
B.
The key box shall contain keys that provide access to all common areas
of the building.
C.
A. The criminal penalty for each violation of this article shall be $300.
A noncriminal enforcement procedure may be utilized pursuant to the
provisions of MGL c. 40, § 21D and Chapter 1, Article II, of the Town
Code as an alternative to criminal enforcement.
B.
The fine for a noncriminal violation shall be $100 for each offense. Each
day shall constitute a separate violation; provided, however, that no
separate ticket need be given after the initial ticket for a continuous
violation.
C.
D. The enforcing authority shall be the Fire Department.
Any penalties imposed under this article that are not paid when due
shall become a municipal charge and shall be recorded as such against
the property in question pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 141,
Fees and Charges, Article I, of the Town Code.
E.
The owner may delegate, by written agreement or contract, the duty
imposed by this article; however, the owner shall remain liable for any
violations by such designee.
F.
§ 150-9 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 150-12
1:110
§ 150-12. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article is for
any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court
of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this article.
§ 150-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-12
1:111

ARTICLE III
Fireworks and Bonfires
[Adopted as Ch. 7, § 7-1100, of the Codified Ordinances]
§ 150-13. Permit required.
No person shall set fire to any rocket, cracker, squib, serpent or other
firework or make any bonfire in any street, lane, highway or park in the
Town without a permit from the Fire Chief.
§ 150-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-13
1:113
Chapter 168
JUNK DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 175.
Solid waste — See Ch. 213.
Tag sales — See Ch. 225.
§ 168-1. License required.
No persons or other entities shall be dealers in or keepers of shops for
the purchase, sale or barter of junk, old metals or secondhand articles or
go about collecting same in this Town unless they are duly licensed by the
License Commission or designee pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 140
of the General Laws; this shall include pawn shops, secondhand stores,
jewelry stores, and any other establishment that receives secondhand goods
from individuals in exchange for money, trade, or store credit or any
combination thereof. For purposes of this chapter, the holder of any such
license shall be referred to as a "junk dealer."
§ 168-2. Restrictions.
The License Commission may restrict the types of goods in which a junk
dealer may trade (e.g., a jewelry store may have its junk dealer license
restricted to jewelry, precious metals or related items, which would
preclude that junk dealer from trading in electronics, tools or musical
instruments, etc.). An unrestricted junk dealer license shall constitute a
pawnbroker's license.
§ 168-3. Inspections.
Junk dealer shops and all articles of merchandise therein and any place,
vehicle or receptacle used for the collecting or keeping of the articles by a
junk dealer may be examined at all times by the License Commission, the
Police Chief or their designee.
§ 168-4. Background check.
Any applicant for a junk dealer's license shall submit to a criminal offender
record inquiry ("CORI") as part of the application process. Licenses may be
denied or revoked if the results of the CORI are found to be unsatisfactory
in the discretion of the License Commission.
§ 168-5. Records.
Every junk dealer shall maintain a written or electronic record system. At
the time of the purchase of any article, the junk dealer shall record in said
system: a description of the article, the name, age and residence of the
§ 150-13 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 168-5
1:114
person from whom such purchase was made and the date and time thereof.
Such records shall at all times be open to the inspection of the License
Commission, the Police Chief or their designee.
§ 168-6. Purchases from minors prohibited.
No junk dealer shall, directly or indirectly, purchase or receive, by way of
barter or exchange, any of the articles referred to in these sections from a
minor, knowing or having reason to believe them to be such.
§ 168-7. Purchase of items with altered identifying marks
prohibited.
§ 168-8. Required retention period.
No article purchased or received by a junk dealer shall be sold until at least
30 days from the date of its purchase or receipt has elapsed. This restriction
may be modified or waived at the discretion of the License Commission to
accommodate certain business practices.
§ 168-9. Revocation of license.
Violations of this chapter shall be grounds for revocation of the license
hereunder. Junk dealers shall have no property right in any license issued
under this chapter and such license may be revoked at the discretion of the
License Commission.
Chapter 175
LICENSES AND PERMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal charges lien — See Ch. 141, Art. I.
No junk dealer shall purchase or take in pawn any item if it appears that
such item has had any serial numbers or identifying marks removed or
apparently removed.
A.
For the purpose of this section, "identifying marks" shall include but not
be limited to serial numbers, engravings, initials or similar inscriptions
on rings, watches or other jewelry or similar inscriptions on other
items.
B.
§ 168-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-9
1:115

ARTICLE I
Revocation or Denial for Nonpayment of Taxes and Fees
[Adopted as Ch. 10, § 10-100, of the Codified Ordinances]
§ 175-1. Annual list of delinquent payments.
The Tax Collector shall annually furnish to each licensing or permit-granting
authority a list of any person, corporation or business enterprise that has
neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments
or other municipal charges or obligations for 12 months or more and that
such person has not filed for an abatement of tax or has a pending petition
before the appellate tax board. Said list shall include the address of any
parcel of land for which taxes are owed by said person, corporation or
business entity.
§ 175-2. Authority to deny, revoke or suspend.
The licensing or permit-granting authority may deny, revoke or suspend
any license or permit, including renewals and transfers, of any party whose
name appears on said list furnished by the Tax Collector.
§ 175-3. Denial based on property address.
The licensing or permit-granting authority may deny, revoke or suspend any
license or permit, including renewals and transfers, involving a property
address that appears on said list furnished by the Tax Collector.
§ 175-4. Notice and hearing.
Provided, however, that written notice is to be given to the party (licensee)
and the Tax Collector, and the party (licensee) is given a hearing to be held
not earlier than 14 days after said notice.
§ 175-5. Certificate of payment; fee.
Any license or permit denied, suspended or revoked shall not be issued
or renewed until the licensing or permit-granting authority receives a
certificate issued by the Tax Collector that the party (licensee) or the
property, as the case may be, is in good standing with respect to any and
all local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges,
payable to the Town as the date of issuance of said certificate. The fee for
said certificate shall be $25.
§ 175-6. Payment agreements.
Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement,
thereby allowing the licensing authority to issue a certificate indicating
said limitations to the license or permit, and the validity of said license
shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory compliance with said agreement.
Failure to comply with said agreement shall be grounds for the suspension
§ 175-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-6
1:117
or revocation of said license or permit; provided, however, that the holder
be given notice and a hearing as required by applicable provision of law.
§ 175-7. Waiver of revocation, suspension or denial.
The License Commission may waive such denial, suspension or revocation if
it finds there is no direct or indirect business interest by the property owner,
its officers or stockholders, if any, or members of the property owner's
immediate family, as defined in MGL c. 268A, § 1, in the business conducted
in or on said property.
§ 175-8. Exempted licenses and permits.
This article shall not apply to the following licenses and permits:
A. Open burning (MGL c. 48, § 13).
B. Bicycle permits (MGL c. 85, § 11A39).
C. Sales of articles for charitable purposes (MGL c. 101, § 33).
D. Children's work permits (MGL c. 149, § 69).
Clubs, associations dispensing food or beverage licenses (MGL c. 140,
§ 21E).
E.
F. Dog licenses (MGL c. 140, § 137).
G. Fishing, hunting or trapping license (MGL c. 131, § 12).
H. Marriage licenses (MGL c. 207, § 28).
I. Theatrical events, public exhibition permits (MGL c. 140, § 181).
39.Editor's Note: MGL c. 85, § 11A was repealed by L. 2008, c. 525, effective 4-15-2009.
§ 175-6 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 175-8
1:118
ARTICLE II
Local Licenses
[Adopted as Ch. 10, § 10-205, of the Codified Ordinances]
§ 175-9. Licenses required; annual renewal.
Any business, trade or occupation that is not required to have a state or
federal license to operate its business may be required to obtain an annual
local license in order to operate its business in the Town of West Springfield.
Licenses shall be subject to renewal annually on January 1.
§ 175-10. Application for license; site plan required.
Any business, trade and occupation required to obtain such local license
must submit an application for a license to the West Springfield Board
of License Commissioners. Said application shall contain a copy of a site
plan for said business, trade or occupation sought to be licensed that has
been approved by the Planning Board in accordance with its rules and
regulations; provided that any business, trade or occupation actively in
operation at the time this article becomes applicable to it shall not be
required to obtain site plan approval for the then-existing business, trade or
occupation. This exemption shall not apply to any substantial expansion or
alteration of said business nor to any relocation of the same.
§ 175-11. Compliance with local laws required.
No license, whether new, renewal or transfer, shall be issued if the premises
sought to be licensed are in violation of the zoning ordinance of the Town,40
the general ordinances of the Town and any order or rule and regulation of
any municipal department.
§ 175-12. Rules and regulations.
The Board of License Commissioners may adopt such rules and regulations
for any license issued or renewed by it as it deems appropriate.
§ 175-13. Modification, suspension or revocation; notice and
hearing.
The violation of any law, ordinance, order or rule and regulation by the
holder of any license or its manager shall be sufficient cause for the
modification, suspension or revocation of the license. The license holder
shall be given at least 10 calendar days' notice of a hearing to be held to
consider such violations. If notice of the hearing is mailed, then 13 calendar
days' notice shall be required.
40.Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Zoning.
§ 175-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-14
1:119
§ 175-14. Property rights.
No license holder shall have any property interest in any license issued
under the authority of this article.
§ 175-15. Proof of property ownership or lease.
Any applicant for a new license to be issued or a renewal or transfer of
an existing license shall file with the application its deed to the site to be
licensed or its lease or rental agreement. No license shall be issued for a
period exceeding the lease or rental agreement.
§ 175-16. Fee; public hearing exceptions.
The fee for the issuance of a license, renewal or transfer of a license shall
be $50. No public hearing shall be required for the issuance of any license,
renewal or transfer for businesses, trades or occupations listed in § 175-17.
§ 175-17. Businesses required to be licensed.
The following businesses, trades or occupations shall be required to obtain
local licenses: rental or leasing of motor vehicles and trailers (including
automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, scooters, boats, household trailers,
camping trailers). [NOTE: Lease/Sale agreements for new vehicles by
businesses licensed under MGL c. 140, § 59(a) are exempt from the
requirements of this article.]
§ 175-18. When effective.
This article shall become effective upon its adoption for all new businesses,
trades or occupations or transfer of an existing business to a new location
or transfer of the ownership of the business, trade or occupation subject
to this article; provided, however, that businesses, trades, or occupations
existing on the effective date of this article shall have 90 days to submit an
application for their current location.
§ 175-19. Number of vehicles to be registered.
Any rental or leasing business licensed hereunder shall register in West
Springfield not less than 50 motor vehicles it has available for lease or
rental or all such vehicles owned by it, whichever is less.
§ 175-20. Severability.
If any section or portion of this article is declared invalid, that section
or portion shall be stricken and the remaining portion and sections shall
remain in full force and effect.
§ 175-14 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 175-20
1:120
Chapter 183
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 105.
Curfew — See Ch. 128.
Drugs and drug products — See Ch. 134.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 192.
§ 183-1. Purpose and intent.
In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the
Town of West Springfield, this chapter shall permit the Town to impose
liability on owners, rental property managers and other responsible persons
for the nuisances and harm caused by properties where unlawful or
disorderly behavior occurs on a regular basis. Specifically, it is the declared
public policy of the Town of West Springfield to utilize this chapter to
discourage and control unlawful or disorderly behavior as discussed herein
and to limit the undesirable impact of such behavior upon members of the
general public and to appropriately assign financial liability for enforcement
action to the owners of the property where such activities occur in a
repeated fashion.
§ 183-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISORDERLY INCIDENTS — Include but are not limited to loud music;
boisterous parties; sounds emanating from within the structure which are
audible outside the building; loud noise; disorderly conduct; fights within
the building or in its vicinity involving tenants of the building or their
invitees (excluding incidents involving domestic violence); tenants or
invitees of tenants being intoxicated on public ways in the vicinity of the
building; the arrest and conviction of tenants or their invitees for activities
which constitute either a crime or civil infraction under either state or local
law; other similar activities in the building or outside the building itself; or
repeated violations of applicable, federal, state or local laws, including but
not limited to the ordinances of the Town of West Springfield.
DISORDERLY RESIDENCE — Any building, or part thereof, which the Town
has identified as a disorderly residence after having responded to multiple
calls for service to the property in response to disorderly incidents, as
defined by this section, which are created by the owner, tenants, or owner's
or tenants' cohabitants, guests or invitees and which would have a tendency
to unreasonably disturb the community, the neighborhood, or any ordinary
individual in the vicinity of said building.
§ 175-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-2
1:121
RESIDENCE — A single unit providing complete living facilities for one
or more persons or any dwelling unit, multifamily dwelling unit, family
apartment, boardinghouse, condominium, rooming house, rooming unit,
or leased units in a manufactured housing park (hereinafter jointly and
severally "residence").
§ 183-3. Investigation and determination procedures.
Upon being dispatched or caused to respond to a disorderly incident
at a residence, the Police Department personnel shall investigate the
validity of the complaint. Upon finding a valid complaint of any
disorderly incident, the Police Department shall make a record of the
disorderly incident.
A.
After three valid complaints in any twelve-month period relating to a
residence, the Police Chief, Mayor, or their designee(s) (hereinafter
referred to as the "Town") shall notify the property owner(s) and the
involved tenant(s), if any, of the ongoing issues at the property in
writing pursuant to § 183-4. The Town shall require the owner(s) or
his/her duly authorized representative to meet with representatives
of the Town, including the Police Department and the Mayor or their
designee(s), within 10 business days from the date of the written
notification (or such other time as is agreed upon by all parties) to
identify ways in which the identified issues will be eliminated. At the
time of said meeting, the Town may request documentation, including,
but not limited to: a copy of the names of all tenants or other persons
authorized to reside or presently residing in the building and the units
they occupy; and/or management contracts with any building
supervisor or other person responsible for the orderly operation of
the building. At the meeting, the owner(s) or his/her duly authorized
representative shall agree to take effective measures to address the
identified issues; said measures shall be memorialized in a written
agreement at the conclusion of the meeting with the Town. The
measures memorialized in the agreement shall be implemented within
one week of said meeting unless another date is agreed upon by the
Mayor or his or her designee in writing.
B.
If the owner(s) fails or refuses to meet with Town officials pursuant to
Subsection B; fails or refuses to agree to take effective measures to
address the disorderly residence; takes ineffective measures to address
the disorderly residence as determined by the Town; fails or refuses
to implement the agreement reached with the Town to address the
disorderly residence; or if the Police Department is called to the
residence within a six-month period after the building owner meets
with the Town, the Town shall send notice in writing pursuant to
§ 183-4 to the property owner and the involved tenant(s), if any, that
the property has been recommended for a classification as a "disorderly
residence." The notice shall include a date, time and place for a hearing
to be held within 10 business days from the date of the written
notification (or such other time as is agreed upon by all parties).
C.
§ 183-2 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 183-3
1:122
§ 183-4. Notice requirements.
§ 183-5. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
Each valid compliant of a disorderly incident occurring after designation
of the property as a "disorderly residence" shall constitute a violation.
Violations shall be enforceable under the noncriminal disposition
procedures established by MGL c. 40, § 21D, and adopted as set forth
in Chapter 1, Article II, of these ordinances. The noncriminal disposition
penalties for any person violating this chapter shall be $150 for the first
violation; $200 for the second violation and $300 for each subsequent
violation and shall be issued to the assessed owner of the property where
the violation occurred. The noncriminal disposition penalty provision of this
chapter shall take precedence over the penalty provisions of Chapter 25,
§ 25-1, of these ordinances, and shall inure to the Town. The enforcement
duties of this chapter shall be performed by the Town's Police Department.
Any fines not paid when due shall be collected as a "municipal charge lien"
pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 58 and this chapter.41
After a hearing, the Town, at its discretion, may make the decision
to designate the property as a disorderly residence. Factors that may
be considered in deciding whether to designate the residence as a
disorderly residence include but are not limited to the following: the
nature, scope, and seriousness of the disorderly incident(s); whether
the disorderly incident(s) resulted in an arrest; history of criminal
activity taking place at the residence; property owners' and
tenants'/occupants' willingness to cooperate with police. The Town shall
notify, in writing, the property owner and the involved tenant(s), if
any, of the Town's decision to designate the property as a "disorderly
residence."
D.
After the hearing pursuant to Subsection C, the residence may be
officially identified as a disorderly residence, and the property owner
shall be subject to the penalties addressed in § 183-5.
E.
Notice content. Notice required by this chapter shall be in writing,
include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification, and
include a statement of the reason or reasons why the notice is being
issued. Such notice shall be deemed sufficient for all legal purposes.
A.
Method of service. Notice required by this chapter shall be deemed
to be properly served if a copy thereof is delivered to the owner
personally; or sent by certified or registered mail addressed to the
owner at the last known address with return receipt requested. If the
certified or registered letter is returned showing that the letter was
not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in
or about the structure affected by such notice. Service of such notice
in the foregoing manner upon the owner's agent or upon the person
responsible for the structure shall constitute service of notice upon the
owner.
B.
§ 183-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-6
1:123
§ 183-6. Additional remedies.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the Police Department from filing an
application for criminal complaint against a party for keeping a noisy or
disorderly house pursuant to MGL c. 272, § 53(b). In addition, the Town may
file a legal action against the owner seeking court costs, response charges,
and all damages and remedies to which it is entitled pursuant to state and
local laws.
§ 183-7. Stay in event of eviction.
In the event the property owner has commenced the process of eviction
against the tenant(s) responsible for the incidents at the property, and
demonstrates that s/he has proceeded diligently and in good faith, then
the application of this chapter shall be stayed until the eviction process is
concluded.
Chapter 192
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public consumption of alcoholic
beverages — See Ch. 105, Art. I.
Animals — See Ch. 110.
Curfew — See Ch. 128.
Public consumption of drugs — See Ch. 134,
Art. I.
Firearms and weapons — See Ch. 146.
Nuisances — See Ch. 183.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 218.
§ 192-1. Disorderly behavior; profane language; loitering.
No person shall behave in a disorderly manner or use any indecent, profane
language in any street or public place in the Town or near any dwelling
house or other buildings therein or in any licensed place of public
amusement, or be or remain upon any sidewalk or upon any doorstep,
portico or other projection from any building or be on any property other
than his own, without a right to be there, to the annoyance or disturbance
of any person.
§ 192-2. Nude bathing.
No person shall swim or bathe in any pond, stream or river in the Town in a
state of nudity.
41.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 141, Fees and Charges, Art. I.
§ 183-6 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 192-3
1:124
§ 192-3. Obstruction of streets and sidewalks by groups of people.
Three or more persons shall not stand together or near each other on
any street, footwalk or sidewalk in the Town so as to obstruct the free
passage of pedestrians, and any person or persons so standing shall move
on immediately after a request to do so made by any police officer, constable
or watchman.
§ 192-4. Playing in streets.
No person shall, within the limits of any street, highway or park in the Town,
play at any game of ball or fly any kite or balloon or engage in any other
game, amusement or exercise interfering with free, safe and convenient use
of such street, highway or park by any person using, traveling or passing
along the same, except at such times and places as the Mayor or designee
may prescribe.
§ 192-5. Smoking in buses.
No person shall smoke or carry a lighted pipe, cigar or cigarette on a bus
or motor vehicle operated for the carriage of passengers for hire in such
a manner as to afford a means of transportation similar to that afforded
by a street railway company, except a chartered or private bus or motor
vehicle or on that part of a bus where smoking is permitted by the company
operating the same.
§ 192-6. Tobacco product use; violations and penalties.
Tobacco product use is prohibited within school buildings, school facilities,
on school grounds and on school buses by any individual, including school
personnel. Any individual violating this section shall be punished by a fine
of $25 for the first offense; $100 for the second offense; and $300 for the
third and all subsequent offenses.
§ 192-7. Flammable substances in sewers.
No person shall make or maintain any connection with any public sewer
or appurtenance thereof whereby there may be conveyed into the same,
or cause to enter or flow into any public sewer or appurtenance thereof,
any hot, corrosive, suffocating, flammable or explosive liquid, gas, vapor,
substance or material of any kind, provided that the provisions of this
section shall not apply to water from ordinary hot-water boilers in
residences.
§ 192-8. Activities involving use of municipal property.
Activities involving the use of municipal property for the purposes set forth
in Subsections A through D shall be permitted only after an application,
on a form prepared by the License Commission, has been reviewed by the
License Commission and a permit issued:
§ 192-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-8
1:125
§ 192-9. Carrying contents of cesspools through streets.
No person or persons shall at any time carry into or through any public
street of the Town any part of the contents of any privy vaults or cesspools
in any cart, wagon or other vehicle or utensil which shall not be closely
covered, watertight and kept clean upon the outer surface.
Chapter 204
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal charges liens — See Ch. 141, Art. I. Water — See Ch. 257.
Musical performances in public places; license required. No person
shall sing, play or perform on any musical instrument in any street
or public place for which he/she or others solicit or receive any
compensation or contribution from bystanders or the public without
first having obtained a license from the License Commission.
A.
Speeches and exhibitions; license required. No person shall make or
give any speech, address, show or exhibition in any street or public
place for which he/she or others solicit or receive any compensation or
contribution therefor from bystanders or the public without first having
obtained a license from the License Commission.
B.
Posting of notices and advertising matter; permit required. No person,
unless required by law so to do, shall, without a permit from the
Director of Public Works, post or affix in any manner, paint, print
or write, or cause to be painted, printed or written, any notice,
advertisement, bill, picture, drawing or writing upon any curbstone,
sidewalk, tree, pole, post or hydrant, in any street, or upon any walk or
fence or other public place.
C.
Parades; permit required. No person shall take part in or sponsor any
parade, pageant or procession on any public way or in any other public
place in the Town unless a permit has been granted for such parade,
pageant or procession by the Chief of Police.
D.
§ 192-8 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 192-9
1:126
ARTICLE I
Discharges to Municipal Storm Drains
[Adopted 4-19-2005 by Ord. No. 121 (Ch. 7, § 7-1600, of the Codified
Ordinances)]
§ 204-1. Purpose, findings and intent.
§ 204-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY — The Department of Public
Works of the Town of West Springfield (hereinafter the "Department"), its
employees or agents designated to enforce this article.
The purpose and intent of this article is to ensure the health, safety
and general welfare of the citizens of the Town of West Springfield and
to protect and enhance the water quality of watercourses and water
bodies within the Town of West Springfield, in a manner consistent with
the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq), by reducing
pollutants in stormwater discharges to the maximum extent practicable
and by prohibiting non-stormwater discharges to the storm drain
system.
A.
Increased and contaminated stormwater runoff is a major cause of
impairment of water quality and flow in lakes, ponds, streams, rivers,
wetlands and groundwater; contamination of drinking water supplies,
alteration or destruction of aquatic and wildlife habitat; and flooding.
B.
Regulation of illicit connections and discharges to the municipal storm
drain system is necessary for the protection of the Town's water bodies
and groundwater, and to safeguard the public health, safety, welfare
and the environment.
C.
The objectives of this article are:
To prevent pollutants from entering the Town's municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4);
(1)
To prohibit illicit connections and unauthorized discharges to the
MS4;
(2)
(3) To require the removal of all such illicit connections;
To comply with state and federal statutes and regulations relating
to stormwater discharges; and
(4)
To establish the legal authority to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this article through inspection, monitoring, and
enforcement.
(5)
D.
§ 204-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-2
1:127
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et
seq.) as hereinafter amended.
DISCHARGE OF POLLUTANTS — The addition from any source of any
pollutant or combination of pollutants into the municipal storm drain system
or into the waters of the United States or commonwealth from any source.
EXPENSES OF ENFORCEMENT OR CORRECTION (EEC) — All costs and
expenses, including all penalties imposed by this article, incurred or
imposed by the Town, in enforcing this article, or for violations thereof,
including but not limited to attorney fees, consultant and expert witness
fees.
GROUNDWATER — Water beneath the surface of the ground.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — A surface or subsurface drain or conveyance
which allows an illicit discharge into the municipal storm drain system,
including without limitation sewage, process wastewater, or wash water and
any connections from indoor drains, sinks, or toilets, regardless of whether
said connection was previously allowed, permitted, or approved before the
effective date of this article.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — A direct or indirect discharge to the municipal
storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except as
exempted in § 204-8. The term does not include a discharge in compliance
with an NPDES stormwater discharge permit or a surface water discharge
permit, or resulting from fire-fighting activities exempted pursuant to
§ 204-8 of this article.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any material or structure on or above the
ground that prevents water infiltrating the underlying soil. Impervious
surface includes without limitation roads, paved parking lots, and rooftops.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM OR MUNICIPAL STORM
DRAIN SYSTEM (MS4) — The system of conveyances designed or used
for collecting or conveying stormwater, including any road with a drainage
system, street, gutter, curb, inlet, piped storm drain, pumping facility,
retention or detention basin, natural or man-made or altered drainage
channel, reservoir, and other drainage structure that together comprise the
storm drainage system owned or operated by the Town of West Springfield.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by United States
Environmental Protection Agency or jointly with the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the
United States.
NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE — Discharge to the municipal storm
drain system not composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, firm, company, trust,
corporation, agency, authority, department or political subdivision of the
commonwealth or the federal government, to the extent permitted by law,
and any officer, employee, or agent of such person.
§ 204-2 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 204-2
1:128
POLLUTANT — Any element or property of sewage, agricultural, industrial
or commercial waste, runoff, leachate, effluent, or other matter, whether
originating at a point or nonpoint source, that is or may reasonably be
expected to be introduced into the MS4 or waters of the commonwealth.
Pollutants shall include without limitation:
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any material, intermediate product, finished product, or waste
product.
RECHARGE — The process by which groundwater is replenished by
precipitation through the percolation of runoff and surface water through
the soil.
STORMWATER — Stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface water
runoff and drainage.
SURFACE WATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) pursuant to 314 CMR 3.00
that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts.
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS MATERIAL OR WASTE — Any material which,
because of its quantity, concentration, chemical, corrosive, flammable,
reactive, toxic, infectious or radioactive characteristics, either separately
or in combination with any substance or substances, constitutes a present
or potential threat to human health, safety, welfare, or to the environment.
Toxic or hazardous materials include any synthetic organic chemical,
petroleum product, heavy metal, radioactive or infectious waste, acid and
A. Paints, varnishes, and solvents;
B. Oil and other automotive fluids;
C. Nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
Refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned
objects;
D.
E. Pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers;
Hazardous materials and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and
pathogens;
F.
G. Dissolved and particulate metals;
H. Animal wastes;
I. Rock, sand, salt, soils;
J. Construction wastes and residues; and
K. Noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
§ 204-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-2
1:129
alkali, and any substance defined as toxic or hazardous under MGL c. 21C
and c. 21E, and the regulations at 310 CMR 30.000 and 310 CMR 40.0000.
VIOLATOR — A person, as defined above, who is in violation of this article.
WASTEWATER — Any sanitary waste, sludge, or septic tank or cesspool
overflow, and water that, during manufacturing, cleaning or processing,
comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any
raw material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product or waste
product.
WATERCOURSE — A natural or man-made channel through which water
flows, or a stream of water including, but not limited to, a river, brook, or
underground stream.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — All waters within the jurisdiction
of the commonwealth, including, without limitation, rivers, streams, lakes,
ponds, springs, impoundments, estuaries, wetlands, coastal waters, and
groundwater.
§ 204-3. Applicability.
This article shall apply to flows entering the MS4.
§ 204-4. Authority.
This article is adopted under the authority granted by the Home Rule
Amendment of the Massachusetts Constitution and the Home Rule
Procedures Act, and pursuant to the regulations of the Federal Clean Water
Act found at 40 CFR 122.34 in effect at the time of the adoption of this
article, a copy of which is on file in the West Springfield Town Council office.
§ 204-5. Responsibility for administration and enforcement.
The Department shall administer, implement and enforce this article. Any
powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Department may be
delegated in writing by the Department to its employees or agents.
§ 204-6. Rules and regulations.
The Department may promulgate rules and regulations to effectuate the
purposes of this article and establish the procedures for inspecting and
monitoring property in Town for compliance. Failure by the Department
to promulgate such rules and regulations shall not have the effect of
suspending or invalidating this article.
§ 204-7. Prohibited activities.
Illicit discharges. No person shall dump, discharge, cause or allow to
be discharged any pollutant or non-stormwater discharge into the MS4,
into a watercourse, or into the waters of the commonwealth.
A.
§ 204-2 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 204-7
1:130
§ 204-8. Exemptions.
Illicit connections. No person shall construct, use, allow, maintain or
continue any illicit connection to the MS4, regardless of whether the
connection was permissible under applicable law, regulation or custom
at the time of connection; provided that any person who has an illicit
connection validly permitted prior to the effective date of this article
shall have 60 days to remove said connection or obtain a permit for said
connection.
B.
Obstruction of MS4. No person shall obstruct or interfere with the
normal flow of stormwater into or out of the MS4 without prior written
approval from the Department.
C.
A. Discharge or flow resulting from fire-fighting activities.
The following non-stormwater discharges or flows are exempt from
the prohibition of non-stormwater, provided that the source is not a
significant contributor of a pollutant to the MS4:
(1) Water line flushing;
(2) Flow from potable water sources;
(3) Springs;
(4) Natural flow from riparian habitats and wetlands;
(5) Diverted stream flow;
(6) Rising groundwater;
Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration as defined in 40 CFR
35.2005(20), or uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
(7)
Water from exterior foundation drains, footing drains (not including
active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, or
air conditioning condensation;
(8)
(9) Discharge from landscape irrigation or lawn watering;
Water from individual residential car washing or water from car
washing conducted by a nonprofit or charitable organization as
part of a fund-raising activity on behalf of said organization;
(10)
Discharge from dechlorinated swimming pool water (less than one
ppm chlorine), provided the water is allowed to stand for one week
prior to draining and the pool is drained in such a way as not to
cause a nuisance;
(11)
(12)Discharge from street sweeping;
Dye testing, provided verbal notification is given to the Department
prior to the time of the test;
(13)
B.
§ 204-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-8
1:131
§ 204-9. Suspension of MS4 access.
§ 204-10. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of local, state or federal law, as soon
as a person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for
emergency response for a facility or operation, has information of or
suspects a release of materials at that facility or operation resulting in
or which may result in discharge of pollutants to the MS4 or waters of
the commonwealth, the person shall take all necessary steps to ensure
containment and cleanup of the release. In the event of a release of oil
or hazardous materials, the person shall immediately notify the municipal
Fire and Police Departments and the Department. In the event of a release
Non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or a
surface water discharge permit, waiver, or waste discharge order
administered under the authority of the United States
Environmental Protection Agency or the Department of
Environmental Protection, provided that the discharge is in full
compliance with the requirements of the permit, waiver, or order
and applicable laws and regulations; and
(14)
A discharge for which advanced written approval is received from
the Department.
(15)
The Department may suspend or terminate MS4 access to any person
or property without prior written notice when such action is determined
to be reasonably necessary to stop an actual or threatened illegal
discharge that presents, or may present, imminent risk of harm to
the public health, safety, welfare or to the environment. The person
or property owner who has had MS4 access suspended or terminated
may, within 30 days of notice of the action to suspend or terminate,
request a hearing before the Director of the Department of Public
Works appealing the action. Written notice of the suspension or
termination shall be served on the person or the property owner as
soon as practical, but no later than seven days after the suspension or
termination. In the event any person fails to comply with an emergency
suspension or termination order, the authorized enforcement agency
may take all reasonable steps to prevent or minimize harm to the public
health, safety, welfare or to the environment.
A.
Any person discharging to the MS4 system in violation of this article
may have his/her access to the MS4 suspended or terminated, after
a hearing, if such suspension or termination would abate or reduce a
violation of this article. The Department shall notify the alleged violator
of the hearing regarding the proposed termination or suspension of
MS4 access by written notice, mailed to the violator not less than 10
calendar days prior to the scheduled hearing date. Said notice shall
contain a summary of the reason(s) for the proposed suspension or
termination and the effective date of said suspension or termination.
B.
§ 204-8 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 204-10
1:132
of nonhazardous material, the reporting person shall notify the authorized
enforcement agency no later than the next business day. The reporting
person shall provide to the authorized enforcement agency written
confirmation of all telephone, facsimile or in-person notifications within
three business days thereafter. If the discharge of prohibited materials is
from a commercial or industrial facility, the facility owner or operator shall
retain on-site a written record of the discharge and the actions taken to
prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three
years. Any unpaid EEC, after 30 days, shall be lien on all property in Town
owned by the violator and shall be subject to the municipal charges lien
provisions of the general ordinances.42
§ 204-11. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
The Department, or an authorized agent of the Department, shall
enforce this article, as well as regulations, orders, violation notices, and
enforcement orders, and may pursue all civil and criminal remedies for
such violations.
A.
Civil relief. If a person violates the provisions of this article, or any
regulation, permit, notice, or order issued thereunder, the Department
may seek injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction
restraining the person from activities which would create further
violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or
remediation of the violation. Any unpaid EEC, after 30 days, shall be a
lien on all property in Town owned by the violator, and shall be subject
to collection pursuant to the municipal charges lien provisions of the
general ordinances.43
B.
Orders. The Department, or an authorized agent, may issue a written
order to enforce the provisions of this article, or the regulations
thereunder, which may include:
(1) Elimination of illicit connections or discharges to the MS4;
(2) Performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
That unlawful discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist; and
(3)
(4) Remediation of contamination in connection therewith.
C.
If the enforcing person determines that abatement or remediation of
contamination is required, the order shall set forth a deadline by which
such abatement or remediation must be completed. Said order shall
further advise that, should the violator fail to abate or perform
remediation within the specified deadline, the Town may, at its option,
undertake such work, and EEC shall be charged to the violator,
D.
42.Editor's Note: See Ch. 141, Fees and Charges, Art. I.
43.Editor's Note: See Ch. 141, Fees and Charges, Art. I.
§ 204-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-11
1:133
§ 204-12. Severability.
The provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause of this article or the application
thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid,
Within 30 clays after completing all measures necessary to abate the
violation or to perform remediation, the violator and the property
owner will be notified of the EEC incurred by the Town, including
administrative costs. The violator may file a written protest, objecting
to the amount or basis of costs with the Department within 30 days
of receipt of the notification of the costs incurred. If the amount due
is not received by the expiration of the time in which to file a protest
or within 30 days following a decision of the Department affirming or
reducing the costs, the EEC shall become a special assessment against
the property owner and shall constitute a lien on the owner's property
for the amount of said costs. Interest shall begin to accrue on any
unpaid costs at the statutory rate provided in MGL c. 59, § 57 after the
31st day at which the costs first become due.
E.
Criminal penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this article,
regulation, order or permit issued thereunder shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $1,000. Each day or part hereof that such violation
occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
F.
Noncriminal disposition. As an alternative to criminal prosecution, the
Town may elect, in addition to civil relief, to utilize the noncriminal
disposition procedure set forth in MGL c. 40, § 21D and as outlined in
Chapter 1 Article II, of the General Ordinances of the Town of West
Springfield to enforce this article, and any EEC shall be a lien under
the municipal charges lien provisions of the general ordinances.44 The
use of the noncriminal procedure shall not limit the ability or authority
to seek criminal penalties in addition to any other enforcement method
authorized in this article.
G.
Entry to perform duties under this article. To the extent permitted by
state law and by this article, or if authorized by the owner or other party
in control of the property, the Department or its agents, officers, and
employees may enter upon privately owned property for the purpose
of performing their duties under this article and regulations and may
make or cause to be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as
the Department deems reasonably necessary.
H.
I. Appeals. The decisions or orders of the Department shall be final.
Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this article are not
exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal,
state or local law.
J.
44.Editor's Note: See Ch. 141, Fees and Charges, Art. I.
§ 204-11 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 204-12
1:134
such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this
article.
§ 204-13. Transitional provisions.
Property owners shall have 60 days from the effective date of this article to
comply with its provisions, provided good cause is shown for the failure to
comply with the article during that period.
§ 204-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-13
1:135
Chapter 209
SOIL REMOVAL AND DEPOSIT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 218. Zoning — See Ch. 300.
§ 209-1. Removal and deposit of soil restricted.
No person shall remove soil, loam, sand or gravel from any land in the Town
not in public use, and no person shall deposit on any land in the Town not in
public use soil, loam, sand or gravel, except as provided herein.
§ 209-2. Permit procedure.
The License Commission may grant a permit for the removal or deposit of
soil, loam, sand or gravel, whether for a commercial purpose or otherwise,
from or on any land in the Town not in public use, in the following manner:
Application.
Each petitioner shall file with the License Commission a written
application setting forth a description of the land for which such a
permit is sought.
(1)
Said application shall be accompanied by the original Mylar tracing
of a map or plan drawn by a professional engineer or land surveyor,
which shall show the existing elevations of the land, the proposed
elevations thereof when the removal operations are completed
and such other relevant information as may be required by the
regulations of the License Commission.
(2)
A.
Hearing.
No such permit shall be granted until after the License Commission
has held a public hearing thereon.
(1)
The License Commission shall cause notice of such hearing to be
published at least 14 days prior thereto in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town.
(2)
The License Commission shall also cause notice of such hearing to
be sent by mail, postage prepaid, at least 14 days prior thereto to
the petitioners and to the owners of all property abutting said land
and deemed by the License Commission to be affected thereby, as
they appear on the most recent tax list.
(3)
B.
C. Permit conditions.
§ 204-13 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 209-2
1:136
§ 209-3. Revocation of permit.
The License Commission may, after a public hearing, notice of which shall
be given in the manner provided herein for the granting of permits, revoke
any such permit upon proof of a violation of any of the conditions thereof.
§ 209-4. Exception to permit requirement.
The License Commission may grant during any calendar year one permit
for the removal or deposit of not more than 50 cubic yards of soil, loam,
sand or gravel from or on any land in the Town not in public use without
the plan, notice and hearing herein provided and subject to any appropriate
conditions, and may revoke any such permit upon proof of a violation of any
of the conditions thereof.
§ 209-5. Nonapplicability.
This chapter shall not be construed to apply to any such deposit or removal
incidental to the construction or alteration of any structure or way
concerning which a building permit has been issued and while said permit
is in effect, nor to any such deposit in or around any occupied dwelling.
§ 209-6. Statutory authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 21(17).
Each permit shall be granted subject to the condition that no such
removal shall be authorized below the proposed elevations shown
on said map or plan or below any higher elevations shown on
any amendment thereof, and one copy of said map or plan or any
amendment thereof shall be made a part of said permit. A tolerance
of six inches shall be allowed in all cases.
(1)
The License Commission may grant such a permit subject to any
appropriate conditions, which shall be made a part of said permit.
(2)
No such permit shall be granted to authorize any such removal
which would result in the lowering of the elevation of any land
below the elevation of any street or way within a radius of 300 feet
thereof.
(3)
Each permit shall be granted for a definite period of time to be fixed
by the License Commission, but no such permit shall be granted for
a period of more than three years from the date thereof.
(4)
§ 209-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-6
1:137
Chapter 213
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 192. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 218.
§ 209-6 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 209-6
1:138
ARTICLE I
Recycling
[Adopted 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 138 (Ch. 9, § 9-400, of the Codified
Ordinances)]
§ 213-1. Purpose.
This article is enacted in order to ensure that waste materials are disposed
in an environmentally responsible manner and to assist in compliance with
state-established waste bans; and to assist in the reduction of municipal
waste disposal costs; and to ensure that all occupied structures in the
community are subject to the duty and obligation to recycle.
§ 213-2. Compliance required.
All property owners or occupants (hereinafter "owners") shall dispose of
waste and recyclables in an acceptable manner.
§ 213-3. Separation of materials.
Every owner shall separate trash and recyclables for collection and delivery
to the appropriate recycling facility.
§ 213-4. Rules and regulations.
The Department of Public Works may make such rules and regulations,
subject to the approval of the Mayor, as it deems necessary to properly
administer and enforce the recycling program.
§ 213-5. Violations and penalties.
Penalties for violation of said rules and regulations shall be recoverable
by means of the municipal charges lien in Chapter 141, Article I, of the
Town Code. No penalty shall be imposed for the first three months following
the adoption of the regulations with respect to violations of the recycling
requirement.
§ 213-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-5
1:139

ARTICLE II
Littering
[Adopted as Ch. 9, § 9-800, of the Codified Ordinances]
§ 213-6. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Littering Ordinance."
§ 213-7. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this article is to set standards and regulations for the control
of litter in the Town of West Springfield. The prevention and control of
litter will have a positive and lasting effect upon the Town's environment
and appearance. The goal of this article is the general upkeep of the
community for the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens. Transporting
loose materials, illegal dumping, unlawful disposal, and nuisances shall not
be allowed on any public or private property within the boundaries of the
municipality by any person or persons.
§ 213-8. Applicability.
This article shall apply to and be enforced within the corporate limits of the
city known as the Town of West Springfield.
§ 213-9. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article the following definitions shall apply:
LITTER — All waste materials that are not secured in a receptacle,
including, but not limited to, cigarettes and cigarette filters, trash, garbage,
refuse, disposable packages or containers, construction and demolition
materials, tires, batteries, appliances, furniture, liquid or granular
substances, hazardous materials, machinery, abandoned vehicles, and
abandoned mobile homes. Unsolicited newspapers and/or advertisements
shall be considered litter for purposes of this article if a person upon
whose property an unsolicited newspaper and/or advertisement is placed
has notified the publisher and/or distributor of said newspaper or
advertisement in writing of the owner's desire not to receive said
newspaper or advertisement.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — Those containers which are suitable and safe for
the disposing of litter.
OWNER — Includes any person owning or having title, possession or control
over real property, including, but not limited to, landholders, landlords,
tenants, proprietors, and business operators.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, company, contractor, subcontractor,
developer, cooperative, corporation, firm, landlord, tenant, proprietor,
owner, political subdivision, subdevelopment, state or county agency, trust,
estate, joint venture or any other legal entity or its legal representative,
agent or assigns.
§ 213-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-10
1:141
§ 213-10. Littering prohibited; liability and responsibility for
removal.
§ 213-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person found in violation of any provision of this article shall pay a
penalty in accordance with Chapter 1, Article II, § 1-4, of the Town Code and
MGL c. 270, § 16.
No person shall dump, throw, drop, deposit, discard, place or in any
way dispose of litter, hazardous material or other liquid, granular or
solid waste upon any public or private property in the municipality or
in the waters of the municipality, whether from a vehicle or otherwise,
including, but not limited to, any road, path, park, beach, campground,
forest land, recreational area, trailer park, road, street or alley, except:
When such property is designated by the Town of West Springfield
and/or the Commonwealth of Massachusetts for the disposal of
litter and other solid waste and such person is authorized to use
such property for that purpose; or
(1)
When placing material into an approved litter receptacle in such a
manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried away,
scattered or deposited by the elements upon any part of such
private or public property or waters.
(2)
A.
The responsibility for the removal of litter from property shall be upon
the person responsible for littering the property. However, if the person
responsible for littering the property is unknown or has not been
charged with littering, then the owner of the property shall be
responsible for the removal of litter from such property; and in such
cases, the Town may consider the financial or physical ability of the
property owner to remove said litter, but the burden is on the property
owner to prove same.
B.
Where litter has traveled through forces of nature onto property of
another, the owner of the property of origin of the litter is responsible
for the removal of litter from the property wherever the forces of nature
carry or spread the litter.
C.
The driver of any vehicle shall be held in violation of this article in the
event it cannot be determined which occupant of the vehicle committed
any of the above prohibited acts.
D.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, institution,
organization, contractor or subcontractor to transport any loose
materials by truck, trailer or other motor vehicles within the corporate
limits of the Town unless said material is covered or secured in such a
manner as to prevent litter, leakage or spillage on public and private
property. Lack of adequate covering or securing of material while the
loaded truck, trailer or other motor vehicle is in motion shall constitute
a violation of this article.
E.
§ 213-10 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 213-12
1:142
§ 213-12. Enforcement.
This article may be enforced by the Police Department, Park and Recreation
Department, Building Department and Health Department.
§ 213-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-12
1:143
Chapter 218
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Soil removal and deposit — See Ch. 209.
Solid waste — See Ch. 213.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 249.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
§ 213-12 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 213-12
1:144
ARTICLE I
General Use and Maintenance
[Adopted as Ch. 9, § 9-600, of the Codified Ordinances]
§ 218-1. Fencing of unsafe conditions; repair required.
Whenever any street, lane, alley or sidewalk or other public place in the
Town shall, under any license granted by these ordinances, be dug up,
obstructed, encumbered or otherwise thereby rendered unsafe or
inconvenient for travel, the person so licensed shall put, and at all times
keep up, a suitable railing or fence around the section of the street, lane,
alley or other public place so obstructed, so long as the same shall be
or remain unsafe or inconvenient as aforesaid, and shall be illuminated in
some other proper manner every night from one-half hour after sunset to
one-half hour before sunrise, so long as such railing or fence shall be kept
standing or obstruction remain. The Director of Public Works shall also,
within such reasonable time as the Mayor shall direct, repair such street,
lane or alley, sidewalk or public place to the acceptance of the Director of
Public Works.
§ 218-2. Obstructions prohibited.
No person shall place or cause to be placed in or on any public way or
street or on any sidewalk, footwalk or crosswalk in the Town any article or
substance whatever so as to interfere with the convenient use of the same
by any person traveling thereon.
§ 218-3. Nails, glass and other obstructions to vehicles prohibited.
No person shall put, place or throw, or cause to be put, placed or thrown,
in any street, lane or alley or other public place in the Town, any nails,
tacks, broken glass or other articles or substances which may in any way be
liable to puncture the tire of any vehicle or which may in any way impede or
obstruct the passage of any vehicle over said street, lane, alley or place.
§ 218-4. Draining water into streets prohibited.
No person shall allow any sink water or other impure water to run from any
house, barn or lot occupied by him or under his control into any street or
highway in the Town.
§ 218-5. Gates and doors swinging over streets or sidewalks.
No person shall allow any gate or door belonging to premises owned or
occupied by him/her or under his/her control to swing on or over or into any
street or sidewalk in the Town.
§ 218-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-6
1:145
§ 218-6. Coasting and sliding restricted.
No person shall course, coast or slide upon any sled, board or other
contrivance on any sidewalk, footwalk, street or highway in the Town
without the approval of the Town Council.
§ 218-7. Water from roofs and window washing.
No person shall permit water from the eaves or leader pipes of any building
owned or cared for by him to be discharged or to flow upon any public
street or sidewalk in the Town; and no person, between the hours of 6:30
a.m. and 11:00 p.m., shall wash or allow to be washed any windows or wall
of a building owned or cared for by him in such a manner as to cause the
discharge of water upon any public sidewalk or walk devoted to the public
use.
§ 218-8. Sales by auctioneers.
No auctioneer shall hold a sale upon any sidewalk or way in the Town
so as to obstruct or prevent the free and convenient use of the same by
pedestrians traveling thereon.
§ 218-6 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 218-8
1:146
ARTICLE II
Rubbish and Handbills; Maintenance of Tree Belt
[Adopted as Ch. 7, § 7-1200, of the Codified Ordinances]
§ 218-9. Prohibited deposits.
No person shall put or place or cause to be put or placed in any street, lane
or alley or other public place in the Town any house dirt, ashes, filth, shells
or any other kind of rubbish, or throw any handbills, circulars, pamphlets,
advertisements or other papers.
§ 218-10. Responsibility to maintain tree belt.
The tenant or occupant of any real estate in the Town which abuts on
any public or private way in the Town and, in case there is no tenant or
occupant, the owner of such real estate shall keep that portion of the public
or private way, commonly known as the "tree belt," mowed and free and
clear of all litter, debris, noxious weeds and brush and any other kind of
rubbish and shall maintain the same in a clean and sanitary manner.
§ 218-11. Solid waste collection and storage. [Amended 5-7-2007 by
Ord. No. 137]
No person shall place, or cause to be placed, rubbish, recyclables, yard
waste, bulky items and holiday trees for collection on any tree belt or
driveway apron prior to 3:00 p.m. on the day before collection or later
than 7:00 a.m. on the day of collection.
A.
Reusable rubbish containers, recycling bins and any uncollected items
shall be removed from the tree belt or driveway apron as soon as
possible after collection, but in no case later than 1:00 a.m. of the day
following the collection.
B.
The tree belt shall not be used as a storage area for rubbish. All rubbish
shall be stored in an area so as to be as inconspicuous as possible to the
public view.
C.
§ 218-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-11
1:147

ARTICLE III
Street Furniture
[Adopted 12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 103; amended in its entirety
3-19-2018 (Ch. 7, § 7-1400, of the Codified Ordinances)]
§ 218-12. Definitions.
When used in this article, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following terms shall have the following meanings:
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Public Works Department of the Town
of West Springfield or such person as said Director may from time to time
designate.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Building Commissioner and any local
inspector.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — The certificate of compliance issued by
the Director to the certificate holder in accordance with the provisions of
this article.
CERTIFICATE HOLDER — The holder of a Certificate of Compliance issued
by the Director in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. A
Certificate Holder is responsible for the installation and maintenance of
street furniture encompassed by any Certificate of Compliance issued
pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance and for compliance with all
provisions contained herein.
EXEMPT STREET FURNITURE — Governmental and municipal signs,
traffic control devices and signs, cable, electric and telephone utility poles,
including conduits, transformers, wires, cables and supporting structures,
mailboxes, structures belonging to a regional transit authority created
under MGL c. 161B, municipal trash receptacles, fire hydrants, call boxes
and public safety and all municipal structures.
LICENSING CLERK — The clerk of the License Commission.
OPERATOR — Any natural person or other legal entity, including, but not
limited to, corporations, partnerships, joint ventures and the like, who
either own, operate or are otherwise in control of street furniture.
PUBLIC WAY — Any public highway, private way laid out under authority of
statute, way dedicated to public use, or a way under the control of the Town
or any department thereof.
STREET FURNITURE — Any structure erected or placed in or on a public
way on a temporary or permanent basis.
TREE BELT — That portion of a street right-of-way located between the
paved portion of the street and the outside edge of the right-of-way
containing a sidewalk, if any, and commonly planted with trees, shrubs,
grass, or other vegetation. However, where the area between the paved
portion of the street and the outside edge of street layout is paved or the
like, the first four feet from the outside edge toward the paved street shall
be considered the sidewalk for the purpose of this article.
§ 218-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-13
1:149
§ 218-13. Certificate of compliance.
Requirement. No person shall place, affix, erect, constitute or maintain
street furniture in or on any part of a public way without first obtaining
a certificate of compliance from the Licensing Clerk in accordance with
the provisions of this article.
A.
The certificate of compliance must be renewed annually by application
to the Director.
B.
Issuing authority. The Licensing Clerk shall be the issuing authority and
coordinator of the application process and administration of this article.
C.
Approving authority. The approving authority shall be the Director. The
Director or his/her designee shall review and approve for compliance
with this section entitled "Certificate of compliance," § 218-15,
Placement standards, and § 218-18, Installation and maintenance.
D.
Application process. Applicants must complete a written application on
a form provided by the Licensing Clerk.
E.
Application contents. The application shall describe in sufficient detail
the number, location and type of street furniture for which the
certificate of compliance is sought and shall contain the following
information:
The name, address and telephone number of the applicant who
is the owner/operator or other person who is the principal
responsible person in charge of the street furniture; and
(1)
The name, address and telephone number of a natural person
(if different from the applicant) who the Town may notify and/or
contact at any time concerning the applicant’s street furniture.
This person would be responsible for receiving complaints and
notices of violations when a certificate of compliance is issued and
for providing information relating to the application during the
application process; and
(2)
The number of pieces of furniture, with a plan and written
description specifying the proposed location of each; and
(3)
A certificate of liability insurance in an amount not less than
$100,000 to cover claims by a person(s) for damages of personal
and bodily injury, including death, or property damage and costs
and expenses suffered or incurred by reason of the design,
placement, installation, operation or maintenance of any of the
applicant’s street furniture. Insurance under this subsection shall
run continuously with the presence of the applicant’s street
furniture in Town of West Springfield public ways and any
termination or lapse of such insurance shall be a violation of this
article, subject to appropriate remedy under § 218-19 of this
article.
(4)
F.
§ 218-13 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 218-13
1:150
§ 218-14. Fee for certificate of compliance; waivers.
§ 218-15. Placement standards.
Placement of street furniture shall be described in detail as part of the
application and shall be approved by the Director. The Director may require
a drawn plan of placement or a written description. No street furniture shall
be placed in any manner that may impede the use of the public way; or block
any sight line of traffic or pedestrian crossing; or in any way interfere with
public safety.
Issuance of certificate. Upon a finding by the Director that the
application is in compliance with the provisions of this article, the
Licensing Clerk shall issue a certificate of compliance for installation by
the applicant.
G.
Denial of certificate. If an application for a street furniture location is
denied by the Director, the Licensing Clerk shall notify the applicant
within 15 business days of the Licensing Clerk’s receipt of the denial.
The Director shall state the specific reasons for denial. The applicant
may reapply for a substitute alternative location without having to
pay an additional application fee. An applicant who has been denied
a certificate of compliance pursuant to this article may appeal within
30 days of such denial by filing a request in writing with the Licensing
Clerk to appear before the License Commission to review said denial.
The appeal shall be heard within 30 days of receipt of the appeal. The
decision on the appeal shall be sent to the applicant within 72 hours
(excluding weekends and holidays) after the meeting.
H.
The Director reserves the right to order, by written notice to the
certificate holder, that street furniture be removed from an approved
location, either temporarily or permanently, if he/she determines said
removal is in the interests of public safety.
I.
There shall be a certificate of compliance fee in the amount of $100
paid to the Town. This fee shall be due upon the initial application.
A.
Additional certificate of compliance. If at any time after the Director
has issued a certificate of compliance a certificate holder proposes to
install additional street furniture on a separate parcel, the provisions
of § 218-13 are to be repeated. Additional certificate of compliance fees
shall be in accordance with Subsection A, except that an additional
certificate of compliance fee is $50.
B.
The Director shall waive any fee established in this section due as
a result of an application by a nonprofit religious, educational, or
charitable entity for directional or informational signs upon the receipt
of documentation showing it is qualified under the provisions of
Internal Revenue Code § 501(c)(3). No fee waiver shall be considered
for any street furniture used as a source of revenue for said
organization.
C.
§ 218-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-16
1:151
§ 218-16. Attachment to property.
§ 218-17. Advertising prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any operator to use street furniture for advertising or
publicity purposes other than that pertaining to the items being dispensed
therein. Advertising associated with the dispensing of material shall be
nonilluminated, located on the front face of the street furniture and shall be
no greater than two square feet in area.
§ 218-18. Installation and maintenance.
Street furniture shall be of a sturdy material and installed or otherwise
placed and maintained by the certificate holder in accordance with the
following provisions:
Attachment to trees and other objects is prohibited. No operator shall
place or cause to be placed and no operator shall suffer to remain any
street furniture chained or otherwise attached to any tree, street light
post, traffic signal, sign, or structure in or upon a public way.
A.
Attachment to other street furniture. When placed side by side, street
furniture may be chained or otherwise attached to one another,
provided that no group of street furniture shall extend for a distance of
more than five feet along a sidewalk, and a space of not less than 75
feet shall separate each group of street furniture.
B.
Installed or placed in accordance with this article, in an upright,
sufficiently weighted and secure position;
A.
B. Constructed so as not to have sharp edges or corners; and
Handicap-accessible, as defined by the State Architectural Access
Board at 521 CMR 5.1. Each piece of street furniture shall be regularly
maintained and serviced so that:
(1) It is kept free of graffiti;
It is maintained in a state of good repair and in a neat and clean
condition;
(2)
It is maintained in a condition that is free of trash, rubbish, or
debris;
(3)
It is kept reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked
paint in the visible painted areas thereof;
(4)
It is kept reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible
unpainted metal areas thereof;
(5)
The clear glass or plastic parts thereof, if any, through which the
material is being dispensed are not broken and are kept reasonably
free of tears, peeling or fading; and
(6)
C.
§ 218-16 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 218-18
1:152
§ 218-19. Abandonment; enforcement.
The structural parts of the street furniture are not broken or unduly
misshapen.
(7)
Nonconforming street furniture. Any street furniture found not to be
in compliance with this article shall be subject to the enforcement
provisions contained herein.
A.
Abandonment. In the event that any street furniture installed pursuant
to the provisions of this article used to hold printed materials
(newsrack) does not contain the printed materials being dispensed
therein for a period of 35 days after the release of the current issue,
the Director may deem the newsrack abandoned and take appropriate
action under this article. In the event that a certificate holder
voluntarily abandons a street furniture location, the certificate holder
shall notify the Licensing Clerk in writing and shall also completely
remove the street furniture and restore the public way to a safe
condition. The failure to pay any fee or fine or to properly maintain
a piece of street furniture shall be deemed an abandonment, if the
fee or fine is not paid when due, and if the required maintenance
is not completed in a good workmanlike manner within 10 days of
written notice by first class mail, mailed to the certificate holder by the
Director.
B.
Enforcement.
Enforcement of the provisions of this article shall be carried out by
the Director. Upon a determination that a violation of any provision
of this article exists, the Building Inspector shall notify the
certificate holder of the violation in writing by first class mail. The
notice shall include:
(a) The location of the street furniture; and
The date of the incident or other cause giving rise to the
violation; and
(b)
(c) A brief and concise statement of the facts causing the violation.
(1)
The notice shall inform the certificate holder that at the expiration
of 10 days from the mailing of the violation notice, the street
furniture will be removed by the Director unless the violation is
corrected.
(2)
Upon removal of street furniture, the Building Inspector shall send,
by first class mail, written notice of such removal to the certificate
holder.
(3)
Notwithstanding the provisions of the foregoing Subsection C(1),
(2) and (3) of this subsection, the Building Inspector may order
the immediate removal of any street furniture that presents an
(4)
C.
§ 218-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-19
1:153
§ 218-20. Fees for removal and storage.
§ 218-21. Regulations.
The Director may, with the approval of the Town Council, promulgate such
rules and regulations consistent with the provisions of this article and the
laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts as shall carry out the purposes
of this article.
§ 218-22. Effect on other laws.
Nothing in this article shall affect the adoption of regulations affecting
street furniture by other government bodies, such as historic district
commissions, to the extent such bodies are authorized to adopt such
regulations.
imminent threat or peril to public health or safety, provided that
the certificate holder shall be notified by first class mail of such
removal within 72 hours (excluding weekends and holidays), and
further provided that any street furniture so removed shall be
stored for a period of 30 days in order to allow the certificate holder
to retrieve the street furniture.
Street furniture removed under the provisions of this section shall
be disposed of after 30 days.
(5)
A certificate holder who has been ordered under this section to
remove street furniture may appeal within 30 days by filing a
request in writing to the Licensing Clerk to appear before the
License Commission. The appeal shall be heard within 30 days of
receipt of the appeal.
(6)
Street furniture removed by the Town will not be disposed of after
30 days if an appeal is pending; and in the event the appeal is made
and the appellant prevails, there will be no storage fee.
(7)
Street furniture removed pursuant to this article may be retrieved by
the certificate holder at any time within 30 days of its removal upon
payment of a removal fee of $25 plus a storage fee of $5 per day, to a
maximum combined removal and storage fee of $180.
A.
After 30 days, any street furniture removed by the Building Inspector
pursuant to this § 218-20 shall be deemed "abandoned property" and
become the property of the Town of West Springfield.
B.
Failure of a certificate holder to retrieve street furniture within the
specified thirty-day period shall not operate to dismiss any fees owed to
the Town for removal and storage of such street furniture. Unpaid fees
accrued pursuant to this § 218-20 shall be considered a municipal lien
payable to the Town.
C.
§ 218-19 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 218-23
1:154
§ 218-23. Severability.
The provisions of this article shall be severable, and if any section, part, or
portion hereof shall be held invalid for any reason by a court, the decision of
such court shall not affect or impair any remaining section, part or portion
thereof.
§ 218-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-23
1:155

ARTICLE IV
Excavations and Obstructions
[Adopted 9-2-2003 by Ord. No. 114 (Ch. 9, §§ 9-200 through 9-202,
of the Codified Ordinances)]
§ 218-24. Erection of barriers required.
The owner or owners of land which has been excavated shall erect barriers
or take other suitable measures to protect persons from injuries or damages
incident thereto after such owner or owners have been notified in writing
by the Director of Public Works that such excavation constitutes a hazard to
public safety.
§ 218-25. License required; annual statement of proposed work
requiring street opening.
§ 218-26. Pavement cuts and restoration.
No person, except as directed by the Director of Public Works in the
performance of his duties, shall break or dig up or cause to be broken
or dug up the pavement or ground in any public street, or any sidewalk
or ground in any public street, or any sidewalk or common in the Town,
or erect or cause to be erected any staging for building thereon, or
place or cause to be placed any materials or rubbish thereon, without
first obtaining from the Town Council a written license stating the
space in the street or other public place that may be occupied and
the time allowed for such occupancy and such other provisions as said
Council may deem best, and filing with the Director of Public Works
a written agreement under seal, approved by said Town Council, to
comply strictly with the terms of the license and to indemnify the
Town for all loss, cost or expense that it may suffer by reason of such
occupancy.
A.
All department heads, persons or corporations owning or maintaining
structures, poles, wires, conduits, pipes, etc., within the limits of the
public ways within the Town shall, on or before the 15th day of March
of each year, file a statement with the Director of Public Works showing
the work proposed to be done by them requiring the opening of streets
during the ensuing year.
B.
A. Title: procedure to obtain a permit to cut way.
Authority. This section is adopted pursuant to the authority of Article 89
of the Amendments to the Constitution of the Commonwealth, the West
Springfield. Home Rule Charter, and any other relevant statutes. MGL
c. 44, § 53E 1/2.
B.
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide a uniform method for
the issuance of permits to cut ways by the Director of the Department
of Public Works; to ensure the useful life of newly surfaced ways is not
C.
§ 218-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-26
1:157
unduly reduced by cuts; and to compensate the Town for the cost to
repair and administer the work performed.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CONTRACTOR — Any person or legal entity seeking authority to
perform work in the layout of a public or Town way.
CUT — Any man-made breaking of the paved surface of a way.
DESIGNEE — A person authorized by the Director, in writing, to act in
place of the Director under this section.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the West Springfield Department of
Public Works.
LOCAL, COLLECTOR AND ARTERIAL ROADWAYS — The definitions of
local, collector and arterial roadways as set forth in the most recent
edition of the Massachusetts Department of Transportation Design
Manual are incorporated herein by reference.
WAY — A public or Town way.
D.
Procedure.
A contractor seeking authorization to cut a way must file an
application for a permit for the work to be performed with the
Director.
(1)
The application shall be obtained from the Department of Public
Works.
(2)
Any permit issued to cut a way that has been paved or resurfaced
within five years of the date of filing of the application for the
permit shall be subject to the following requirements:
The contractor must repair the cut with a permanent patch in
accordance with the written requirements established by the
Department of Public Works Director.
(a)
The contractor shall be responsible for any settlement or other
problems with the cut for one year from the date of the
completion of the work authorized in the permit. The
contractor shall correct any settlement or other problems as
directed by the Department of Public Works during the oneyear
time period.
(b)
Permanent repair of the cut shall be performed by a paving
contractor employed by the Town the following calendar year
at the expense of the contractor.
(c)
The contractor shall be provided with a statement of the cost
of the estimated permanent repairs, including pavement
markings (plus a 10% administrative fee), upon approval of the
(d)
(3)
E.
§ 218-26 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 218-26
1:158
permit. A permit shall be issued only after full payment of cost
of permanent repairs and the administrative fee has been paid
to the Department of Public Works.
All payments received by the Department of Public Works shall
be placed in a revolving fund which is hereby established for
the Department of Public Works pursuant to the requirements
of MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2. Said funds shall be used by the
Department of Public Works for the resurfacing and remarking
of ways or portions thereof that are cut by contractors. The
total amount that the Department may expend in any fiscal
year from said account shall not exceed $100,000. The Director
shall, not less than annually, transfer the administrative
expenses of the fund to the general revenue account to pay for
the Town's costs in administering this section.
(e)
The contractor shall replace or have replaced with temporary
markings all pavement markings affected by the permitted
work. The permanent pavement markings will be installed by
the Town or its designee.
(f)
The contractor shall maintain insurance coverage as
determined by the Director and shall provide evidence of the
same to the Director prior to the issuance of a permit under
this section. The contractor shall have the Town added as
additional insured on said insurance policy and shall execute
an agreement to indemnify and defend the Town from all
claims, costs and expenses, including attorney fees, in
connection with all claims made relating to the work
performed under the permit.
(g)
A contractor who violates any provision of this article shall
be prohibited for five years, from the date said violation is
discovered, from performing any work within a way in the
Town.
(h)
Any permit issued to cut a way paved or resurfaced more than
five years from the filing of an application for the permit shall be
subject to the following requirements:
All pavement edges of the trench shall be saw cut with straight
vertical edges six inches from the edge of excavation. The
edges shall be kept clear of any foreign materials and tack
coated before completion of the permanent patch.
(a)
Backfill material shall be of a good quality as determined by
the Town's inspector. Excavatable flowable fill may be required
if determined necessary by the West Springfield Department of
Public Works. No frozen material shall be used as backfill.
(b)
Backfill material must be placed in lifts of eight inches and 10
inches and thoroughly compacted by mechanical compactors
(c)
(4)
§ 218-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-26
1:159
to a minimum density of 95% for the full depth of the trench.
Density tests may be required by the Town. These tests will be
done at the contractor's expense.
Some roadways may have an original surface under the
bituminous concrete such as portland cement concrete or
cobblestones. The Town may require this portion of the
roadway structure to be replaced with portland cement
concrete, excavatable flowable fill, bituminous concrete and/or
another material suitable for the repair. This will be dealt with
on a case-by-case basis.
(d)
The depth of gravel base shall be equal to the depth of gravel
excavated, but not less than 12 inches.
(e)
Local roadway.
A temporary patch may be warranted before a permanent
patch is laid. This will be determined by the Department
of Public Works. The top surface shall be covered with two
inches of Type I-1 top course and shall be maintained by
the permittee until a permanent patch is placed. The patch
shall be such that all vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian
traffic can pass over it safely. Vehicles must be able to
safely travel over the patch at a speed equaling the posted
speed limit plus five miles per hour; or if there is no posted
speed in the area of the roadway cut, then a speed of 35
miles per hour shall be used.
[1]
The depth of the permanent patch shall be equal to the
depth of the existing pavement plus one inch. The
permanent patch shall consist of at least a two-inch base
course of bituminous concrete and a two-inch top course
of Type I-1 bituminous concrete at a minimum. Work shall
be done in accordance with the current Massachusetts
Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for
Highways and Bridges.
[2]
(f)
Collector and arterial roadways.
A temporary patch may be warranted before a permanent
patch is laid. This will be determined by the Department of
Public Works. The top surface shall be covered with three
inches of Type I-1 top course and shall maintained by the
permittee until a permanent patch is placed. The patch
shall be such that all vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian
traffic can pass over it safely. Vehicles must be able to
safely travel over the patch at a speed equaling the posted
speed limit plus five miles per hour; or if there is no posted
speed in the area of the road way cut, then a speed of 45
miles per hour shall be used.
[1]
(g)
§ 218-26 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 218-26
1:160
The depth of the permanent patch shall be equal to the
depth of the existing pavement plus one inch. The
permanent patch shall consist of a four-inch base course of
bituminous concrete and a three-inch top course of Type
I-1 bituminous concrete at a minimum. Work shall be done
in accordance with the current Massachusetts Department
of Transportation Standard Specifications for Highways
and Bridges.
[2]
Police officers for traffic control will be required whenever
traffic must be diverted into the lane or lanes of opposing
traffic on the street or highway, to control access and/or egress
for any existing driveway being worked on or as deemed
necessary by the West Springfield Police Department or the
Department of Public Works. This must be coordinated with the
West Springfield Police Department in advance of the proposed
work.
(h)
A representative from the Department of Public Works must
inspect the trench prior to backfilling and during the repair
process.
(i)
The permittee is required to correct trench settlement and
faulty pavement repairs for a period of two years after the
permanent patch is placed. Any repairs will be done under the
direction of the Department of Public Works at the expense of
the permittee.
(j)
The contractor shall maintain insurance coverage as
determined by the Director and shall provide evidence of the
same to the Director prior to the issuance of a permit under
this section. The contractor shall have the Town added as
additional insured on said insurance policy and shall execute
an agreement to indemnify and defend the Town from all
claims, costs and expenses, including attorney fees, in
connection with all claims made relating to the work
performed under the permit.
(k)
A contractor who violates any provision of this article shall
be prohibited for five years, from the date said violation is
discovered, from performing any work within a way in the
Town.
(l)
The contractor shall replace or have replaced all pavement
markings affected by the permitted work.
(m)
The invalidation of any section or portion of any section of this section
shall not affect the legality or enforceability of the remaining portions.
F.
§ 218-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-26
1:161

ARTICLE V
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 7-14-2003 by Ord. No. 113 (Ch. 9, § 9-500, of the Codified
Ordinances)]
§ 218-27. Removal after snowfall.
The owner of any property abutting upon any street, lane, court or square
within the Town where there is a sidewalk which is or may hereafter be
established or set apart by the Town as such shall, after the ceasing to
fall of any snow thereon, within 24 hours cause the same to be removed
therefrom.
§ 218-28. Removal of snow fallen from buildings and from plowing
or shoveling and drifting snow.
Whenever any snow shall be collected or deposited upon any sidewalk
mentioned in the preceding § 218-27 either by falling from an adjoining
building or by being plowed or shoveled onto said sidewalk by any snow
activity or by drifting upon said sidewalk, the owner of the property
abutting upon said sidewalk shall, within 24 hours after its being so
collected or deposited, cause the same to be removed therefrom.
§ 218-29. Throwing snow or ice into streets.
No person shall throw or put or plow or cause to be thrown or put or plowed
any snow or ice into any portion of a street, lane or alley in the Town used
for travel.
§ 218-30. Depositing snow or ice.
In the event the owner of any property removes snow or ice therefrom
or hires another to do so, which said owner or other person violates the
provisions of § 218-29, the owner and said other, or either of them, shall be
subject to the penalties and enforcement provisions set forth in § 218-33.
§ 218-31. Obstructions to fire hydrants and catch basins.
No person shall throw or put or cause to be thrown or put any snow or ice
or any other substance upon or against any fire hydrant or catch basin in
any street, lane, alley or park in the Town.
§ 218-32. Removal of ice.
Whenever any sidewalk mentioned in § 218-27 shall be encumbered with
ice, it shall be the duty of the owner to cause such sidewalk to be made
safe and convenient for travel by removing the ice therefrom or by treating
the surface with sand or salt within 24 hours after such sidewalk shall have
become so encumbered.
§ 218-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-33
1:163
§ 218-33. Violations and penalties.
A. The criminal penalty for each violation of this article shall be $300.
A noncriminal enforcement procedure may be utilized pursuant to the
provisions of MGL c. 40, § 21D and Chapter 1, Article II, of the Town
Code as an alternative to criminal enforcement.
B.
The fine for a noncriminal violation shall be $50 for each offense. Each
day shall constitute a separate violation.
C.
D. The enforcing authority shall be the Police Department.
Any penalties imposed under this article that are not paid when due
shall become a municipal charge and shall be recorded as such against
the property in question pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 141,
Article I, Municipal Charges Lien, of the Town Code.
E.
The owner may delegate, by agreement or contract, the duty imposed
by this article; however, the owner shall remain liable for any violations
by such designee.
F.
The first ticket given to any owner of real estate for a violation of the
provisions of this article in any fiscal year shall be a warning.
G.
§ 218-33 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 218-33
1:164
ARTICLE VI
Complete Streets
[Adopted as Ch. 9, § 9-900, of the Codified Ordinances]
§ 218-34. Findings.
Complete streets are designed and operated to provide safety and
accessibility for all the users of Town roadways, trails and transit systems,
including pedestrians, bicyclists, transit riders, motorists, freight,
commercial, and emergency vehicles and for people of all ages and of all
abilities. Furthermore, Complete Streets principles contribute toward the
safety, health, economic viability, and quality of life in a community by
providing accessible and efficient connections between home, school, work,
recreation and retail destinations by improving the pedestrian, bicycle and
vehicular environments throughout communities. They also assist in
improving air quality and reducing energy consumption for a more
sustainable environment.
§ 218-35. Purpose.
The purpose of West Springfield's Complete Streets Ordinance, therefore,
is to accommodate all road users by creating a transportation network that
meets the needs of individuals utilizing a variety of transportation modes.
The Town of West Springfield will ensure any plans, designs, operations and
maintenance of streets that accommodate and are safe for all users of all
ages and abilities as a matter of routine to the best extent practicable.
§ 218-36. Intent; applicability.
This article directs decision-makers to consistently plan, design, construct
and maintain streets for the accommodation of all anticipated users,
including, but not limited to, pedestrians, bicyclists, motorists, emergency
vehicles, and freight and commercial vehicles, in a context-sensitive
manner. This article shall apply to all municipal roadway repairs, upgrades
or expansion projects within the public right-of-way and private
developments requiring approval from the Town. Procedures will be
developed to ensure complete streets elements are incorporated into these
activities.
§ 218-37. Core commitment; projects subject to provisions;
administration.
The Town of West Springfield recognizes that users of various modes
of transportation, including, but not limited to, pedestrians, bicyclists,
runners, hikers, transit and school bus drivers/riders, motorists,
commercial vehicles, delivery and service personnel, freight haulers,
and emergency responders, are legitimate users of streets and deserve
safe facilities. "All users" includes users of all ages and abilities.
A.
§ 218-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-37
1:165
§ 218-38. Exceptions.
Exceptions to this article are only allowed upon approval by the Mayor
based upon recommendation from his/her designee overseeing this article,
with documentation and data that indicate:
The Town of West Springfield recognizes that all projects, new,
maintenance, or reconstruction, are potential opportunities to apply
complete streets design principles.
B.
The Town will, to the maximum extent practical, design, construct,
maintain, and operate all streets to provide for a comprehensive and
integrated street network of facilities for people of all ages and abilities.
C.
Complete streets design recommendations shall be incorporated into
all publicly and privately funded projects, as appropriate. All
transportation infrastructure and street design projects requiring
funding or approval by the Town of West Springfield, as well as projects
funded by the state and federal government, such as the Chapter
90 funds, Town improvement grants, Transportation Improvement
Program (TIP), the Mass Works Infrastructure Program, Community
Development Block Grants (CDBG), Capital Funding and other state
and federal funds for street and infrastructure design, shall adhere
to (comply with) the Town of West Springfield Complete Streets
Ordinance. Private developments and related street design components
or corresponding street-related components shall adhere to (comply
with) the complete streets principles. New subdivisions shall be
required to comply with this article. In addition, to the extent practical,
state-owned roadways will comply with the complete streets article,
including the design, construction, and maintenance of such roadways
within Town boundaries.
D.
The Mayor shall designate a staff person from one of the Town's
municipal departments who will be responsible for oversight of this
article.
E.
Facilities where specific users are prohibited by law, such as interstate
freeways or pedestrian malls. In these cases, an effort will be made for
accommodations elsewhere.
A.
Where costs or impacts of accommodation are excessively
disproportionate to the need or probable use or probable future use.
B.
The existing right-of-way or adjacent land is constrained in a manner
that inhibits addition of transit, bicycle, or pedestrian improvements. In
this case, the Town shall consider alternatives such as lane reduction,
lane narrowing, on-street parking relocation, shoulders, signage, traffic
calming, or enforcement.
C.
Where such facilities would constitute a threat to public safety or
health.
D.
§ 218-37 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 218-38
1:166
§ 218-39. Best practices.
§ 218-40. Design criteria.
In fulfilling the goals of this Complete Streets Ordinance, the Town will
follow the latest design manuals, standards and guidelines. This includes
documents that are listed below but should not be precluded from
considering innovative and nontraditional design options where a
comparable level of safety for users is present or provided:
Where construction and future maintenance will create significant
adverse environmental impacts to streams, floodplains, wetlands,
historical resources.
E.
The Town of West Springfield Complete Streets Ordinance will focus
on developing and maintaining a connected, integrated network that
serves all road users. Complete streets will be integrated into policies,
planning, and design of all types of public and private projects,
including new construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation, repair, and
maintenance of transportation facilities on streets and redevelopment
projects.
A.
Implementation of the Town of West Springfield Complete Streets
Ordinance will be carried out cooperatively within all departments
in the Town of West Springfield, with multijurisdictional cooperation,
to the greatest extent possible, among private developers, and state,
regional, and federal agencies.
B.
Complete streets principles include the development and
implementation of projects in a context-sensitive manner in which
project implementation is sensitive to the community's physical,
economic, and social setting. The overall goal of this approach is to
preserve and enhance scenic, aesthetic, historical, and environmental
resources while improving or maintaining safety, mobility, and
infrastructure conditions. The context-sensitive approach to process,
decision-making and design includes a range of goals by considering
stakeholder and community values on a level plane with the project
need. It includes goals related to livability, with greater participation of
those affected in order to gain project consensus.
C.
The Town of West Springfield recognizes that "complete streets" may
be achieved through single elements incorporated into a particular
project or incrementally through a series of smaller improvements or
maintenance activities over time.
D.
Massachusetts of Department of Transportation Project Design and
Development Guidebook.
A.
B. Massachusetts Department of Transportation Engineering Directives.
Massachusetts Department of Transportation Separated Bike Lane
Planning and Design Guide.
C.
§ 218-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-40
1:167
§ 218-41. Performance standards.
Complete streets implementation and effectiveness should be constantly
evaluated for success and opportunities for improvement. The Town will
develop performance measures to gauge implementation and effectiveness
of the policies. These performance measures may include but are limited to:
§ 218-42. Implementation.
The latest edition of American Association of State Highway
Transportation Officials (AASHTO) A Policy on Geometric Design of
Highway and Streets.
D.
ITE Designing Walkable Urban Thoroughfares: A Context Sensitive
Approach.
E.
National Association of City Transportation Officials Urban Bikeway
Design Guide.
F.
The United States Department of Transportation Federal Highway
Administration's Manual on Uniform Traffic Design Controls (2009).
G.
H. The Architectural Access Board (AAB) 521 CMR Rules and Regulations.
Documents and plans created for the Town of West Springfield, such as
bicycle and pedestrian network plans.
I.
A. Total miles of marked bike lanes.
B. Total miles of roadway with shoulders four feet wide or greater.
C. Linear feet of sidewalk, including new and reconstructed.
Closure of network gaps and removal of impediments in the
transportation infrastructure.
D.
Number of new curb ramps constructed and existing ramps
reconstructed.
E.
F. Number of existing curb ramps in need of reconstruction.
G. Crosswalk and intersection improvements.
H. Crash and personal injury data.
I. Citations for traffic violations.
J. Number of new street trees planted.
K. Transit ridership.
L. Public participation.
Annual estimate of yearly Town investments in complete streets design
and construction activities.
M.
§ 218-40 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 218-42
1:168
The Town shall make complete streets practices a routine part of
everyday operations, shall approach every transportation project and
program as an opportunity to improve streets and the transportation
network for all users, and shall work in coordination with other
departments, agencies, and jurisdictions to achieve complete streets.
A.
The Town shall review and either revise or develop proposed revisions
to all appropriate planning documents (master plans, open space and
recreation plan, etc.), zoning and subdivision codes, laws, procedures,
rules, regulations, guidelines, programs, and templates to integrate
complete streets principles in all street projects. A committee of
relevant stakeholders designated by the Mayor will be created as an
advisory body to assist in overseeing the implementation of this
initiative.
B.
The Town shall maintain a comprehensive inventory of pedestrian and
bicycle facility infrastructure that will be used in identifying and
prioritizing projects to eliminate gaps in the sidewalk and bikeway
network.
C.
The Town shall promote interdepartment project coordination among
Town departments with an interest in the public right-of-way in order
to better use fiscal resources.
D.
The Town shall seek methods to educate all transportation users to
better understand and utilize complete streets. This shall include but
not be limited to Town website updates, social media posts, the
community access cable channel, public outreach meetings and
informational pamphlets for the general public and students.
E.
The Town will reevaluate capital improvement projects prioritization to
encourage implementation of complete streets policies.
F.
The Town will train pertinent Town staff and decision-makers on the
content of complete streets principles and best practices for
implementing this article through dissemination of current information/
concepts, attendance at workshops, project meetings and other
appropriate means.
G.
The Town will utilize interdepartment coordination to promote the most
responsible and efficient use of resources for activities within the public
way.
H.
The Town will seek out appropriate sources of funding and grants for
implementation of complete streets policies.
I.
The Town will investigate new and continue with existing programs
such as Mass in Motion and Safe Routes to Schools which complement
complete streets initiatives.
J.
§ 218-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-42
1:169
Complete streets infrastructure shall be maintained by the jurisdiction
that owns the right-of-way it resides on unless binding agreements are
made with other maintaining entities.
K.
The Town will seek input from residents, developers and businesses
as well as work with neighboring municipalities and the Department
of Transportation to coordinate and optimize connectivity of
improvements on both the local and regional level.
L.
§ 218-42 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 218-42
1:170
Chapter 225
TAG SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk dealers — See Ch. 168.
§ 225-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the
following meanings:
DAYLIGHT HOURS — From one-half hour after sunrise to one-half hour
before sunset.
HOUSEHOLD — All persons lawfully residing in the same dwelling unit.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — That property which is owned, utilized and
maintained by members of a household where said sale is being held
and which may have been acquired in the normal course of occupying
or maintaining a household and shall not include items purchased for
resale, obtained on consignment or owned by any person from outside the
immediate area where said sale is being held; however, neighbors shall be
considered as being from the immediate area.
TAG SALES — All general sales open to the public conducted on a
residential premises for the purposes of disposing of personal property
and shall include but not be limited to all sales known as "tag," "garage,"
"lawn," "yard," "attic," "porch," "room," "backyard," "patio," "rummage" or
its equivalent.
§ 225-2. Sale of certain property prohibited.
No person shall sell or offer for sale at any tag sale any property other than
personal property.
§ 225-3. Permit required; fee; residency requirements.
It shall be unlawful to conduct a tag sale without first having obtained
a permit from the office of the Town Clerk. This permit shall contain
the dates, time, and location of the sale, telephone number, and the
person conducting the sale. The applicant shall pay a fee of $10 for said
permit. Said permit shall be issued in triplicate by the office of the Town
Clerk. One copy shall be delivered to the Police Department prior to the
sale. One copy must prominently be displayed at the site of the sale by
the applicant. The original will be maintained by the office of the Town
Clerk.
A.
In order to obtain a permit, an application must be obtained from the
Town Clerk. The completed application must be filed with the Town
B.
§ 218-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-3
1:171
§ 225-4. Limitations.
§ 225-5. Display of property.
Personal property offered for sale at any tag sale shall be displayed only on
private property. No personal property offered for sale at any tag sale shall
be displayed in any public right-of-way.
§ 225-6. Signs.
Signs promoting tag sales shall not be erected more than two days prior to
any tag sale and shall be removed not more than 24 hours after the close of
any tag sale. No sign promoting any tag sale shall exceed four square feet
on each side. (This section does not exclude people from violation of any
other state law or Town bylaw relating to signs.) No signs shall be posted
within the legal layout of a public way.
§ 225-7. Right of entry.
The Chief of Police or the Chief of the Fire Department, or persons
authorized by either of them, shall have the right to enter onto private
property for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
§ 225-8. Parking.
Where a tag sale is being conducted, the Chief of Police or persons
authorized by him/her may enforce temporary parking restrictions
necessary to the safe and orderly flow of traffic and the passage of
emergency vehicles. Parking shall be allowed only on the side of the road
where the sale is located, unless the Chief of Police determines in writing,
for public safety, that parking should be on the other side of the road.
Vehicles must be parked facing the direction in which that vehicle would be
normally traveling.
Clerk at least 72 hours before the scheduled sale (excluding Saturdays,
Sundays and legal holidays); otherwise, the permit shall be denied.
The applicant must be a Town resident. Proof of residency must be
established. The holder of the permit shall have no property right
in said permit and it may be revoked without hearing as hereinafter
provided.
C.
It shall be unlawful for a person to conduct a tag sale at any one
residence on more than two separate occasions in any calendar year,
for a duration of not more than three consecutive days for each sale. No
rain dates will be allowed. Tag sales shall be conducted during daylight
hours only.
A.
In a multi-dwelling unit, each household may conduct a tag sale on no
more than two separate occasions in any calendar year, for a duration
of not more than three consecutive days for each sale.
B.
§ 225-3 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 225-9
1:172
§ 225-9. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 230
TAXATION
Failure to comply with the provisions of any section of this chapter shall
result in the following:
First offense: a written warning shall be given by the Chief of
Police, the Chief of the Fire Department or his/her designee.
(1)
Second offense: the Chief of Police, the Chief of the Fire
Department or his/her designee shall, for a second violation of this
chapter or a failure to correct the violation for which the warning
was issued, revoke the permit and order the tag sale closed.
(2)
A.
The permit holder may request a determination of the appropriateness
of a revocation by filing a request for a review of the revocation with
the Mayor or his or her designee within 72 hours of the revocation. The
Mayor or his or her designee shall schedule a hearing to determine if
the revocation was warranted.
B.
The failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be
punishable by a fine of $35, which shall be payable to the Town Clerk.
Said fine shall be in addition to any revocation ordered under this
section.
C.
Any person who has had a permit revoked or a fine imposed shall not
be issued another permit for a period of two years nor shall a permit
be issued for the premises previously licensed for a period of two years
from said revocation or fine.
D.
§ 225-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-9
1:173

ARTICLE I
Senior and Veteran Tax Work-Off Abatement
[Adopted 11-8-2000 by Ord. No. 145; amended by Ord. No. 146 (Ch.
6, § 6-700, of the Codified Ordinances)]
§ 230-1. Authority; applicability.
Senior and veteran tax work-off abatements are available pursuant to MGL
c. 59, §§ 5K and 5N. Tax abatements shall be available beginning Fiscal Year
2017. Volunteer services must be performed before a work-off abatement
check will be issued in any year.
§ 230-2. Number of annual abatements.
The total number of annual abatements shall not exceed 40.
§ 230-3. Eligibility.
§ 230-4. Compensation rate; payments.
Any person performing volunteer services under this article shall be paid
for said services at a rate per hour equal to the minimum wage in effect
in this commonwealth at the time services are performed. Said payment,
including all required deductions, shall not exceed 125 hours per fiscal year.
Said check shall be endorsed payable to the Town of West Springfield by the
senior or veteran and shall be applied to the tax on said senior's residence
for the fiscal year in which the services were performed. All work must be
completed by November 30 of each year.
In order to be eligible for this abatement program the applicant must:
Be 60 years of age or older at the time the application for the workoff
abatement is filed or a veteran as defined by MGL c. 4, § 7,
clause forty-third;
(1)
Be an owner or deeded life tenant of the property for which said
abatement is requested;
(2)
Apply for said abatement program each year that he/she wishes to
be considered for participation;
(3)
(4) Possess the minimum qualifications for the available positions; and
(5) Not be currently employed by the Town.
A.
Preference shall be given to the most qualified candidate for the
position.
B.
C. Only one abatement per household.
§ 230-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-5
1:175
§ 230-5. Rules and regulations.
The Human Resources Director, subject to Executive Order 104, may adopt
rules and regulations for the implementation and operation of this article,
including but not limited to the following:
§ 230-6. Required language.
The following language must be added to all information relative to the
senior and veteran rebate regarding property tax: "Please be aware that
participation in this program may affect your eligibility or rights under
other Town, state, federal or local programs. You may wish to contact the
West Springfield Council on Aging or other appropriate representative for
further clarification."
A. The types of work or services said volunteers shall perform;
B. The hours when said services shall be performed;
C. Procedures for overseeing said volunteers; and
Record-keeping procedures to be used to establish the amount of the
abatement; and
D.
Requirements for continued participation in the program once
accepted.
E.
§ 230-5 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 230-6
1:176
Chapter 235
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 175.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 249.
Traffic orders — See Ch. 400.
§ 235-1. Term defined.
Every motor vehicle used or to be used for the conveyance of persons for
hire shall be deemed to be a taxicab within the meaning of this chapter,
except a motor vehicle operated in a manner and for the purposes stated in
Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 159A, and a motor vehicle used for
private livery purposes.
§ 235-2. Business license required.
No person shall engage in the Town in the business of operating a taxicab
without first obtaining from the License Commission the license or licenses
required by this chapter.
§ 235-3. Operator's licenses.
The License Commission may license the operation of a taxicab and may
license a person to drive such a taxicab, and may revoke such licenses at its
discretion.
§ 235-4. Taxicab stands.
No taxicab shall be allowed to stand or to wait for passengers on any public
way in the Town except on such portions thereof as may be designated
therefor by a license granted by the License Commission, which may revoke
such a license for a taxicab stand or change the location thereof at any time.
No person shall allow any vehicle to remain standing in any taxicab stand
except a taxicab licensed therefor.
§ 235-5. Expiration of licenses; transferability; fee.
Any license required by this chapter shall expire on the 30th day of April
following the date of issuance, and no such license shall be transferred
without the consent of the License Commission. The fees for all such
licenses shall be determined from time to time by rules, orders and
regulations of the License Commission.
§ 230-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-6
1:177
§ 235-6. Rates; rules and regulations.
No owner or driver of a taxicab shall charge any passenger any higher
rate for any service than authorized from time to time by rules, orders and
regulations of the License Commission. All owners and drivers of taxicabs
licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to such further
rules, orders and regulations as may from time to time be promulgated by
the License Commission.
Chapter 240
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 218. Zoning — See Ch. 300.
§ 240-1. Attachments prohibited.
§ 240-2. Permission required to pave tree belt.
With the exception of that portion of any public way necessary to provide
reasonable access, no person or legal entity, public or private, shall pave
or surface with asphalt, concrete, crushed stones or similar substance that
part of the public way commonly known as the "tree belt" without obtaining
written permission from the Town Council. Such permission shall not be
granted until written recommendations from the Planning Board regarding
the desirability of such paving or surfacing have been received by the Town
Council. Failure of the Planning Board to respond within seven days of a
written request from the Town Council shall be construed as a favorable
recommendation and shall not impede the granting of permission by the
Town Council.
Chapter 249
Attachments to trees restricted. No electric wires, cables, guys, poles,
crossarms, brackets, insulators or other wires or fixtures nor any signs,
cards or other advertising matter shall be attached to or come in
contact with any tree standing for use or ornament in any public street,
lane, court, park or other public place in the Town without the written
consent of the Department of Public Works.
A.
Removal of existing attachments; cost of removal. All wires, cables,
guys and wire fixtures now attached to or in contact with such trees
shall be removed when so ordered by the Director of Public Works, and
it shall be the duty of said Director to cause the removal of such wires,
cables, guys and fixtures, signs, cards and other advertising matter
when it shall be necessary so to do; the cost of such removal to be
charged to the company owning such wires, cable or fixtures.
B.
§ 235-6 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 240-2
1:178
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxicabs — See Ch. 235. Traffic orders — See Ch. 400.
§ 249-1. Vehicles interfering with snow removal operations.
§ 249-2. Emergency parking ban; violations and penalties.
[Amended 5-8-2002 by Ord. No. 109]
§ 249-3. Vehicles obstructing private ways or fire lanes.
The Director of the Department of Public Works, for the purpose of
plowing snow or removing ice from any way, may remove or cause to
be removed to some convenient place, including a public garage, any
vehicle interfering with such work. The Director shall keep or cause
to be kept records of the registration number of each such vehicle so
removed and the place to which it is removed and shall, within 48 hours
after such removal, send notice thereof by mail to the owner of such
vehicle at his last known address and to the Chief of Police.
A.
Before the owner or his/her duly authorized agent shall be permitted to
obtain possession of a vehicle which has been removed as aforesaid to
a public garage or other convenient place, he/she shall:
Furnish satisfactory evidence to the Director or to the owner or
person in charge of said public garage of his/her identity and
ownership or right to possession of said vehicle.
(1)
Pay all charges for towing or removing said vehicle, all storage
charges and the cost of publishing or sending any and all notices
hereunder.
(2)
(3) Sign a written receipt acknowledging delivery of said vehicle.
B.
It shall be unlawful for an operator or owner of any vehicle to park such
vehicle on any public or private street during an emergency declared
by the Mayor or his/her designee. Public notice of the imposition of
such emergency ban shall be given prior to its imposition. The ban shall
remain in effect until terminated by the Mayor or his/her designee.
A.
The fine for violation of this ban shall be not less than $15 for each
offense.
B.
Obstruction of private way. It shall be unlawful to obstruct or block a
private way with a vehicle or any other means so as to prevent access
by fire apparatus or equipment to any schools and places of public
assembly.
A.
§ 240-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 249-3
1:179
§ 249-4. Handicapped parking; violations and penalties.
§ 249-5. Obstruction of streets by vehicles.
No person shall stand with or permit any vehicle under his or her care or
control to stand across any public highway or street in such a manner as to
obstruct travel over the same, and no person shall stop with any vehicle in
any public street at the side of or so near to another vehicle as to obstruct
public travel, and no person shall stop with any vehicle upon or across any
crosswalk in any street or highway in the Town.
§ 249-6. Vehicles on sidewalks restricted. [Amended 11-19-2012 by
Ord. No. 144]
Obstruction of fire lanes. It shall be unlawful to obstruct or park a
vehicle in any clearly marked fire lane, such fire lanes to be designated
by the Chief of the Fire Department or his/her designee and posted as
such.
B.
Removal of objects obstructing access. Any object or vehicle
obstructing or blocking any fire lane or private way may be removed or
towed by the Town under the direction of a police officer at the expense
of the owner and without liability to the Town of West Springfield.
C.
Installation of signs, road markings. The owner of record of any
building affected by this section shall provide and install signs and road
markings as provided in Subsection B of this section. Said signs shall
be no less than 12 inches by 18 inches and shall read "Fire Lane - No
Parking - Tow Zone."
D.
Parking restricted; special plates required. No person shall permit any
vehicle registered in his or her name to stand or park in the spaces
designated as reserved for handicapped persons or to obstruct any
curb ramp designed for use by handicapped persons unless the vehicle
is owned by a disabled veteran or handicapped person and bears a
distinctive plate authorized by MGL c. 90, § 2.
A.
Violations and penalties. The registered owner of any vehicle standing
or parked in a space reserved for handicapped persons in violation of
this section shall be subject to a fine and the procedures established
pursuant to MGL c. 90, § 20A 1/2.
B.
No person shall ride, drive, wheel or push any vehicle or other device
which achieves locomotion through the use of wheels upon any
sidewalk in Town except as follows:
Wheelchairs or similar vehicles which are used as medically
necessary assistance, including but not limited to personal mobility
scooter-type vehicles shall be allowed.
(1)
Personal transportation parallel-wheeled devices such as Segways
shall be allowed.
(2)
A.
§ 249-3 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 249-6
1:180
§ 249-7. Parking on tree belts.
In any public way wherein the portion of the way used for vehicular travel is
paved to a width of 18 feet or more, no person shall park or allow to stand
any motor vehicle or trailer in such manner that a wheel, wheels, standard
or support thereof rests upon that portion of the way between the curbing
and the property line, or between the equivalent edge of the pavement
and the property line where no curbing exists, unless written permission
for such parking or standing shall have been granted by the Town prior to
November 1, 1976.
§ 249-8. Solicitation of rides.
No person shall solicit or procure, either verbally, by sign or signal or in
any other manner, transportation for themselves or for other persons in
any motor vehicle operated upon any way in the Town, except a motor
vehicle operated for the carriage of passengers for hire and which has been
licensed as such by the License Commission.
§ 249-9. Towing and storage of motor vehicles; fees; revolving fund.
Strollers and/or carriages used to transport infants or toddlers
shall be allowed.
(3)
Bicycles shall be allowed on sidewalks outside of business districts
pursuant to MGL c. 85, § 11B.
(4)
(5) Four-wheel and "in-line" roller skates shall be allowed.
Children's wagons shall be allowed as long as they are under the
control of and being pulled by an individual exercising due care.
(6)
For purposes of this section, the term "bicycles" shall include twowheel,
nonmotorized cycles, tricycles, and children's two- or threewheeled
cycles.
B.
No motorized vehicle shall be used upon any sidewalk in Town unless
such vehicle is included in Subsection A(1) or (2) above. Any vehicle
used upon a sidewalk in Town must be in fully operable condition at the
time of use and must be operated in a safe manner at all times, at no
time exceeding a speed of eight miles per hour. Racing of such vehicles
is prohibited. Pedestrians walking on or crossing onto the sidewalk
must be granted the right-of-way at all times.
C.
Rules and regulations. Unless inconsistent with the terms and
conditions set forth in the Massachusetts General Laws, the duly
adopted regulations of an agency of the commonwealth, or of this
article, the rules and regulations adopted by the Town Council shall
govern towing and storage of motor vehicles lawfully seized and held
by or by order of the Police Department.
A.
B. Charges for towing and storage.
§ 249-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 249-9
1:181
Chapter 257
WATER
The charges for towing and storage of motor vehicles when such
towing is ordered by the police shall be the rate as set by the
Massachusetts Department of Telecommunications and Energy as
set forth in MGL c. 159B, § 6B.
(1)
For each motor vehicle towed by order of the police, there shall
be assessed a one-time administrative fee in accordance with the
following schedule:
Commercial motor vehicle with one or more than one of the
following: 1] three or more axles; 2] a gross weight of 26,001
pounds or greater; 3] an unusually heavy, bulky or dangerous
load which requires extensive handling: fee of $50.
(a)
Noncommercial motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle not
subject to the above-stated criteria: fee of $25.
(b)
(2)
The administrative fee added to the tow charge as set forth in
MGL c. 159B, § 6B shall be collected by the tow company, and
payment shall be made by check from the tow company monthly
to the Accounting Department of West Springfield. In the event of
a discrepancy in the amount owed at the end of each month, the
records held at the Police Department of the number of vehicles
towed shall be the determining factor to settle the discrepancy.
(3)
Reserve receipt fund, deposit and expenditure.
All charges collected by the Town in accordance with the charges
imposed by Subsection B(2) shall be separately accounted for in
a fund maintained separately from the Town's general fund, in
accordance with MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2, and reserved for
appropriation by the Mayor as approved by the Town Council
consistent with the restrictions on expenditures as set forth herein.
(1)
The following activities, and no others, are eligible to be funded
with monies appropriated from the fund:
Purchase of cruisers and other police vehicles, including, but
not limited to, all-terrain vehicles, as authorized by the Police
Chief and approved by the Mayor, for policing the roads; and
conservation restricted areas and parks.
(a)
Purchase of parts, equipment and services necessary for the
operation and maintenance of said police vehicles used for
policing the roads.
(b)
(2)
C.
§ 249-9 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 249-9
1:182
ARTICLE I
Water Use Restrictions
[Adopted 6-12-2002 by Ord. No. 110 (Ch. 7, § 7-1500, of the Codified
Ordinances)]
§ 257-1. Authority.
This article is adopted by the Town in furtherance of its police powers to
protect public health and welfare and its powers under MGL c. 40, § 21
and to implement the Town's authority to regulate water use pursuant to
the Acts of 1893, Chapter 206. This article also implements the Town's
authority under MGL c. 40, § 41A when, in the opinion of the Massachusetts
Department of Environmental Protection, an emergency exists.
§ 257-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect, preserve and maintain the public
health, safety and welfare of Town residents whenever there is in force a
State of Water Supply Conservation or State of Water Supply Emergency
by providing for enforcement of any restrictions or conservation measures
imposed by the Town or by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection.
§ 257-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OUTDOOR WATERING — Any use of water out of doors for such purpose as
the watering of lawns, plants, trees, shrubs, flowers and gardens; excluding
commercial agricultural and horticultural uses, the commercial washing of
vehicles, recreational water use for watering of golf courses and filling of
swimming pools, by any water user.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, trust, partnership, association, or
other entity.
STATE OF WATER SUPPLY CONSERVATION — Determination of or need for
water conservation declared by the Town pursuant to § 257-4 of this article.
STATE OF WATER SUPPLY EMERGENCY — A water-related emergency
declared by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection
under MGL c. 21G, § 15 or any other applicable statute or regulation.
TOWN — The Town of West Springfield and, where appropriate, the Mayor
and his/her designee.
WATER USER or WATER CONSUMER — All public and private users of the
Town's public water system, irrespective of whether the person using the
water is responsible for billing purposes for water used at the particular
location in issue.
§ 257-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-4
1:183
§ 257-4. Declaration of State of Water Supply Conservation.
The Town, through the Mayor or his/her designee, may declare a State of
Water Supply Conservation upon a determination by the Mayor or his or her
designee that a shortage of water exists or may exist unless conservation
measures appropriate to insure an adequate supply of water to all water
consumers are adopted. Public notice of a State of Water Supply
Conservation shall be given in the manner set forth in § 257-6.
§ 257-5. Restricted water use.
§ 257-6. Public notification of State of Water Supply Conservation;
notification of DEP.
Notification of any restricted water use imposed by the Town in connection
with a State of Water Supply Conservation or a State of Water Supply
Emergency shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within
the Town at least seven days before its effective date; unless the cause
of the conservation measure is the result of a sudden emergency causing
a disruption in the water supply or similar emergency, in which case
notification by newspaper publication shall not be required but shall be
announced by such method deemed most appropriate by the Mayor or his/
her designee.
When a declaration of a State of Water Supply Conservation or State
of Water Supply Emergency is made, the Mayor or his or her designee
may impose such restrictions on water use from the following:
Odd/Even day outdoor watering. Outdoor water by residential
water users with odd-numbered addresses is restricted to oddnumbered
days. Outdoor watering by residential water users with
even-numbered addresses is restricted to even-numbered days.
(1)
Outdoor watering hours. Outdoor watering is permitted only
during daily periods of low demand, to be specified in the
declaration of a State of Water Supply Conservation.
(2)
Filling swimming pools. Filling of nonmunicipal swimming pools is
prohibited.
(3)
(4) Outdoor watering ban. Outdoor watering is prohibited.
A.
If the Mayor declares a state of emergency he/she may impose such
restrictions as he/she deems necessary until the emergency is at an
end.
B.
The applicable restrictions, conditions or requirements shall be
included in the public notice required under § 257-6.
C.
§ 257-4 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 257-7
1:184
§ 257-7. Termination of State of Water Supply Conservation or
Emergency; notice.
A State of Water Supply Conservation or State of Water Supply Emergency
may be terminated by the Mayor or his or her designee, upon a
determination that the need for conservation no longer exists. Public
notification of the termination of a State of Water Supply Conservation or
Emergency shall be given in the same manner by which it was imposed.
§ 257-8. State of Water Supply Emergency; compliance with DEP
orders.
Upon notification to the public in accordance with the procedure set forth
in § 257-6 that a declaration of a State of Water Supply Emergency has been
issued by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection, no
person shall violate any provision, restriction, requirement, condition of any
order approved or issued by said Department intended to bring about an
end to the state of emergency unless a waiver has been issued in writing by
the Mayor or his/her designee.
§ 257-9. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
Violations shall be enforceable under the non-criminal disposition
procedures established by MGL c. 40, § 21D, and adopted as set forth
in Chapter 1, Article II, of these ordinances. The noncriminal disposition
penalties for any person violating this article shall be, for the first offense, a
written warning; violators shall be liable to the Town in the amount of $50
for the second violation, and $100 for the third violation and $150 for each
subsequent violation. Violations shall be issued to the assessed owner of the
property where the violation occurred. The noncriminal disposition penalty
provision of this article shall take precedence over the penalty provisions of
Chapter 25, § 25-1, and shall inure to the Town. Each day of violation shall
constitute a separate offense. The enforcement duties of this article shall be
performed by the Town's Police Department and Public Works Department.
Any fines not paid when due shall be collected as a "municipal charge lien"
pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 58 and this article.45
§ 257-10. Severability.
The invalidity of any portion or provision of this article shall not invalidate
any other portion or provision of this article.
45.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 141, Fees and Charges, Art. I.
§ 257-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-10
1:185

ARTICLE II
Protection of Drinking Water
[Adopted as Ch. 9, § 9-700, of the Codified Ordinances]
§ 257-11. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health and safety by
minimizing contamination of shallow/surficial aquifers and preserving and
protecting existing and potential sources of drinking water supplies. It is
the intent to accomplish this through both public education and public
cooperation, as well as by creating appropriate land use regulations that
may be imposed in addition to those currently imposed by existing zoning
districts or other Town regulations.
§ 257-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
WATERSHED PROPERTY — Any reservoir, land, water supply, watershed
and any structure or building appurtenant thereto, owned by or under the
care and control of the Town of West Springfield and/or the Town of West
Springfield Department of Public Works.
§ 257-13. Prohibited activities.
Activity which, as determined by the Department of Public Works Director,
could injure or pollute watershed property, including but not limited to the
following, shall be prohibited on watershed property:
A. Use of any motorized vehicle;
B. Picnicking;
C. Bathing, swimming;
D. Ice skating;
E. Wading or launching/operating boats or other watercraft;
Fishing (including ice fishing), hunting, target shooting of any kind
(including but not limited to bow and arrow and firearms);
F.
G. Paintballing or use of paintball guns;
H. Smoking;
Littering or depositing dirt, refuse, construction/demolition debris,
white goods, household trash including but not limited to discarded
appliances and/or furniture, hazardous materials, or any other matter
as described by Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection as having the potential to injure or pollute watershed
property;
I.
§ 257-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-13
1:187
§ 257-14. Activities allowed by permit.
§ 257-15. Activities allowed without permit.
The following passive, recreational, and educational activities will be
allowed on the watershed property without a permit:
J. Drawing or causing to be removed any water from any source;
K. Possession of any alcoholic beverage or controlled substance; and
L. Fires of any type.
The following activities are allowed on watershed property with a
permit from the Department of Public Works Director, the Mayor, or
their respective designees:
(1) Use of automobiles, trucks and construction equipment.
(2) Commercial signs, advertising displays.
(3) Cutting, logging or removing timber.
A.
Provided, however, vehicles and equipment used or contracted by the
Town of West Springfield to maintain the watershed property and
enforce these ordinances may be operated without the need for a
permit, as may be Town, state or federal public safety vehicles and
equipment.
B.
Hiking, walking, running, nonmotorized biking, snowshoeing, crosscountry
skiing, bird watching, nature study, and historical and
educational themed activities (that do not require use of nonpermitted
or prohibited activities).
A.
The walking and exercising of dogs kept as household pets as well as
service animals are allowed under the following conditions:
All such animals must be licensed in compliance with all applicable
laws and regulations;46
(1)
(2) All such animals shall be kept on a leash or lead at all times;
No such animal shall chase, harm or otherwise interfere with any
flora or wildlife inhabiting the watershed property; and
(3)
(4) The party in control of the animal shall clean up after the animal.
B.
Any other nonprohibited activity as identified by posting on any
watershed property.
C.
46.Editor's Note: See Ch. 110, Art. II, Dogs and Cats.
§ 257-13 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 257-16
1:188
§ 257-16. Curfew and parking.
There will be no trespassing on watershed property by vehicle or on foot
from dusk to dawn. Parking of vehicles is limited to officially designated
areas and the shoulder of public ways through the watershed property.
Parking of vehicles anywhere else is restricted. The Town of West
Springfield reserves the right to alter the areas so designated with no
advance notice. Parking areas shall be designated by signs placed in
conspicuous locations by the Town of West Springfield. Such signs may
restrict parking to certain times and/or days. No private party may regulate
parking on any watershed property.
§ 257-17. Park rangers.
The Town of West Springfield may employ park rangers to patrol various
Town recreational areas, including watershed property. Anyone using the
watershed property for allowed or permitted uses as set forth in these
regulations shall be subject to the authority of the park rangers and shall
heed all reasonable directions and requests presented by the park rangers.
§ 257-18. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
Any person and, if applicable, the employer of illegal vehicles, and all other
persons concerned therein, violating the provisions of this article shall be
fined for each offense listed in the attached Watershed Fines and Penalties
Table as promulgated by the Director of the Department of Public Works.47
All fines provided for herein shall inure to the use of, and be paid to, the
Town of West Springfield. Violations of this article shall be enforced by the
Town of West Springfield's park rangers and Police Department.
§ 257-19. Severability.
Each term and provision of this article shall be valid and enforceable to
the fullest extent permitted by law, and any invalid, illegal or unenforceable
term or provision shall be deemed replaced by a term or provision that is
valid and enforceable and that comes closest to expressing the intention of
the invalid, illegal or unenforceable term or provision.
47.Editor's Note: The fines and penalties table is on file in the Town offices.
§ 257-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-19
1:189
Chapter 300
ZONING
§ 257-19 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 257-19
1:190
ARTICLE I
Purposes
§ 300-1.0. Purpose and title.
For the purpose of promoting the health, safety, convenience, morals and
welfare of its inhabitants, the Town of West Springfield, pursuant to the
provisions of MGL c. 40A, §§ 1 to 22,48 as amended, hereby adopts this
ordinance, which shall be known and cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of
the Town of West Springfield." Further purposes of this ordinance are to
lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other
dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of
land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate
provisions of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other
public requirements; and to increase the amenities of the municipality.
48.Editor's Note: So in original. MGL c. 40A includes §§ 1 through 17.
§ 300-1.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-1.0
1:191

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 300-2.0. Word usage and interpretation.
§ 300-2.1. Terms defined.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for
the purpose of this ordinance, have the meanings herein given:
ACCESS DRIVE — That portion of a street from the paved or traveled
portion to a lot line that provides access to a driveway and/or parking lot
serving a lot.
ACCESSORY USE — The subordinate use of a building or premises for a
purpose customarily incidental to a main or principal use permitted in the
district in which it is located.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion (greater than 20%) of its stock-in-trade, books,
magazines, visual material and other matter which is distinguished or
characterized by its emphasis depicting, describing, or relating to nudity,
sexual conduct or sexual excitement, all as defined in MGL c. 272, § 31.
ADULT CLUB — An establishment which, as a form of entertainment, allows
a person or persons to perform in a state of nudity as defined in MGL c. 272,
§ 31.
ADULT THEATER — A building used for presenting material distinguished
by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to nudity, sexual
conduct or sexual excitement, all as defined in MGL c. 272, § 31.
AGE-RESTRICTED HOUSING — A planned development of land consisting
of multiple structures constructed expressly for use and residency by
persons who have achieved the minimum age requirement for residency
of 55 years or older, as permitted by MGL c. 151B, § 4, Subsection 6 (as
amended).
AGRICULTURE — The production, keeping or maintenance, for sale or
lease, of plants and animals useful to man, including, but not limited to:
forages and sod crops; grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy
products, poultry and poultry products; livestock, including beef cattle,
swine, horses, mules, ponies, or goats or any mutations or hybrids thereof,
For the purpose of this ordinance, certain terms or words used herein
shall be interpreted as follows: Words used in the present tense include
the future; "lot" includes "plot"; "occupied" includes "designed,"
"arranged," or "intended to be occupied"; "used" includes "designed,"
"arranged," or "intended to be used"; the term "shall" is always
mandatory; the use of the masculine herein shall also include the
feminine.
A.
Diagrams are for reference and do not constitute part of the adopted
ordinance.
B.
§ 300-2.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-2.1
1:193
including the breeding and grazing of any or all such animals, bees, and
apiary products, for animals, trees and forest products; fruits of all kinds,
including grapes, nuts and berries, vegetables, floral, nursery, ornamental
and greenhouse products, or lands devoted to a soil conservation or forestry
management program.
ALTERATION — Any construction, reconstruction or other action resulting
in a change in the structural parts, height, number of stories, entrances,
exits, size, use or location of a building or other structure.
ANIMAL CLINIC — An establishment where animals (pets) are admitted
principally for examination, treatment, or care by a doctor of veterinary
medicine, and which does not include outside runs and kennels. Boarding is
provided only for medical purposes or treatment.
BANK — An institution in the commercial world, empowered to receive
deposits of money, to make loans, and to issue its promissory notes
(designed to circulate as money and commonly called "bank notes" or "bank
bills") or to perform any one or more of these functions.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT — An owner-occupied singlefamily
dwelling which may rent rooming units for transient occupancy and
where a breakfast is included in the rent and all accommodations are
reserved in advance.
BOARD OF APPEALS — The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Town of West
Springfield, Massachusetts.
BOARDINGHOUSE — Any dwelling unit in which more than three persons,
whether individually or as families, are housed or lodged for hire, with or
without meals. A motel, rooming house or a furnished rooming house shall
be deemed a boardinghouse.
BREWERY, DISTILLERY, WINERY — An establishment primarily engaged in
the on-site manufacture, blending, fermentation, processing, and packaging
of alcoholic beverages, for wholesale or retail distribution, as allowed by
state law. The establishment may include accessory uses such as: tasting
room for on-site consumption of the product produced on-site, retail sales
of the product produced on-site and related goods, and/or tours of the
production facility, provided that all production, processing, distribution,
and storage activities are to be conducted within an enclosed
building.[Added 4-23-2018]
BUFFER AREA — A landscaped area intended to separate and partially
obstruct the view of two adjacent land uses or properties from one another.
See Diagram 2-1.
§ 300-2.1 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-2.1
1:194
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls
and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, or
chattel. The word "building" shall be construed, where the context allows,
as though followed by the words "or part or parts thereof."
BUILDING COVERAGE — That percentage of a lot covered by buildings or
structures.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the mean finished grade
of the ground adjoining the building to the highest point of the roof for flat
or shed roofs, to the deck line for mansard roofs, and to the mean height
between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs. Not included
are spires, cupolas, TV antennas, or other parts of structures which do not
enclose potentially habitable floor space.
BUILDING LINE — The line established by law, beyond which a building
shall not extend, except as specifically provided by law.
BUILDING LOT — See "lot, building."
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A detached building:
A. Which is subordinate in area to the principal building;
The use of which is customarily incidental and subordinate to that of
the principal building; and
B.
§ 300-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-2.1
1:195
BUILDING, ATTACHED — A building having any portion of one or more
walls in common with adjoining buildings.
BUILDING, NONCONFORMING — See "nonconforming building.'
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — See "principal building."
BUSINESS — The transaction or carrying on of a trade or commercial
enterprise, not manufacturing, with a view to profit or for a livelihood.
BUSINESS SERVICES — Establishment primarily engaged in rendering
services to business establishments on a fee or contract basis, including but
not limited to the following: advertising and mailing; building maintenance;
employment services; management and consulting services; protective
services; equipment rental and leasing; commercial research, etc.
CAR WASH — An area of land and/or a structure with machine- or handoperated
facilities used principally for the cleaning, washing, polishing, or
waxing of motor vehicles.
CEMETERY — A place or area of land, set apart for the burial of the dead,
operated, managed and controlled under the provisions of Massachusetts
General Laws Chapter 114, or a burial place under the care and supervision
of the Town or other public authority.
CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY — A written form signed by the
Building Inspector certifying that the stated and described use, structure
and/or lot conforms with this ordinance or, in the case of an appeal, variance
or special permit, with written conditions of the Board of Appeals, Planning
Board or Town Council as appropriate.
CHILD-CARE FACILITY — Any facility operated on a regular basis whether
known as a "day nursery," "nursery school," "kindergarten," "child play
school," "progressive school," "child development center," or "preschool,"
or known under any other name, which receives children not of common
parentage under seven years of age, or under 16 years of age if such
children have special needs, for nonresidential custody and care during part
or all of the day separate from their parents. A day-care center shall not
include: any part of a public school system; any part of a private, organized
educational system, unless the services of such system are primarily limited
to kindergarten, nursery or related preschool services; a Sunday school
conducted by a religious institution; a facility operated by a religious
organization where children are cared for during short periods of time
while persons responsible for such children are attending religious services;
a family day-care home; an informal cooperative arrangement among
neighbors or relatives; or the occasional care of children with or without
compensation therefor.
CLUB OR LODGE — Premises or building of a membership organization
exclusively servicing members and their guests but not including any
vending standards, merchandising, or commercial activities except as
required generally for the membership and purpose of such club; does not
Which is located on the same lot as that occupied by the principal
building.
C.
§ 300-2.1 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-2.1
1:196
include sports clubs, or clubs or organizations whose chief activity is a
service customarily carried on as a business.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT, CLUSTER PLANNING or CLUSTER PLAN — An
alternative division of a tract of land into lots for use as single-family sites in
which reduced area and setback requirements may be authorized by special
permit in exchange for the reservation of open space. The development may
be developed in accordance with specific cluster requirements of Table 6-1A
of this ordinance.49
COMMERCIAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATION — Any
combination of structures, devices and elements which rely upon solar
photovoltaic cells and arrays to generate electricity primarily for use offsite.
CONSUMER SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment/repair shop
where the repair of household items, except motor vehicles, occurs.
Consumer service establishments include, but are not limited to: furniture
upholstery and the repair of lawn mowers, snowblowers, or electrical
appliances.
CONTRACTOR'S YARD — A premises used by a contractor or subcontractor
for storage of equipment and supplies, fabrication of subassemblies, or
parking of wheeled equipment.
CONVENIENCE STORE — Any retail establishment offering for sale
prepackaged food products, household items, and other goods commonly
associated with the same and having a gross floor area of less than 5,000
square feet.
CONVENTIONAL DEVELOPMENT, CONVENTIONAL SUBDIVISION or
CONVENTIONAL PLAN — A division of a tract of land into lots for use as
single-family building sites in accordance with the general lot area, width
and yard requirements of Tables 6-1 and 6-2 in Article VI of this ordinance.50
CORNER LOT — A lot or a parcel of land abutting upon two or more
streets at their intersection, or upon two parts of the same street forming
an interior angle of less than 135°. See Diagram 2-2.
49.Editor's Note: Table 6-1A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
50.Editor's Note: Tables 6-1 and 6-2 are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 300-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-2.1
1:197
CREDIT UNION — A member-owned, nonprofit, cooperative thrift
institution operated under state and federal law and regulation.
DETACHED — Separated from.
DETACHED DWELLING — A dwelling which is not attached to any other
dwelling by any means.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels;
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any structure; any mining, excavation, landfill
or land disturbance, and any use or extension of the use of land.
DISTRICT — A zoning district as established by Article III of this ordinance.
DRIVE-IN — A business establishment so designed that a portion of its retail
or service character is dependent on providing a driveway approach for
motor vehicles to serve patrons while in the motor vehicle, rather than from
within the building.
DRIVEWAY — A space, located on a lot, built for access to a garage or offstreet
parking or loading space.
DRIVING LANE — An aisle within a parking lot or structure intended to
provide access to one or more parking spaces located therein.
DWELLING — A privately or publicly owned permanent structure,
containing a dwelling unit or dwelling units. Hotels, lodging houses,
hospitals, membership clubs, motels or rooming houses shall not be
considered dwellings.
§ 300-2.1 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-2.1
1:198
DWELLING UNIT — A building or portion thereof providing complete
housekeeping facilities for living, sleeping, cooking and eating for one
family.
DWELLING, DETACHED — See "detached dwelling."
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — See "multifamily dwelling."
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — See "one-family dwelling."
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — See "two-family dwelling."
ERECT — To build, construct, reconstruct, move upon, or conduct any
physical development of the premises required for a building. To excavate,
fill, drain and like preparation for building construction shall also be
considered to erect.
FAMILY — One or more persons who live together in one dwelling unit and
maintain a common household. May consist of a single person or of two or
more persons, whether or not related by blood, marriage or adoption. May
also include domestic servants and gratuitous guests.
FAMILY HOME DAY CARE — Any private residence which, on a regular
basis, receives for temporary custody and care during part or all of the
day, children under seven years of age or children under 16 years of age if
such children have special needs; provided that the total number of children
shall not exceed six, including participating children living in the residence.
"Family home day care" shall not mean a private residence used for an
informal cooperative arrangement among the neighbors or relatives, or the
occasional care of children with or without compensation.
FENCE — An artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination
of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land.
FILLING — Any deposit, placement, storage, redistribution of soil, earth,
sand, gravel, rock, loam, or other similar material on any land, wetland, or
in watercourses, and including the conditions resulting therefrom.
FINISHED GRADE — The prepared level of land and all paved surfaces at
the time construction is complete and a site is ready for its intended use.
FIRE DISTRICTS — Those districts in the Town in which fireproofing
requirements of the Massachusetts State Building Code for commercial
and industrial structures apply. Depending upon the degree of fireproofing
required, such districts shall fall into one of the two categories: Fire District
Number 1 or Fire District Number 2.
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source.
FLOODPROOFED — Structures which meet the requirements of FIA
Regulations 1910.3(c)3, 4, including for the purposes of this section all
requirements for certification contained therein.[Amended 7-16-2013]
FLOODWAY — The channel of a stream plus any portion of the adjacent
bank and land designated to be kept free of encroachment so that the
discharge of the base flood may be carried without increase in flood
§ 300-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-2.1
1:199
elevation as designated within the Town of West Springfield on the
Hampden County Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) issued by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the administration of the NFIP
dated July 16, 2013, and further defined by the Flood Insurance Study
booklet dated July 16, 2013.[Amended 7-16-2013]
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The ratio of the gross floor area of all
buildings on a site to the total area of the site itself. The floor area ratio
permitted within a zoning district multiplied by the total area of a site will
indicate the total gross floor area permitted on the site.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — See "gross floor area."
FLORICULTURE — The cultivation of ornamental flowering plants.
FRONTAGE — The linear distance of a lot adjacent to a single street
measured continuously along one street line between its side lot lines and
their intersection with the street line. (See Diagram 2-3.) That portion of a
lot adjacent to a road which has been discontinued or which, in the opinion
of the Planning Board, is not sufficient to provide safe and unimpeded
access to the parcel for ordinary two-wheel drive cars and/or emergency
vehicles, does not constitute frontage.
FUNERAL ESTABLISHMENT — A building or part thereof used for human
funeral services. Such building may contain space and facilities for:
§ 300-2.1 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-2.1
1:200
FURNITURE STORE — A full-service retail facility containing 20,000 square
feet or more of gross floor area that specializes in the sale of furniture.
Furniture stores having less than 20,000 square feet of gross floor area shall
be considered a retail store as defined by this ordinance.
GAMBLING ESTABLISHMENT — The use of a building, structure and/or
land which has for its principal purpose the conduct of games, sports or
other activities the outcome of which is the subject of wagers for money or
other stakes.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building used only for the storage of
motor vehicles.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building, or portion thereof, other than a private
customer and employee garage or private residential garage, used primarily
for the parking and storage of vehicles and available to the general public.
GARAGE, REPAIR — Any building, premises, or land in which or upon
which a business, service, or industry involving the maintenance, servicing,
repair, cleaning, preparation, or painting of motor vehicles is conducted or
rendered.
GARDEN CENTER — An establishment where the primary business
includes a yard of plantings and landscape stock and where tools,
applications, and other necessities used in the practice of gardening are
sold.
GASOLINE FILLING STATION — A building, or part thereof, for the retail
sale of gasoline, oil, and auto accessories. Specifically excluded from this
definition are so-called "self-serve" gasoline filling stations.
GASOLINE FILLING STATION, SELF-SERVE — See "self-serve gasoline
filling station."51
GREENHOUSE OR NURSERY — Premises used for the gainful purpose
of propagation of trees, shrubs, vines, flowers, or other plants for
transplanting, stock for grafting, or for cut flowers.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal area of the several
floors of a principal building and its faces of the walls. It does not include
Embalming and the performance of other services necessary for the
preparation of the dead for burial;
A.
B. The performance of autopsies and other surgical procedures;
C. The storage of caskets, funeral urns, and other related funeral supplies;
D. The storage of funeral vehicles;
E. Facilities for cremation; and
The living quarters of an individual whose bona fide occupation is in the
funeral establishment.
F.
51.Editor's Note: See the definition of "self-service gasoline filling station" below.
§ 300-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-2.1
1:201
cellars; unenclosed porches or attics not used for human occupancy; openair
malls within a shopping center utilized purely for pedestrian circulation
and/or decorative purposes between individual shops of the center; any
floor space in an accessory or principal building intended and designed for
the parking of motor vehicles in order to meet the parking requirements of
this ordinance.
GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATION — A solar
photovoltaic system which includes appurtenant or accessory buildings and
structures that are mounted on the ground and are not mounted on the roof
of a structure. All such appurtenant structures include but are not limited
to equipment shelters, storage facilities, transformers, and substations.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any substance or mixture of such chemical,
physical or infectious characteristics as to pose a significant, actual or
potential hazard to water supplies, or other hazard to human health, if
such substance or mixture were discharged on land or into air or waters.
Hazardous materials are those designated by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the regulations of the
Massachusetts Waste Management Act (MGL c. 21C) and include, without
limitation, organic chemicals, petroleum products, heavy metals,
radioactive or infectious wastes, acids and alkalis, and include such
products as pesticides, herbicides, solvents and thinners.
HELIPORT —
HELIPORT, APPROACH-DEPARTURE PATH — Any clear path selected for
flight extending upward and outward from the edge of a landing and takeoff
area. No such path shall be selected unless it has received any necessary
approvals from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and/or
Massachusetts Aeronautics Commission (MAC).
An area, either at ground level or elevated on a structure, that is
used for the landing and take-off of helicopters. According to Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) guidelines contained in FAA publication
Heliport Design Guide, November 5, 1969, heliports may be divided
into three classes:
(1) Class I: Private.
(2) Class II: Public (Small).
(3) Class III: Public (Large).
A.
In addition, heliports may be divided into three subclasses:
Subclass A: Minimum support facilities; i.e., no buildings or
maintenance.
(1)
Subclass B: Limited support facilities; i.e., limited support facilities
with no maintenance or fueling.
(2)
Subclass C: Complete support facilities, including maintenance and
fueling.
(3)
B.
§ 300-2.1 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-2.1
1:202
HELIPORT, LANDING AND TAKE-OFF AREA — That specific area in which
the helicopter actually lands and takes off, including the touchdown area.
HELIPORT, TEMPORARY — That take-off and landing area intended for
temporary or occasional helicopter use but not formally designated as a
heliport.
HOME OCCUPATION — Any use customarily conducted entirely within a
dwelling and carried on by the inhabitants thereof, which use is clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes
and does not change the character thereof. The conducting of a clinic,
hospital, barber shop, beauty parlor, tea room, tourist home, animal hospital
or any similar use shall not be deemed to be a home occupation.
HORTICULTURE — The cultivation of a garden or orchard.
HOSPITAL — A building providing, among others, twenty-four-hour inpatient
services for persons admitted thereto for the diagnosis, medical,
surgical or restorative treatment or other care of human ailments, including
a sanitarium; not to be interpreted to include a doctor's office, a medical
clinic, a life-care facility, rest home, nursing home or convalescent home.
HOSPITAL, VETERINARY — A building providing for the diagnosis and
treatment of ailments of animals other than human, including facilities for
overnight care, but not including crematory facilities.
HOTEL — A building containing rooms intended or designed to be used or
which are used, rented or hired out to be occupied or which are occupied
for sleeping purposes by guests and where only a general kitchen and
dining room which may be provided within the building or in an accessory
building. Access to the individual sleeping rooms is usually through a lobby
and interior corridors; not to be interpreted to include a bed-and-breakfast
establishment, motel, boardinghouse or lodging house.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any material that substantially reduces or
prevents the infiltration of water into the underlying soil. It includes streets,
roofs, driveways, parking lots, and other similar surfaces.
INVERTER — The electrical component(s) of a solar photovoltaic
installation that convert(s) DC current to AC current.
JUNKYARD — A lot, land or structure, or part thereof, used primarily
for the collecting, storage and sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal or
discarded material; or for the collecting, dismantling, storage and salvaging
of machinery or vehicles not in running condition and for the sale of parts
thereof.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL — An establishment licensed to operate a facility
housing dogs, cats, or other household pets and where grooming, breeding,
boarding, training or selling of animals is conducted as a business.
KENNEL, PRIVATE — Any building or land designed or arranged for the
care of dogs, cats or other household pets belonging to the owner of the
residential, principal use, kept for purposes of show, hunting, or as pets.
§ 300-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-2.1
1:203
LANDSCAPING — An area of a lot which includes an expanse of natural
vegetation or the addition of lawns, trees, plants and other natural and
decorative features to the lot. In all cases where landscaping or planting
is required by the provisions of this ordinance, such trees, shrubs and
other plant materials must be live specimens as opposed to artificial plant
materials.
LAUNDRY, SELF-SERVICE — A business that provides home-type washing,
drying, and/or ironing machines for hire to be used by customers on the
premises.
LIVING SPACE — The net floor area within a dwelling unit, exclusive of
utility rooms, closets, attics, and cellars.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space or berth used for the loading and
unloading of commercial vehicles.
LODGE — A place where members of a local chapter of an association hold
their meetings; and the local chapter itself.
LODGING HOUSE — A building in which lodgings are let to five or more
persons and in which no meals are furnished. It shall not be interpreted to
include dormitories of charitable, educational or philanthropic institutions,
hotels, motels, life-care facilities, or nursing homes.
LOT — A parcel of land. In order to be used for building purposes, it must
meet the criteria for a building lot.
A. LOT, CORNER — See "corner lot."
LOT, INTERIOR — Any lot other than a corner lot or a through lot. See
Diagram 2-2.
B.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot which fronts upon two parallel streets, or
which fronts upon two streets which do not intersect at the boundaries
of a lot. The owner shall designate one street line as the front lot line.
See Diagram 2-2.
C.
§ 300-2.1 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-2.1
1:204
LOT AREA — The total area within the lot lines of a lot, excluding any street
rights-of-way.
LOT COVERAGE — That portion of the lot that is covered by buildings and
structures.
LOT DEPTH — The distance measured from the front lot line to the rear lot
line. See Diagram 2-4.
§ 300-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-2.1
1:205
LOT LINE — The dividing line between lots.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The property line dividing a lot from a single
street right-of-way. In the case of a corner lot or a through lot, at
least one front lot line shall conform to the minimum lot frontage
requirement. See Diagram 2-3.
A.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line opposite and most distant from the
front lot line; or in the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly
shaped lots, a line 10 feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel to
and at a maximum distance from the front lot line. See Diagram 2-3.
B.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line not a front or rear lot line. See Diagram
2-3.
C.
§ 300-2.1 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-2.1
1:206
LOT WIDTH — The mean width measured at right angles to its depth.
LOT, BUILDING — A parcel of land held in one ownership meeting the
dimensional requirements of this Zoning Ordinance.
MAJOR APPLIANCE — A large machine that accomplishes a routine
housekeeping task such as cooking, food preparation or cleaning such
as refrigeration equipment, stoves, washing/dishwashing machines. Largescreen
televisions are also considered major appliances. Major appliances
are differentiated from other appliances, as they are large, difficult to move
and generally fixed in place to some extent.
MAJOR APPLIANCE STORE — A retail establishment containing over
15,000 square feet of retail floor space displaying and selling a significant
portion of its products as major appliances. "Significant portion," for this
use, shall be defined as occupying at least 80% of the retail display space
and generating over 80% in volume and revenue of products sold.
MANUFACTURING — A facility primarily for heavy or light industry and
the manufacture or assembly of a product, including processing, blending,
fabrication, assembly, treatment and package. Incidental activities such as
storage, offices, wholesale sales, retail sales and employee-only recreation
and eating facilities are permitted.
MEDICAL/DENTAL CENTER OR CLINIC — A building or group of buildings
used for the offices and facilities accessory to the practice of licensed
§ 300-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-2.1
1:207
medical practitioners (including physicians, dentists, optometrists,
ophthalmologists, and persons engaged in all fields related generally to
medicine, but not including veterinarians), and including such common
facilities as an outpatient clinic or emergency treatment rooms, but not
including inpatient facilities.
MEMBERSHIP CLUB — A social, sports or fraternal association or
organization which is used exclusively by members and their guests and
which may contain bar facilities.
MOBILE HOME — A dwelling unit built on a chassis and containing
complete electrical, plumbing and sanitary facilities, and designed to be
installed on a temporary or permanent foundation for permanent living
quarters; this shall not include the type of vehicle known as a "camper
trailer" or similar trailer designed for travel, recreational, and vacation use.
MOBILE HOME PARK — Any plot of ground upon which two or more
mobile homes, occupied or intended to be occupied for dwelling or sleeping
purposes, are located for periods of longer than 90 days.
MOBILE HOME SPACE — A plot of ground within a mobile home park
designed for the accommodation of one mobile home.
MOTEL — A dwelling with attached, semidetached or detached units
providing lodging for transient clientele; each unit shall have separate
outside entrances and convenient parking spaces. A motel whose units
qualify as dwelling units shall be governed by the appropriate multifamily
regulations contained herein.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A building designed for or occupied by three
or more families, living independently in separate dwelling units with
services for heat, lighting and other utilities.
MUNICIPAL USE — Land or structure used for any operation by the Town
government, except as elsewhere more specifically defined.
NET FLOOR AREA — The total area of all floors of a dwelling unit, measured
to the interior walls thereof, and excluding unenclosed porches, terraces,
patios and all other external areas such as halls, stairways and the like used
in common with tenants of other dwelling units.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A building or structure,
lawfully existing at the effective date of this ordinance, or any subsequent
amendment thereto, which does not conform to one or more provisions of
this ordinance. Buildings or structures subject to variances shall not be
considered nonconforming.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot lawfully existing at the effective date
of this ordinance, or any subsequent amendment thereto, which does not
conform to one or more provisions of this ordinance. A lot subject to a
variance shall not be considered nonconforming.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use lawfully existing at the time of adoption
of this ordinance, or any subsequent amendment thereto, which does not
§ 300-2.1 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-2.1
1:208
conform to one or more provisions of this ordinance. A use subject to a
variance shall not be considered nonconforming.
NURSING, REST OR CONVALESCENT HOME — An extended or
intermediate-care facility licensed or approved to provide full-time
convalescent or chronic care to individuals who, by reason of advanced age,
chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves.
OCCUPANCY — Use or occupancy, character of use or designated purpose
of a building, structure or land.
OCCUPANCY PERMIT — A permit authorizing the occupancy and use of
land and/or structures and buildings.
OFF-SITE MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY (OMMD) — A registered
marijuana dispensary that is located off-site from the cultivation/processing
facility (and controlled and operated by the same registered and approved
not-for-profit entity which operates an affiliated RMD) but which serves
only to dispense the processed marijuana, related supplies and educational
materials to registered qualifying patients or their personal caregivers in
accordance with the provisions of 105 CMR 725.00.
ON-SITE SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATION — A solar photovoltaic
installation is a structure that is constructed at a location where other uses
of the underlying property occur.
ONE-FAMILY DWELLING — A detached building containing one dwelling
unit and having no party wall, or walls, in common with an adjacent
dwelling. Also referred to as a "single-family dwelling."
OPEN SPACE — All portions of a lot not devoted to building, parking lots
or vehicular surfaces. Such open space may include, but not be limited
to, landscaping, lawns, walkways for pedestrians and active or passive
recreation areas.
OPEN SPACE RATIO (OSR) — The ratio of open space to the gross floor area
proposed for a site. The open space ratio required within a zoning district
multiplied by the gross area proposed for a site within such district will
indicate that amount of open space which must be provided on the site.
PARKING AREA OR STRUCTURE, OFF-SITE — A structure or parcel of land
within the Central Business District used to provide parking in accordance
with the requirements of § 300-9.0 of this ordinance for uses also located
within the Central Business District. Such parcel or structure is physically
removed from the uses it serves.
PARKING AREA OR STRUCTURE, OFF-STREET — A structure or parcel of
land for the parking of automobiles and light commercial vehicles with a
rated capacity of one ton or less, provided no repairs, servicing or sale of
gasoline is carried on.
PARKING SPACE — An unobstructed space or area other than a street or
driveway that is permanently reserved and maintained for the parking of
one motor vehicle.
§ 300-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-2.1
1:209
PAWN SHOP/CASH-FOR-GOLD STORE — An establishment or portion
thereof that requires a junk dealer's license in accordance with Chapter
168, Junk Dealers, of the Town Code and that purchases property on the
condition of selling it back at a stipulated price, offers secured loans to
individuals with their property used as collateral, and/or purchases at retail
items made of or substantially consisting of silver, gold, or platinum metals.
This definition shall not apply to establishments that purchase secondhand
items and/or accept in-trade items as part of a business substantially
dedicated to the retail sale of like items in new condition, or businesses
that deal solely in clothing, furniture, or books. (See "secondhand
store.")[Added 5-21-2018]
PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY — The permit granting authority for
variances and administrative appeals in the Town of West Springfield,
Massachusetts shall be the Board of Appeals.
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment primarily
engaged in providing services involving the care of, repair, maintenance,
or customizing of personal properties that are worn or carried about the
person or are a physical component of the person, including, but not limited
to: barber shops, beauty salons, tailors, garment makers, milliners or
cobblers. Does not include medical and dental offices or veterinarians.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — The main or most important building in which
is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is located. Attached
structures shall be considered an integral part thereof, provided such
structures are completely enclosed by continuous walls supporting a roof.
PRINCIPAL USE — The main or primary purpose for which a structure or
lot is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it may be used, occupied
or maintained under this ordinance.
PRIVATE GARAGE — A structure which is accessory to a building and which
is used for the parking and storage of vehicles owned and operated by
the occupants thereof, and which is not a separate commercial enterprise
available to the general public.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in
rendering services by professional persons on a fee or contract basis,
limited to the following: the offices of accountants, architects, artists,
brokers/market analysts, chiropractors, engineers, lawyers, photographers,
planners/landscape architects, real estate agents and travel consultants.
RATED NAMEPLATE CAPACITY — The maximum rated output of electric
power production of the photovoltaic system in direct current (DC).
RECREATION CAMP OR CAMPGROUNDS — Any area or tract of land upon
which two or more campsites are commercially located, established, or
maintained for the occupancy of cabins, tents, trailers, or other camping
outfits as temporary living quarters for recreational, educational or vacation
purposes. Occupancy of campgrounds shall be temporary, falling between
April 1 and November 30 of the same year.
§ 300-2.1 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-2.1
1:210
RECREATION COMMUNITY CENTER — A building and associated playing
fields for recreational activities owned and operated by a public or nonprofit
group or agency, such as the Boys and Girls Club or the YMCA.
RECREATIONAL FACILITY — A place designed and equipped for the
conduct of sports, leisuretime activities and other customary and usual
nonmotorized recreational activities.
RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT — A use operated by an
entity licensed by the Cannabis Control Commission, and pursuant to all
other applicable state laws and regulations, that acquires, cultivates,
possesses, processes (including development of related products such as
food, tinctures, aerosols, oils, or ointments), packages, delivers, obtains,
manufactures, purchases, transfers, transports, sells, distributes,
dispenses, or administers marijuana, products containing marijuana, or
related supplies for nonmedical or recreational use.[Added 2-6-2017]
REGISTERED MARIJUANA DISPENSARY (RMD) — A use operated by a notfor-
profit entity registered and approved by the Massachusetts Department
of Public Health in accordance with 105 CMR 725.000, and pursuant to all
other applicable state laws and regulations, also to be known as a "medical
marijuana treatment center," that acquires, cultivates, possesses, processes
(including development of related products such as food, tinctures,
aerosols, oils, or ointments), transfers, transports, sells, distributes,
dispenses, or administers marijuana, products containing marijuana,
related supplies, or educational materials to registered qualifying patients
or their personal caregivers. An RMD shall explicitly include facilities which
cultivate and process medical marijuana, and which may also dispense
and deliver medical marijuana and related products. The cultivation and
processing of medical marijuana in accordance with these regulations is
considered to be a manufacturing use and is not agriculturally exempt from
zoning.
RESEARCH LABORATORY — A facility primarily for scientific or product
research, investigation, testing, or experimentation, along with incidental
offices, incidental storage, incidental manufacture and sale of products, and
incidental employee-only facilities.
RESIDENTIAL COMMUNICATIONS LINK — Any permanently affixed
fixture or equipment used for the wireless transmission and reception of
radio signals, including television, personal communication devices and
federally licensed amateur operations located on the same lot with, and
customary and incidental to, a residential use.
RESTAURANT — A business establishment whose principal business is the
preparation, selling of unpackaged food for personal consumption while
seated at tables or counters located within the building.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN — A place of business operated for the sale and
purchase at retail of food and/or beverages, any part of which is laid out
or equipped so as to deliver prepared food and/or beverages to patrons
in motor vehicles or to permit patrons to purchase prepared food and/or
beverages for consumption in motor vehicles.
§ 300-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-2.1
1:211
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THROUGH — A place of business operated for the
sale and purchase at retail of food and/or beverages where the patron
customarily drives a motor vehicle onto the site and to a window or
mechanical drive-through by which the patron is served without exiting
the vehicle. Prior to service, the engine of the motor vehicle customarily
remains in operation.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — A restaurant, the principal activity of which
is the sale of food for consumption on, or off, the premises which is:
RESTAURANT, TAKE-OUT — An establishment which by design of physical
facilities or by service or packaging procedures permits or encourages the
purchase of prepared ready-to-eat foods intended primarily to be consumed
off the premises, and where the consumption of food in motor vehicles on
the premises is not permitted or not encouraged.
RETAIL STORE — An establishment engaged in selling goods or
merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption
and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods.
SANITARIUM or SANATORIUM — An establishment for the recuperation or
treatment of invalid or convalescent persons.
SECONDHAND STORE — An establishment or portion thereof that requires
a junk dealer's license in accordance with Chapter 168, Junk Dealers, of
the Town Code and that purchases secondhand items and accepts in-trade
items as part of a business substantially dedicated to the retail sale of like
items in new condition, or an establishment or portion thereof that requires
a junk dealer's license in accordance with Chapter 168, Junk Dealers, of the
Ordinances of the Town of West Springfield and that deals solely in clothing,
furniture, or books. This definition shall not apply to establishments that
purchase property on the condition of selling it back at a stipulated price,
offer secured loans to individuals with their property used as collateral,
and/or purchase at retail items made of or substantially consisting of silver,
gold, or platinum metals. (See "pawn shop/cash-for-gold store.")[Added
5-21-2018]
SELF-SERVICE GASOLINE FILLING STATION — A premises used for the
retail sale of gasoline, oil, and automotive accessories, where the customers
themselves may convey fuels from the fuel pump into the motor vehicle gas
tank or into portable gasoline containers.
SELF-SERVICE UNITS — A building or group of structures consisting of
individual, small self-contained units that are leased or owned for the
storage of business and household goods or contractor's supplies.
Primarily intended for immediate consumption rather than for use as
an ingredient or component of meals;
A.
B. Available upon short waiting time; and
Packaged or presented in such a manner that it can be readily eaten
outside the premises where it is sold.
C.
§ 300-2.1 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-2.1
1:212
SIGN — Any display of lettering, flags, logos, colors, lights, or illuminated
neon tubes visible to the public from outside of a building or from a
traveled way, which either conveys a message to the public or intends
to advertise, direct, invite, announce, or draw attention to, directly or
indirectly, a use conducted, goods, products, services or facilities available
either on the lot or on any other premises, excluding window display of
goods and merchandise.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A detached building designed for or
occupied exclusively by one family.
SITE — Any plot or parcel of land or combination of contiguous lots or
parcels of land.
SITE PLAN — The plans for a given development depicting one original
design under the control of one agency or developer and indicating various
phases of planning and construction, including essential architectural,
engineering, and landscaping features. Such plans shall show the location,
shape, and height of buildings, location of roads, access and circulation
drives, off-street parking areas and description of uses of buildings as they
relate to the purpose of this ordinance as set forth in Article I.
SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC ARRAY — An arrangement of solar photovoltaic
panels.
SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATION — A solar photovoltaic system of
any nameplate generating capacity with any type of mounting system.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A process which allows the Town to conduct a more
detailed review of certain uses and structures which may have a significant
impact on their surroundings and ensures proposals are consistent with the
purpose of the Zoning Ordinance as specified in Article I of this ordinance.
Such special permit shall be issued in accordance with the particular
section(s) of this ordinance authorizing the special permit and establishing
special permit criteria where applicable.
SPECIAL PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY — That body or individual
empowered to grant special permits. The special permit granting authority
for the Town of West Springfield, Massachusetts shall be the Zoning Board
of Appeals or the Planning Board as specified by Article V, Use Regulations,
and Article XII, Special Permits.
STABLE, COMMERCIAL — A building where horses are kept for
remuneration, hire, sale, boarding, riding or show.
STABLE, PRIVATE — A building incidental to an existing residential,
principal use that shelters animals for the exclusive use of occupants of the
premises.
STORY — That part of a building between any floor and the floor or roof next
above. For the purpose of this ordinance, where a building is not divided
into stories, a story shall be considered 15 feet in height, provided that
steeples, penthouses, cupolas, stage lofts, etc. shall not be considered as
additional stories. A basement or cellar, the ceiling of which extends more
§ 300-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-2.1
1:213
than 4 1/2 feet above the average finished grade, shall be a story within the
meaning of this ordinance.
STREET — A way which is used, or intended to be used, for a passage or
travel by motor vehicles and is one of the following:
STREET LINE — The dividing line between a street and a lot.
STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY — A general term denoting land, property or
interest therein, usually a strip acquired for or devoted to a planned
roadway. A street right-of-way should be sufficient to accommodate the
ultimate roadway, including, but not limited to: the street pavement,
shoulder, grass strip, sidewalk, public utility facilities, street trees, and
snow storage.
STREET, ARTERIAL — Those streets or ways within the Town which by
design and/or use serve major centers of activity, accommodate through
traffic and carry the highest traffic volume. For the purposes of this
ordinance, all numbered federal and state highways shall be considered
arterials.
STREET, COLLECTOR — Those streets or ways within the Town which by
design and/or use serve to distribute traffic from arterials to areas of lowintensity
use within the Town and to collect traffic from such areas for
movement to arterials. Collectors may carry some through traffic.
STREET, LOCAL — Those streets or ways within the Town which by design
and/or use provide direct access to abutting land and distribute traffic to
collector and arterial streets. Through traffic movement on local streets is
discouraged.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials, assembled at a fixed location to
give support or shelter, such as a building, framework, retaining wall, tent,
reviewing stand, platform, bin, fence, flagpole, mast for radio and television
antennas or the like. The word "structure" shall be construed, where the
context allows, as though followed by the words "or part or parts thereof."
STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY — See "building, accessory."
STRUCTURE, NONCONFORMING — See "nonconforming building or
structure."
A. A public way or county road; or
A way which the Town Clerk certifies is maintained and used as a public
way; or
B.
A way shown on a plan approved and endorsed in accordance with the
Subdivision Control Law; or
C.
A way physically in existence when the Subdivision Control Law
became effective, May 1955, in the Town of West Springfield, which in
the opinion of the Planning Board is presently suitable to provide for the
needs of vehicular traffic and for the installation of municipal services
to serve the land.
D.
§ 300-2.1 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-2.1
1:214
STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY — A structure without any foundation or
footings and which is intended to be removed when the designated use for
which the temporary structure was erected has ceased.
SUBSTANTIALLY DIFFERENT USE — A use which by reason of its normal
operation would cause readily observable differences in patronage, service,
appearance, noise, employment or similar characteristics from the use to
which it is being compared.
SUPERMARKET — A retail establishment primarily selling food as well as
other convenience and household goods.
TAVERN, PUB OR COCKTAIL LOUNGE — An establishment serving
alcoholic beverages in which the principal business is the sale of such
beverages at retail for consumption on the premises.
THEATER — A building or part of a building for dramatic, musical or live
performances or for the screening of movies.
THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment
administering by any method of pressure on or friction against, or by
stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating
of external parts of the human body with the hands or with the aid of
any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances, with or without
supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniment, antiseptics, oils,
powder, creams, lotions, ointment or other such similar preparations
commonly used in the practice of massage under such circumstances that
it is reasonably expected that the person to whom the service is provided,
or some third person on his or her behalf, will pay money or give any other
consideration or any gratuity therefor, excepting those practitioners duly
licensed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
TOWNHOUSE — A dwelling containing three or more dwelling units, each
sharing one or more party walls with another dwelling unit, and each having
at least one floor at ground level with direct access to yards or open space
on two or more sides. Dwelling units within townhouses may be owned
individually or rented.
TRADESMAN — A builder, carpenter, electrician, painter, plumber, tree
surgeon or similar building trade occupation.
TRAILER — Any vehicle or object on wheels and having no motive power of
its own, but which is drawn by, used or capable of being used in combination
with a motor vehicle.
TREE BELT — That portion of a street right-of-way located between the
paved portion of the street and the outside edge of the right-of-way
containing a sidewalk, if any, and commonly planted with trees, shrubs,
grass or other vegetation.
TRUCKING TERMINAL — An area and building where cargo is stored and
where trucks load and unload cargo on a regular basis.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A detached building containing two dwellings.
§ 300-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-2.1
1:215
UNREGISTERED MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle required to be
registered by law of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts for operation on
public ways but not so registered.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed,
arranged, intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. The
term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed to include any
nonconforming use.
USE, ACCESSORY — See "accessory use."
USE, NONCONFORMING — See "nonconforming use."
USE, PRINCIPAL — See "principal use."
USE, SUBSTANTIALLY DIFFERENT — See "substantially different use."
VARIANCE — Such departure from the terms of this ordinance relating to
structure, front yard, side yards, rear yard, frontage requirements and/or
lot size as the Board of Appeals, upon appeal in specific cases, is empowered
to authorize under the terms of Article XV, Administration. A variance is
granted because strict enforcement of the zoning ordinance as it applies
to a specific lot would cause an undue hardship and present site-specific
practical difficulties that are not relevant to other lots in the district.
VETERINARY HOSPITAL — See "hospital, veterinary."
VISUAL FLIGHT RULES (VFR) — Those conditions of flight established by
the Federal Aviation Administration which allow aircraft to operate on a
"seen and be seen" basis and which do not require tracking by ground radar
facilities.
VITICULTURE — The cultivation of grapes.
WAREHOUSE/RETAIL TRADE AND DISTRIBUTION FACILITY — An
establishment or place of business engaged in the operation of a warehouse
and the selling of a single product category (examples of single product
categories are meat products, lighting fixtures, textiles) to retailers, to
industrial, commercial, institutional, professional business users, and to
the general public, or to other wholesalers. Said use does not include
a wholesale membership club, retail sales (examples of retail uses not
permitted are Sears, Old Navy, Target, Wal-Mart, Home Depot, Dick's
Sporting Goods) other than as allowed by the previous sentence, retail
outlet stores or retail showrooms primarily for the general public.
WAREHOUSING — Terminal facilities for handling freight with or without
maintenance facilities.
WHOLESALE TRADE AND DISTRIBUTION — Establishment or places of
business primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers, to industrial,
commercial, institutional, or professional business users, or to other
wholesalers, or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or
selling merchandise to, such individuals or companies.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — A communications facility
consisting of fixed structures and equipment used for the wireless
§ 300-2.1 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-2.1
1:216
transmission and reception of radio signals for: 1) the reception and
transmission equipment and fixtures such as antennas, communications
dishes and similar devices; 2) structures that are erected and used primarily
to support such reception and transmission equipment, including, without
limitation, monopoles and lattice towers; 3) any accessory mechanical,
electronic, or telephonic equipment, fixtures, wiring and protective
covering customary and necessary to operate such wireless
communications equipment; and 4) any functionally equivalent devices or
equipment. A wireless communications facility is a transmission and
reception substation, not a principal facility for conducting a
communications business.
YARD — An open area on the same lot with a building or other structure
located between the building and the lot lines, unoccupied and
unobstructed by structures from the ground up except as may be allowed
by specific provisions of this ordinance, including ingress and egress as
required by the building code.
YARD, FRONT — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the
principal building, extending the full width of the lot and from the street
line to the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot.
The depth of the front yard shall be measured between the front lines of
the building and the street line. Covered porches, whether enclosed or
unenclosed, shall be considered as part of the main building and shall
not project into a required front yard. On lots containing two or more
principal buildings, the front yard shall be defined by that principal
building closest to the front yard street line. See Diagram 2-3.
A.
YARD, REAR — An open, unoccupied space, except for accessory
buildings, on the same lot with the principal building between the rear
line of the building and rear line of the lot and extending the full width
of the lot. On lots containing two or more principal buildings, the rear
yard shall be defined by that principal building closest to the rear lot
line. See Diagram 2-3.
B.
YARD, SIDE — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the
principal building situated between the principal building and the side
line of the lot and extending from the front yard to the rear yard. Any
lot line not a rear line or a front line shall be deemed a side line. On lots
containing two or more principal buildings, side yards shall be defined
by the principal building closest to each side lot line. See Diagram 2-3.
C.
§ 300-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-2.1
1:217
§ 300-2.1 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-2.1
1:218
ARTICLE III
Zoning Districts
§ 300-3.0. Establishment of districts.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the Town of West Springfield is hereby
divided into the following 20 zoning districts:
Full Name Short Name
Residence A RA
Residence A-1 RA-1
Residence A-2 RA-2
Residence B RB
Residence C RC
Neighborhood Business NB
Business A BA
Business A-1 BA-1
Business B BB
Business B-1 BB-1
Central Business CB
Industrial I
Industrial Park IP
Industrial Park - Light IP-L
Special Use (Technical) SU-T
Special Use (Office) SU-O
Special Use (Multifamily) SU-M
Special Use (Mobile Home) SU-H
Planned Unit Development PUD
Recreation REC
§ 300-3.1. Overlay districts.
The following overlay districts are hereby established:
Full Name Short Name
Water Supply Protection WSP
Flood Hazard FH
Age-Restricted Housing ARH
Memorial Corridor MC
§ 300-3.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-3.2
1:219
§ 300-3.2. Purpose of zoning districts.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the Town of West Springfield has
established these zoning districts for the following purposes:
Residence A (RA). The purpose of the RA District is to provide for
residential areas that allow for lower density residential areas primarily
for single-family dwellings.
A.
Residence A-1 (RA-1). The purpose of the RA-1 District is to provide
for residential areas of medium density primarily for single-family
dwellings.
B.
Residence A-2 (RA-2). The purpose of the RA-2 District is to provide for
residential areas of higher density primarily for single-family dwellings.
C.
Residence B (RB). The purpose of the RB District is to provide for
residential areas of higher density primarily for single-family and twofamily
dwellings.
D.
Residence C (RC). The purpose of the RC District is to provide for
residential neighborhoods of higher densities that allow for a mix of
residential and professional office uses.
E.
Neighborhood Business (NB). The purpose of the NB District is to
establish a small business district in residential areas that permit a
number of selected small businesses that could provide limited services
to the surrounding neighborhood.
F.
Business A (BA). The purpose of the BA District is to provide areas
for a wide range of retail uses/services and commercial activities, of
higher densities, along primary roads to serve as business highway
corridors within West Springfield. BA Districts are especially capable
of accommodating high-volume traffic-generating uses, such as drivethrough
restaurants, convenience stores, gas stations, and drive-in
banks.
G.
Business A-1 (BA-1). The purpose of the BA-1 District is to provide
a mixed-use area, of medium density, containing a wide variety of
institutional, civic and professional/business uses with multifamily
residential uses and a limited quantity of commercial uses. This district
is applied to the area of the West Springfield Town Center abutting Park
Street and Park Avenue.
H.
Business B (BB). The purpose of the BB District is to provide a higher
density area for a mix of business and industrial uses.
I.
Business B-1 (BB-1). The purpose of the BB-1 District is to provide a
higher density area for a mix of industrial, multifamily residential and
limited commercial uses.
J.
Central Business (CB). The purpose of the CB District zoning is
intended to emphasize the unique character of the Elm Street/Westfield
K.
§ 300-3.2 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-3.2
1:220
Street section of West Springfield by encouraging a mix of public
service uses with commercial uses of neighborhood and community
scope. Requirements within the district also attempt to encourage
retention of the area's pedestrian-oriented characteristics but do not
discourage access by motor vehicles, provision of adequate parking or
limited regional services. However, uses which require large expanses
of land, interrupt pedestrian shopping and circulation patterns or
otherwise interfere with the goals, subgoals and policies contained in
this section are discouraged.
Industrial (I). The purpose of the I District is to provide a high-density
area for industrial uses, both heavy and light uses.
L.
Industrial Park (IP). The purpose of IP Districts is to encourage the
environmentally and socially sound development of industrial activities
and various complementary or compatible uses.
M.
Industrial Park - Light (IP-L). The purpose of the IP-L Districts is to
encourage the environmentally and socially sound development of
small-scale industrial activities and various complementary or
compatible uses.
N.
Special Use (Technical), Special Use (Office), Special Use (Multifamily),
and Special Use (Mobile Home). The purpose of all Special Use Districts
is to encourage the flexible, orderly and rational development of larger
parcels of land, i.e., five acres or more.
O.
Planned Unit Development (PUD). The purpose of the PUD District
is to promote greater flexibility in land use and building design by
permitting modification of the specific provisions of this ordinance for
designated areas that will be developed as a single entity, provided
that the development is compatible with the surrounding land uses and
consistent with the Town's Master Plan. A planned unit development
is also intended to provide for a mixture of land uses, including
residential, commercial and/or industrial; the creative use of open
space; the protection of natural resources and environmentally
sensitive areas; and greater amenities to the occupants and users of the
development.
P.
Flood Hazard (FH). The purposes of establishing the Flood Hazard
Overlay District are to:
Ensure public safety through reducing the threats to life and
personal injury due to flooding.
(1)
(2) Eliminate new hazards to emergency response officials.
Prevent the occurrence of public emergencies resulting from water
quality, contamination, and pollution due to flooding.
(3)
Q.
§ 300-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-3.2
1:221
Avoid the loss of utility services that, if damaged by flooding, would
disrupt or shut down the utility network and impact regions of the
community beyond the site of flooding.
(4)
Eliminate costs associated with the response and cleanup of
flooding conditions.
(5)
Reduce damage to public and private property resulting from
flooding waters.
(6)
Water Supply Protection (WSP). The purpose of the WSP District is to
promote the health, safety and welfare of the community by protecting
and preserving the surface resources of the Town and the region from
any use of land or buildings which may reduce the quality of its water
resources.
R.
Recreational (REC). The purpose of the REC District is to promote
the sound use of the community's waterfront for passive and active
recreational uses and to preserve the scenic qualities of the
Connecticut and Westfield Rivers and the public's ability to enjoy visual
and recreational access to the rivers; promote the creation of natural
buffer area or greenbelt along the length of the river, punctuated by
public access areas and open spaces; protect life, public safety and
property from flooding hazards, and preserve natural flood storage
areas; preserve environmentally sensitive areas, such as fisheries and
wildlife habitat, along the river; and prevent water pollution caused by
erosion, sedimentation, nutrient or pesticide run-off, and poorly sited
waste disposal facilities.
S.
Age-Restricted Housing (ARH). The purpose of the ARH Overlay Zoning
District is to encourage the development of affordable and market-rate
housing for individuals aged 55 and over, by allowing for a greater
variety of building types at a higher density than would normally be
allowed; by allowing greater flexibility in site planning so as to promote
the sound development of land which reduces residents' burdens of
property maintenance and which reduces demands on municipal
services; and to promote flexibility in land use planning in order to
improve site layouts, protect natural features and environmental values
and utilize land in harmony with neighboring properties.
T.
Memorial Corridor (MC). The purpose of the MC Overlay District is to
promote the health, safety, and welfare of the public and secure public
benefits by the following means:
Minimizing adverse land uses and community impacts on locations
within proximity of a gaming establishment;
(1)
Encouraging economic stimulus through appropriate commercial
development; and
(2)
Recognizing the Eastern States Exposition fairgrounds as a
regional community asset by formalizing the list of historically
(3)
U.
§ 300-3.2 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-3.2
1:222
§ 300-3.3. Zoning Map.
The location and boundaries of Zoning District Map and overlay districts
hereby established are shown and on a series of maps entitled "Zoning
Map, West Springfield, Massachusetts." This map, including overlays and
amendments, shall be on file with the Town Clerk and authenticated with
the signatures of the Planning Board.
permitted uses and providing supplemental standards of use that
would apply within the Fairgrounds Subdistrict of the Memorial
Corridor with the long-term goal of broadening and enhancing the
year-round use of the site and related facilities so that it may
continue to effectively benefit and serve the Town of West
Springfield and New England region over the long term.
Flood Hazard Overly District Maps. The Flood Hazard Overlay District
is herein established as an overlay district. Said Flood Hazard Overlay
District is superimposed on certain portions of the principal zoning
districts established in § 300-3.2 but do not alter the uses permitted
therein. The district includes all special flood hazard areas within the
Town of West Springfield designated as Zone A or AE on the Hampden
County Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) issued by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the administration of the
National Flood Insurance Program. The map panels of the Hampden
County FIRM that are wholly or partially within the Town of West
Springfield are panel numbers 25013C0190E, 25013C0191E,
25013C0192E, 25013C0193E, 25013C0194E, 25013C0213E,
25013C0377E, 25013C0381E, 25013C0382E, 25013C0383E,
25013C0384E, 25013C0401E, 25013C0402E, 25013C0403E, and
25013C0404E, dated July 16, 2013. The exact boundaries of the district
may be defined by the one-hundred-year base flood elevations shown on
the FIRM and further defined by the Hampden County Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) report dated July 16, 2013. The FIRM and FIS report are
incorporated herein by reference and are on file with the Town Clerk,
Planning Board, Building Official, and Conservation Commission.
A.
Age Restricted Housing (ARH). The purpose of the Age Restricted
Housing Overlay Zoning District is to encourage the development of
affordable and market-rate housing for individuals aged 55 and over,
by allowing for a greater variety of building types at a higher density
than would normally be allowed; by allowing greater flexibility in site
planning so as to promote the sound development of land which
reduces residents' burdens of property maintenance and which reduces
demands on municipal services; and to promote flexibility in land use
planning in order to improve site layouts, protect natural features and
environmental values and utilize land in harmony with neighboring
properties.
B.
Water Supply Protection Overlay Map. The Water Supply Protection
District is herein established to include all lands within the Town of
West Springfield lying within the watershed areas of public water
C.
§ 300-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-3.3
1:223
§ 300-3.4. Interpretation of district boundaries.
The location of the boundary lines of the districts shown upon the Zoning
Map shall be determined as follows:
supply reservoirs which now or may in the future provide public water
supply. The map entitled "Water Supply Protection District, Town of
West Springfield," on file with the Town Clerk, delineates the
boundaries of the district.
Memorial Corridor Overlay Map. The Memorial Corridor Overlay
District is herein established to include all lands within the Town of
West Springfield lying within the area shown on the plan entitled
"Memorial Corridor Overlay District," dated October 2013, prepared by
Tighe and Bond, on file with the Town Clerk.
D.
District boundary lines on ways. Where the boundary lines are shown
upon said map within the street lines of public or private ways, the
center lines of such ways shall be the boundary lines.
A.
District boundary lines on lot lines. Where the boundary lines are
shown approximately on the location of property or lot lines, and the
exact location of a property, lot or boundary line is not indicated by
means of figures, then the property or lot lines shall be the boundary
lines.
B.
District boundary lines outside of street lines. Where the boundary lines
are located outside of such street lines and are shown approximately
parallel thereto, they shall be deemed to be parallel to such street lines,
and figures upon said map between such boundary lines and street
lines, such distances being measured at right angles to such street lines
unless otherwise indicated.
C.
District boundary lines on rivers. Where the boundary lines follow a
river, the boundary lines shall be deemed to be at the limit of the
jurisdiction of the Town, unless otherwise indicated.
D.
Location of district boundary lines. In cases which are not governed by
other provisions of this section, the location of said boundary lines shall
be determined by the distances in feet, if given, from other lines upon
said map, or, if distances are not given, then by the scale of said map.
E.
Determination of district boundary line. Whenever any uncertainty
exists as to the exact location of a district boundary line, the location of
such line shall be determined by the Inspector of Buildings; provided,
however, that any person aggrieved by his decision may appeal to the
Board of Appeals, as provided in § 300-15.8 of this ordinance.
F.
§ 300-3.3 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-3.4
1:224
ARTICLE IV
Existing Structures and Uses
§ 300-4.0. Purpose and interpretation.
§ 300-4.1. Applicability.
The purpose of this article is to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare of the Town of West Springfield and its citizens,
promote the re-use of land and structures that contribute to the
character, diversity and sustainability of a neighborhood and to
promote economic redevelopment and the re-use of developed land by
regulating structures and uses that do not conform to one or more
provisions of this ordinance, but were lawfully established and in
compliance with all applicable ordinances and laws at the time the
structure was constructed and/or the use begun.
A.
Nothing contained within this article shall be construed, nor shall it be
implied, so as to allow for the continuation or alteration of structures
or uses that were not in compliance with all applicable ordinances and
laws at the time the structure was constructed or the use begun.
B.
Existing structures, uses and permits.
This ordinance shall not apply to structures or uses lawfully in
existence or lawfully begun, or to a building permit or special
permit issued before the first publication of notice of a public
hearing regarding an amendment to this ordinance which makes
said structure or use nonconforming, but shall apply to any
modification or change of such use, to a building permit or special
permit issued after the first notice of said public hearing and to any
reconstruction, extension or structural change of such structure
begun after the first notice of said public hearing.
(1)
This Article IV is intended to regulate:
(a) The change of use of the land or structure;
The reconstruction of a structure or to any alteration of a
structure when the alteration would increase the footprint,
height or volume of the structure or any other exterior
structural change (hereinafter to be known collectively as
"alteration"); and
(b)
To any alteration of a structure or land to provide for its use for
a purpose or in a manner different from the use to which it was
put before the alteration or for its use for the same purpose
to a greater extent (hereinafter to be known collectively as
"change of use") of a lawfully established nonconforming
structure or nonconforming use by establishing the standards
by which said structure or said use may be altered or changed.
(c)
(2)
A.
§ 300-4.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-4.1
1:225
§ 300-4.2. Definition of nonconforming uses and structures.
§ 300-4.3. Alteration or change of nonconforming multifamily and
nonresidential structures and uses.
Alteration of structures and land. Alteration of structures or land or
the use of property conducted under a lawfully issued building permit
or special permit pursuant to Subsection A(1) shall conform to any
subsequent amendment of this ordinance unless the structural or land
alteration or use of the property is commenced within a period of not
more than 180 days after the issuance of the building permit or special
permit and, in cases involving construction, unless such construction
is continued to completion in a continuous and reasonably expeditious
manner, which shall not exceed two years from the date of issuance of
the building permit.
B.
Signs. The provisions of Article IV of this ordinance shall not apply
to signs. (Refer to § 300-9.2 for standards related to nonconforming
signs.)
C.
Nonconforming use. The term "nonconforming use" shall mean the use
of a structure or land lawfully permitted and lawfully existing at the
time of the adoption of this ordinance or any applicable amendments
thereof, but which does not conform to the current requirements of this
ordinance or any subsequent amendments thereof.
A.
Nonconforming structure. The term "nonconforming structure" shall
mean a structure lawfully permitted and lawfully existing at the time of
the adoption of this ordinance or any applicable amendments thereof,
but which does not conform to the current requirements of this
ordinance and any subsequent amendments thereof.
B.
Multifamily and nonresidential structures. Alteration to a
nonconforming multifamily or nonresidential structure may be allowed
only upon approval of the permit granting authority with specific
written findings that such alteration shall:
(1) Not create a new nonconformity or violation; and
Enhance the general character and quality of the neighborhood;
and
(2)
Be consistent with the architectural design and style of the
abutting properties and surrounding neighborhood; and
(3)
(4) Provide adequate off-street parking for the use of the property; and
Not be more detrimental to the neighborhood than the existing
nonconforming structure.
(5)
A.
Multifamily and nonresidential uses. Alteration or change in use to
an existing nonconforming multifamily use or nonresidential use may
B.
§ 300-4.1 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-4.3
1:226
§ 300-4.4. Alteration and reconstruction of nonconforming singleand
two-family uses and structures.
be allowed only upon approval of the permit granting authority with
specific written findings that such alteration shall:
Enhance the general character and quality of the neighborhood;
and
(1)
(2) Provide adequate off-street parking for the use of the property; and
Not be more detrimental to the neighborhood than the existing
nonconforming use.
(3)
Permit granting authority. For the purpose of administering § 300-4.3
of this ordinance, the Board of Appeals shall be the permit granting
authority.
C.
Alteration by-right. Alteration or reconstruction to a nonconforming
single- or two-family residential use or structure shall not be considered
an increase in the nonconforming nature of the structure and shall be
permitted by right, provided the following standards are met:
Alteration or reconstruction of a structure which is nonconforming
due to setback requirements will not result in additional
encroachment by the nonconforming setback(s); and
(1)
Alteration or reconstruction of a structure which is nonconforming
due to insufficient lot area will not result in the expansion of the
structure into the minimum front, side and rear yard requirements;
and
(2)
Alteration or reconstruction of a structure which is nonconforming
due to height requirements will not result in an increase in the
height of the structure; and
(3)
The proposed alteration or reconstruction will not result in any
additional violation of any other zoning requirements; and
(4)
The proposed alteration or reconstruction will not result in more
than a 20% increase in the gross floor area of the existing structure
(exclusive of basements not defined as habitable under the
Massachusetts State Building Code in effect at the time of
application for said alteration/reconstruction).
(5)
A.
Alteration by special permit. Alteration or reconstruction of a
nonconforming single- or two-family use or structure that does not
comply with the provisions of Subsection A may be allowed only upon
approval by the permit granting authority with specific written findings
that such alteration or reconstruction shall:
(1) Not create a new nonconformity or violation; and
B.
§ 300-4.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-4.4
1:227
§ 300-4.5. Discontinuance and re-establishment of nonconforming
uses.
Enhance the general character and quality of the neighborhood;
and
(2)
Be consistent with the architectural design and style of the
abutting properties and surrounding neighborhood; and
(3)
(4) Provide adequate off-street parking for the use of the property; and
Not be more detrimental to the neighborhood than the existing
nonconforming use and/or structure.
(5)
Alteration of a nonconforming structure from single-family use to twofamily
use. In a zoning district allowing for single- and two-family uses,
a change of a nonconforming structure from single-family use to twofamily
use shall require approval by the permit granting authority, with
specific written findings, as set forth in Subsection B.
C.
Permit granting authority. For the purpose of administering § 300-4.4
of this ordinance, the Board of Appeals shall be the permit granting
authority.
D.
Re-establishment of a nonconforming use. No nonconforming use of any
structure or land shall be re-established where there has been a change
to a use of the structure or land which is permitted in the zoning district
in which the structure or land is located.
A.
Discontinuance of a nonconforming use. Except as provided for by
Subsection C of this section, if the nonconforming use of any structure
or land shall be discontinued for a period of 24 consecutive months,
it shall not be re-established and all future uses thereof shall be in
conformity with the then applicable provisions of this ordinance. For
the purposes of this section, the discontinuance period shall not be
considered broken by temporary or sporadic use during said two-year
period. The use shall not be considered temporary or sporadic when
such use is active for a minimum of eight hours per day for a period
of not less than 60 or more consecutive days, exclusive of Sundays and
holidays.
B.
Re-establishment of a discontinued nonconforming use. The reestablishment
of a discontinued nonconforming use may be allowed
only upon approval by the permit granting authority with specific
written findings that:
The nonconforming use of property is compatible in type and scale
with the abutting uses and with the character of the neighborhood;
and
(1)
The nonconforming use of property will not create a nuisance to the
general public or any abutter as defined by MGL c. 40A by reason
(2)
C.
§ 300-4.4 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-4.5
1:228
§ 300-4.6. Restoration and reconstruction of damaged
nonconforming multifamily and nonresidential structures.
of air quality, water, light or noise, degradation of traffic safety or
increase traffic congestion; and
The intensity of the nonconforming nature of the use is lessened to
the greatest extent reasonably possible; and
(3)
The nonconforming use of property will not create a new
nonconformity; and
(4)
The nonconforming use of property will enhance the general
character and quality of the neighborhood; and
(5)
The nonconforming use of property will provide adequate off-street
parking for the use of the property; and
(6)
The nonconforming use of property will not be more detrimental
to the neighborhood than the existing nonconforming use and/or
structure prior to its lapse; and
(7)
Not more than five years have elapsed since the discontinuance of
said nonconforming use.
(8)
Permit granting authority. For the purpose of administering § 300-4.5
of this ordinance, the Planning Board shall be the permit granting
authority.
D.
Restoration and reconstruction by-right. Nothing in this ordinance shall
prevent the reconstruction or substantial restoration and the
continuance of use of a nonconforming multifamily or nonresidential
structure which has been damaged by fire, explosion, flood, riot, act of
the public enemy or accident of any kind if the estimated replacement
cost of such restorations does not exceed 75% of the most recent
appraised building value of the structure as identified on the field
record card in effect at the time of the damage that is on record in
the West Springfield Assessor's office, provided that the structure as
restored shall be constructed within the existing footprint and shall not
be greater in volume, height or area than the original nonconforming
structure and provided, further, that said restoration is commenced
within 12 months of the initial damage and completed within 24 months
of said damage. The estimated cost of such restoration shall be
determined by the Building Commissioner. If the property owner
disputes the determination of the Building Commissioner, he may
request that the Building Commissioner base the determination upon
receipt of an estimate from an independent contractor selected by the
Building Commissioner. The cost to obtain said estimate shall be borne
by the owner of the premises and shall be paid to the Town at the time
the building permit application is filed. Said restoration costs shall also
include all improvements or upgrades required by the State Building
Code.
A.
§ 300-4.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-4.6
1:229
§ 300-4.7. Restoration or reconstruction of damaged noncompliant
structures.
Restoration and reconstruction by special permit. The reconstruction
or substantial restoration of a damaged nonconforming multifamily or
nonresidential structure where said restoration exceeds 75% of the
most recent appraised building value of the structure as identified on
the field record card in effect at the time of the damage that is on
record in the West Springfield Assessor's office may be allowed only
upon approval by the permit granting authority with specific written
findings that:
The structure as restored shall be constructed within the existing
footprint and not be greater in volume, height or area than the
original nonconforming structure; and
(1)
The structure as restored will enhance the general character and
qualities of the neighborhood; and
(2)
It shall be consistent with the architectural design and style of the
abutting properties and surrounding neighborhood; and
(3)
Adequate off-street parking is available for the use of the structure;
and
(4)
The nonconforming nature of the structure is lessened to the
greatest extent reasonably practicable; and
(5)
Application for the special permit for said reconstruction or
substantial restoration is filed with the Town Clerk within 12
months of the damage to the structure; and
(6)
The reconstruction or substantial restoration is completed within
24 months of the issuance of the building permit allowing for said
reconstruction or substantial restoration; and
(7)
The owner of the structure is in full compliance with all orders
issued by the Town with respect to securing and maintaining the
structure and the premises.
(8)
B.
Permit granting authority. For the purpose of administering § 300-4.6
of this ordinance, the Planning Board shall be the permit granting
authority.
C.
Definition of a noncompliant structure.
A noncompliant structure shall be defined as any structure
constructed in accordance with an improperly issued building
permit, which has been in existence for at least six years and
during which no enforcement action has been initiated by the
Building Department.
(1)
A.
§ 300-4.6 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-4.7
1:230
§ 300-4.8. Restoration or reconstruction of damaged unlawful
structures.
For the purposes of this section, a noncompliant structure shall not
include a structure in existence without the issuance of a building
permit or a structure in existence which is not in compliance with
a lawfully issued building permit.
(2)
Restoration and reconstruction of noncompliant structures. For the
limited purposes of substantial restoration or reconstruction,
noncompliant structures shall be considered nonconforming and any
restoration or reconstruction of a noncompliant structure shall be
governed by this Article IV of the Zoning Ordinance.
B.
Definition of an unlawful structure.
An unlawful structure shall be defined as:
Any structure which was constructed under a lawfully issued
building permit but which does not comply with said building
permit; and
(a)
Is in violation of a provision of the zoning ordinance which was
in effect at the time of construction; and
(b)
The structure has been in existence for at least 10 years,
during which no enforcement action has been initiated by the
Building Department to correct said violation(s).
(c)
(1)
Structures constructed without the issuance of a building permit
shall not be considered nonconforming, noncompliant or unlawful.
(2)
A.
Restoration and reconstruction of unlawful structures.
For the limited purposes of substantial restoration or
reconstruction, unlawful structures shall be considered
nonconforming and any restoration or reconstruction of an
unlawful structure shall be governed by this Article IV of the zoning
ordinance.
(1)
The permit granting authority, when making findings related to
approving the substantial restoration or reconstruction of an
unlawful structure, shall also find that:
The zoning violation that renders the structure as unlawful
is not detrimental to the public and does not nullify or
substantially derogate from the intent of the zoning ordinance;
and
(a)
Correcting the violation would result in significant economic
hardship to the property owner.
(b)
(2)
B.
§ 300-4.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-4.9
1:231
§ 300-4.9. Development of established vacant nonconforming
single-family residential lots.
A vacant preexisting nonconforming lot located in an RA, RA-1, RA-2
or RB Zoning District under common ownership with an abutting
developed lot that has been merged by operation of law may be
considered and developed as a legal building lot for single-family use
upon the issuance of a special permit, subject to the following
development standards:
The development of the property and the structures located
thereon shall conform with the height, bulk, external appearance
and general character of the abutting structures and
neighborhood; and
(1)
The development of the property will not, by reason of air, water,
light, noise, obstruction of views, traffic safety or traffic congestion,
negatively affect the character and quality of life of the
neighborhood; and
(2)
The development of the property will provide adequate off-street
parking for the use of the property; and
(3)
The subject lot shall have a minimum of 75 feet of frontage and
7,500 square feet of land area or conform to the frontage and
lot size standards of the neighborhood within which its located,
whichever is greater; and
(4)
The front yard building setback requirement shall conform to the
front setback of the abutting properties. The side and rear yard
building setback requirements shall not be less than the average of
that of the abutting properties or a minimum ten-foot side yard and
twenty-five-foot rear yard, whichever is greater.
(5)
A.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to more than one abutting
lot. Said lot must have been held in common ownership as of January 1,
2011, and conformed to the zoning requirements in effect at the time:
The lot was recorded with the Hampden County Registry of Deeds
or the Land Registration Office; and
(1)
The lot was acquired and considered merged by operations of law
with the developed lot.
(2)
B.
Separation and conveyance of the undeveloped nonconforming lot shall
not adversely impact the legal status of the developed nonconforming
lot. Said developed lot shall be considered legal nonconforming under
the provisions of this zoning ordinance.
C.
The development of the vacant, nonconforming lot shall be for singlefamily
use and allowable accessory uses and structures.
D.
§ 300-4.9 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-4.9
1:232
For the purposes of administering this section, the neighborhood shall
be defined as the parcels of land directly abutting and located directly
across the street from the subject property and those parcels abutting
said parcels.
E.
For the purposes of administering this section of the zoning ordinance,
the Planning Board shall be the special permit granting authority.
F.
§ 300-4.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-4.9
1:233

ARTICLE V
Use Regulations
§ 300-5.0. Applicability of use regulations.
Except as otherwise permitted by the Zoning Act or by this ordinance,
within any districts shown on the Zoning Map, no building or other
structure shall be erected, altered or used and no land shall be used or
occupied for any purpose except for the purposes permitted in the district
as described in this section. Any use not listed shall be construed to be
prohibited.
§ 300-5.1. Permitted uses.
The restrictions and controls intended to regulate development in each
district are set forth as follows:
P - Use Permitted by Right
SPR - Use Permitted with Site Plan Review from the Planning Board in
accordance with Articles XIII and XIV
SPA - Use Permitted by Special Permit from the Zoning Board of
Appeals in accordance with Article XII
SPB - Use Permitted by Special Permit from the Planning Board in
accordance with Article XII
— - Use Prohibited
§ 300-5.2. Uses subject to other regulations.
Uses permitted by right or by special permit shall be subject, in addition to
use regulations, to all other provisions of this ordinance.
§ 300-5.3. Table of Use Regulations.52
Residential Districts. See Table 5-1 for a catalog of uses permitted in all
Residential Districts.
A.
Business Districts. See Table 5-2 for a catalog of uses permitted in all
Business Districts.
B.
Industrial Districts. See Table 5-3 for a catalog of uses permitted in all
Industrial Districts.
C.
Special Zoning Districts.
See Table 5-4 for a catalog of uses permitted in the following
Special Zoning Districts: Special Use (Technical), Special Use
(Office), Special Use (Multifamily), Special Use (Mobile Home) and
Recreational.
(1)
D.
52.Editor's Note: The Tables of Use Regulations referenced below are included as
attachments to this chapter.
§ 300-5.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-5.3
1:235
§ 300-5.4. Prohibited uses.
Combination of SU-T, SU-O, SU-M, and SU-H Special Use Districts.
In order that the Town may retain the flexibility to encourage
a rational well-designated mix of principal uses on any one
parcel, nothing herein shall preclude the West Springfield
Town Meeting from rezoning such parcel to two or more of the
Special Use Districts.
(a)
In the event a combination of Special Use Districts is proposed,
the total area of such combination shall not be less than five
acres. In addition, all other requirements of §§ 300-9.0,
300-9.2, 300-9.6, 300-9.7, and 300-9.8A(3)and, if appropriate,
§ 300-8.4 of this ordinance shall be met.
(b)
(2)
Water Supply Protection District. See § 300-7.1, Water Supply
Protection District, to determine what uses are permitted.
E.
Flood hazard. See § 300-7.3 to determine the development standards
associated with uses within the overlay district.
F.
Planned Unit Development District. See § 300-7.7, Planned Unit
Development District, to determine what uses are permitted.
G.
The following uses are explicitly prohibited in all zoning districts:
(1) Gambling establishments.
(2) Abattoir.
(3) Fat rendering.
Glue or size manufacture or process involving recovery from fish or
animal offal.
(4)
(5) Explosives or fireworks manufacture.
(6) Petroleum refining.
Rubber, caoutchouc or gutta-percha manufacture from crude or
scrap materials.
(7)
(8) Sewage disposal plant.
(9) Smelting and reduction of metals.
(10)Sulfurous, sulfuric, nitric or hydrochloric acid manufacture.
(11)Tar distillation.
(12) Incineration, reduction or dumping of offal, garbage or refuse.
Disposal of "hazardous wastes" as defined by the Bureau of Solid
Waste Disposal, Massachusetts Executive Office of Environmental
(13)
A.
§ 300-5.3 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-5.4
1:236
§ 300-5.5. Other general use regulations.
Affairs, except as any specific restriction may be precluded under
present or subsequent state law.
Motorized outdoor commercial recreational uses, excluding
marinas, used for outdoor vehicle sports including, but not limited
to, motocross, drag racing, demolition derby, etc.
(14)
(15)Bail bond establishment.
Electronic Gaming establishment, cybercafe, gambling internet
cafe establishment as defined in § 300-7.9B.
(16)
(17)Payday or title loan agency.
(18)Pawn shop, cash-for-gold store.
The following uses are explicitly prohibited in all zoning districts except
in Central Business (CBD) by special permit from the Planning Board:
(1) Check cashing business.
B.
Principal building. One principal building only shall be permitted on
a lot, with the exception of multifamily developments in Residence
C, Business A-1, Business B-1 and Special Use (Multifamily) Zoning
Districts and age-restricted housing developments by special permit in
an Age-Restricted Housing Overlay Zoning District.
A.
Accessory uses. Accessory uses customarily incidental to any principal
use permitted in any district shall be authorized herein.
B.
Accessory buildings as dwellings. No accessory buildings may be used
as dwellings.
C.
Injurious uses. No premises shall be used, and no buildings or
structures shall be constructed, enlarged, reconstructed or used for any
purpose which by the emission or discharge of fumes, vapor, gas, dust,
offensive odors, chemicals, poisonous fluids, or substances, refuse,
organic matter, or excrement or by the causing of noise or vibrations,
or by unduly increasing the risk from fire or explosion, or otherwise
would be dangerous or injurious to the public health or safety, or for any
purpose which would be for any reason injurious to the health, safety,
or welfare of the inhabitants of the Town.
D.
Business A permitted uses. Business A permitted uses shall include any
establishments of a character similar to and not more objectionable
than those set forth in Table 5-2,53 provided the principal use thereof
shall be to store and display goods or products for sale at retail on the
premises or to engage in a service enterprise, and provided that no
E.
53.Editor's Note: Table 5-2 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 300-5.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-5.5
1:237
goods or products may be manufactured or processed on the premises
except for sale at retail thereon.
Business B permitted uses. Business B permitted uses as set forth in
Table 5-254 shall be limited to the requirement that the number of
workers habitually engaged in any activity authorized therein shall not
exceed 100.
F.
54.Editor's Note: Table 5-2 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 300-5.5 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-5.5
1:238
ARTICLE VI
Area, Height and Bulk Regulations
§ 300-6.0. Applicability of regulations.
The regulations for each district pertaining to minimum lot area, minimum
lot width, minimum lot frontage, minimum lot depth, minimum front yard
depth, minimum side yard width, minimum rear yard depth, maximum
height of buildings, maximum number of stories and maximum building
coverage of lot shall be specified in this article, Article II, Definitions, and
set forth in the area, height and bulk regulations in Tables 6-1 and 6-2,55
and subject to the further provisions of this article.
§ 300-6.1. Table of Area Regulations.
See Tables 6-1A through 6-1J on accompanying pages, plus attached notes,
which are declared to be part of this ordinance.56
§ 300-6.2. Table of Height and Bulk Regulations.
See Table 6-2 on accompanying pages, plus attached notes, which are
declared to be part of this ordinance.57
§ 300-6.3. General regulations applicable in all zoning districts.
Required yard or open space. No part of a yard or other open space
required about any building for the purpose of complying with the
provisions of this ordinance shall be included as a part of a yard or
other open space similarly required for another building.
A.
Reduction of lot areas. No lot shall be reduced in size or area so that
any yard, court, open space, frontage, lot width or lot area will be less
than what is prescribed by this ordinance for the district in which the
lot is located, unless it is recombined with an abutting lot and a plan of
the recombined lot is approved by the Planning Board and recorded in
the Hampden County Registry of Deeds or the Land Court of Hampden
County. This provision shall not apply in the case of a lot when a portion
thereof is taken for a public purpose.
B.
Height exceptions. The provisions of this ordinance governing the
height of buildings shall not apply to chimneys, cooling towers, elevator
bulkheads, skylights, ventilators and other necessary appurtenances
usually carried above roofs, nor to domes, stacks, or spires if not used
for human occupancy, nor to ornamental or observation towers, and
like structures which occupy not more than 25% of the ground area of
the building or of the lot area. The provisions of this ordinance shall
C.
55.Editor's Note: Tables 6-1 and 6-2 are included as attachments to this chapter.
56.Editor's Note: Table 6-1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
57.Editor's Note: Table 6-2 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 300-6.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-6.3
1:239
not prevent the erection of a parapet wall or cornice for ornamental
purposes extending above such height limit for not more than five feet.
Yard exceptions and projections. The following exceptions and
projections shall be permitted:
Unenclosed porches. An unenclosed, unroofed one-story porch,
erected on piers, may project into any required front yard a
distance not to exceed four feet, and into a required rear yard a
distance not to exceed 10 feet, and shall not be considered in the
determination of the size of yards or lot coverage.
(1)
Enclosed porches. Any two-story or enclosed porch, or a porch
having a solid foundation and capable of being enclosed, shall be
considered an integral part of the building in the determination of
the size of required yards or lot coverage.
(2)
Existing porches. A porch existing prior to the effective date of this
ordinance may be enclosed on one or more sides, provided said
porch is not nearer than 10 feet to any street line, and provided
that no such enclosure shall consist of material other than screen
or glass to the extent of more than 25% thereof.
(3)
Projecting architectural features. The space in any required yard
shall be open and unobstructed except for the ordinary projections
of window sills, belt course, cornices, eaves and other architectural
features; provided, however, that such features shall not project
more than two feet into any required yard.
(4)
Bay windows. Bay windows, including their cornices and eaves,
may project into any required yard not more than two feet;
provided, however, that the sum of such projections on any wall
shall not exceed 1/3 of the length of said wall.
(5)
Fire escapes. Open or lattice-enclosed metal fire escapes may
project not more than five feet into a rear yard.
(6)
Terraces. A paved terrace shall not be considered in the
determination of yard sizes or lot coverage; provided, however, that
such terrace is unroofed and without walls, parapets or other forms
of enclosure. Such terraces, however, may have an open guard
railing not over three feet high, and shall not project into any yard
to a point nearer than five feet to any lot line.
(7)
D.
Accessory structures.
Accessory structures shall be located in the rear yard of the
principal structure.
(1)
No more than 25% of a rear yard shall be occupied by accessory
structures.
(2)
E.
§ 300-6.3 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-6.3
1:240
§ 300-6.4. (Reserved)
Accessory structures located on a corner lot shall be set back from
any street line a distance equal to or greater than that required of
the principal structure.
(3)
Except for structures used for agricultural purposes as defined by
MGL c. 40A, § 3, the footprint of the accessory structure shall not
be greater than that of the principal structure.
(4)
Except for structures used for agricultural purposes as defined by
MGL c. 40A, § 3, the height of an accessory structure shall not be
greater than that of the principal structure.
(5)
Accessory structures less than 400 square feet must be located a
minimum of 10 feet from the side and rear property lines and 15
feet from the principal structure.
(6)
Structures greater than 400 square feet shall be set back from the
side and rear property lines and principal structure a minimum
distance equal to the height of the accessory structure or 15 feet,
whichever is greater.
(7)
No signs, as defined in this ordinance, shall be attached to an
accessory structure.
(8)
Accessory structures greater than 600 square feet in area and
located in an RA, RA-1, RA-2 or RB Zoning District shall require the
issuance of a special permit by the Planning Board.
(9)
Visibility at intersections. On a corner lot, no signs, fence, wall, tree,
hedge or other vegetation, and no building or other structure more than
3 1/2 feet above the established street grades, shall be erected, placed
or maintained within the area formed by the intersecting street lines
and a straight line joining said street lines at points which are 25 feet
distant from the point of intersection, measured along said street lines.
F.
Front yards as affected by abutting existing buildings. No part of any
building needs to set back from the street line of any street on which
it faces more than the average of the setbacks of existing buildings
on the lots adjacent thereto on either side thereof and facing on the
same street and within the same zoning district. Where no such existing
building exists, the front yard requirements of the zoning district in
which such building is located shall be applicable.
G.
Corner lots and side yards. No part of any building on a corner lot shall
be nearer the side street line than 15 feet or the required side yard,
whichever is greater.
H.
Rear yards for through lots. The rear yard setback in the case of an
interior lot running through a block from street to street shall be equal
to the required depth for the front yard applicable thereto.
I.
§ 300-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-6.5
1:241
§ 300-6.5. (Reserved)
§ 300-6.6. (Reserved)
§ 300-6.7. Additional regulations applicable in Business A-1
Districts.
§ 300-6.8. Additional regulations applicable in Central Business
Districts.
Conversion of existing single- and two-family dwellings to other uses
permitted within the Central Business District need not meet the lot area
requirement of Table 6-1G,61 provided:
Motor vehicle parking areas shall not be permitted in any required front
yard area. With the exception of access areas as defined in Note 2 of
Table 13-1 of this ordinance,58 such front yard areas shall be landscaped
but may be provided with pedestrian facilities.
A.
With the exception of front yard areas, landscaping for all development,
other than multifamily, shall meet or exceed the requirements of Table
13-1 herein.59
B.
With the exception of front yard areas, buffers for multifamily
developments shall be provided in accordance with the appropriate
requirements of Table 13-1.60 Plantings shall also be provided in
accordance with the requirements of Table 13-1.
C.
Design of required parking areas, landscaping and open space shall
be prepared by a landscape architect licensed to practice in the
commonwealth.
D.
The distance between principal buildings on a single lot shall not be
less than the height of the higher building.
E.
Development within Business A-1 Districts shall be oriented to Park
Street or Park Avenue. With the exception of Main Street, access to
developments within Business A-1 Districts shall not be allowed over
streets on which 50% or more of assessed parcels are devoted to
residential uses.
F.
Any such conversion retains the external appearance and facade of a
single- or two-family dwelling; and
A.
The design of such conversion is prepared by an architect or landscape
architect licensed to practice in the commonwealth.
B.
58.Editor's Note: See § 300-13.8.
59.Editor's Note: See § 300-13.8.
60.Editor's Note: See § 300-13.8.
61.Editor's Note: Table 6-1G is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 300-6.5 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-6.8
1:242
ARTICLE VII
Special District Regulations
§ 300-7.0. (Reserved)
§ 300-7.1. Water Supply Protection District.
Purpose: to promote the health, safety and welfare of the community
by protecting and preserving the surface and groundwater resources of
the Town and the region from any use of land or buildings which may
reduce the quality and quantity of its water resources.
A.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
AQUIFER — Geologic formation composed of rock or sand and gravel
that contains significant amounts of potentially recoverable potable
water.
GROUNDWATER — All water found beneath the surface of the ground.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — A waste which is hazardous to human health
or the environment. Hazardous wastes have been designated by 310
CMR 30.130 adopted pursuant to the Massachusetts Hazardous Waste
Management Act, Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 21C.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACES — Materials or structure on or above the
ground that do not allow precipitation to infiltrate the underlying soil.
PRIMARY AQUIFER RECHARGE AREA — Areas which are underlain
by surficial geologic deposits, including glaciofluvial or lacustrine
stratified drift deposits or alluvium or swamp deposits, and in which the
prevailing direction of groundwater flow is toward public water supply
wells or potential sites for such wells.
SECONDARY AQUIFER RECHARGE AREA — Areas which are
underlain by surficial geologic deposits, including till or bedrock, and
in which the prevailing direction of surface water flow is toward public
water supply wells or potential sites for such wells.
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any substance or mixture of
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics posing a significant,
actual, or potential hazard to water supplies or other hazards to human
health if such substance or mixture were discharged to land or water
of the Town of West Springfield. Toxic or hazardous materials include,
without limitation, synthetic organic chemicals, petroleum products,
heavy metals, radioactive or infectious wastes, acids and alkalis, and all
substances defined as toxic or hazardous under Massachusetts General
Laws (MGL) Chapters 21C and 21E and 310 CMR 30.00, and also
include such products as solvents and thinners in quantities greater
than normal household use.
TRUCKING TERMINAL — Business which services or repairs
commercial trucks which are not owned by the business.
B.
§ 300-7.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-7.1
1:243
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS SUBJECT TO 314 CMR 5.00 —
Any wastewater treatment plants or works, including community septic
systems, which require a permit from the Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection.
WATERSHED — Land lying adjacent to watercourses and surface water
bodies which create its catchment or drainage areas of such
watercourses and bodies.
ZONE I RECHARGE AREA — That circle of a four-hundred-foot radius
extending around the wellhead of a drinking water well with the
wellhead at its center and including all land within the boundaries of
said circle.
ZONE II RECHARGE AREA — That area of an aquifer which contributes
water to a well under the most severe pumping and recharge conditions
that can be realistically anticipated (180 days of pumping at safe yield,
with no recharge from precipitation). It is bounded by the groundwater
divides which result from pumping the well and by the contact of
the aquifer with less permeable materials such as till or bedrock.
In some cases, streams or lakes may act as recharge boundaries. In
all cases, Zone II shall extend upgradient to its point of intersection
with prevailing hydrogeologic boundaries (a groundwater flow divide a
contact till or bedrock, or a recharge boundary).
Scope of authority. The Water Supply Protection District is an overlay
district and shall be superimposed on the other districts established by
this ordinance. All regulations of the Town of West Springfield Zoning
Ordinance applicable to such underlying districts shall remain in effect,
except that where the Water Supply Protection District imposes
additional regulations, such regulations shall prevail.
C.
District delineation.
The Water Supply Protection District is herein established to
include all lands within the Town of West Springfield lying within
the primary and secondary recharge areas of groundwater aquifers
and watershed area of reservoirs which now or may in the future
provide public water supply. The map entitled "Water Supply
Protection District, Town of West Springfield," on file with the Town
Clerk, delineates the boundaries of the district.
(1)
Where the bounds delineated are in doubt or in dispute, the burden
of proof shall be upon the owner(s) of the land in question to
show where they should properly be located. At the request of the
owner(s), the Town may engage a professional hydrogeologist to
determine more accurately the location and extent of an aquifer or
primary recharge area, and may charge the owner(s) for all or part
of the cost of the investigation.
(2)
D.
Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted within the Water
Supply Protection District, provided that they comply with all
E.
§ 300-7.1 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-7.1
1:244
applicable restrictions in this ordinance, including but not limited to
Subsections F and G of this section:
(1) Single-family residences;
Residential accessory uses, including garages, driveways, private
roads, utility rights-of-way, and on-site wastewater disposal
systems;
(2)
(3) Agricultural uses such as farming, grazing and horticulture;
(4) Forestry and nursery uses;
Outdoor noncommercial recreational uses, including fishing,
boating, play areas, hiking, nature study, and picnicking, but
excluding court and field sports such as tennis and baseball;
(5)
Conservation of water, plants, and wildlife; wildlife management
areas;
(6)
(7) Family home day care and child-care facilities;
(8) Structures for nonprofit educational or religious purposes.
Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited within the Water
Supply Protection District:
Business and industrial uses, not including agriculture,
horticulture, floriculture or viticulture, which generate, treat,
store, or dispose of hazardous wastes, including but not limited to
metal or jewelry plating, chemical or plastics manufacturing, wood
preserving, furniture stripping, dry cleaning, and auto body repair,
photography laboratories, asphalt plants, hazardous materials
processing or transfer, laboratory operations, machine shops,
metal working, electronic components or semi-conductor
manufacturing, except for the following:
Very small quantity generators of hazardous waste, as defined
by 310 CMR 30, as amended, which generate less than 20
kilograms or six gallons of hazardous waste per month may be
allowed by special permit in accordance with Article XII of this
ordinance;
(a)
Household hazardous waste collection centers or events
operated pursuant to 310 CMR 30.390, as amended;
(b)
(c) Waste oil retention facilities required by MGL c. 21, § 52A; and
Treatment works for the remediation of contaminated water
supplies, which are approved by Massachusetts Department
of Environmental Protection and designed in accordance with
314 CMR 5, as amended.
(d)
(1)
F.
§ 300-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-7.1
1:245
Solid waste landfills, dumps, auto recycling, junk and salvage
yards, landfilling or storage of sludge and septage, with the
exception of the disposal of brush or stumps.
(2)
Storage of liquid petroleum products, except for the following:
Storage which is incidental to: normal household use, outdoor
maintenance, or the heating of a structure; emergency
generators required by statute, rule or regulation; waste oil
retention facilities required by statute, rule, or regulation;
treatment works approved by the Massachusetts Department
of Environmental Protection designed in accordance with 314
CMR 5.00 for the treatment of contaminated groundwater or
surface waters; provided that storage, listed in Subsection
F(3)(a) above, shall be in a freestanding, aboveground
container within a structure or within the basement of a
structure with secondary containment adequate to contain a
spill the size of the container's total storage capacity. The
storage tank and piping must comply with all applicable
provisions of 527 CMR 9.00, Massachusetts Board of Fire
Prevention regulations.62
(a)
Replacement storage tanks.
Replacement of storage tanks or systems for the keeping,
dispensing or storing of gasoline, which existed the time of
adoption of this ordinance, provided that:
All such replacement storage tanks or systems shall
be located underground as required by Massachusetts
Board of Fire Prevention regulation 527 CMR 1463;
[a]
All such storage systems shall be protected by one
of the secondary containment systems specified in
Massachusetts Board of Fire Prevention regulations
527 CMR 9.08(3)64;
[b]
The head of the Fire Department may deny an
application for tank replacement or approve it subject
to conditions if he or she determines that it constitutes
a danger to public or private water supplies, in
accordance with 527 CMR 9.26(4)(d).65
[c]
[1]
Replacement of all other storage tanks for liquid
petroleum products other than gasoline must be above
ground, in accordance with Subsection F(3)(a) above.
[2]
(b)
(3)
62.Editor's Note: See now 527 CMR 1.00, the Massachusetts Comprehensive Fire Safety Code.
63.Editor's Note: See now 527 CMR 1.00, the Massachusetts Comprehensive Fire Safety Code.
64.Editor's Note: See now 527 CMR 1.00, the Massachusetts Comprehensive Fire Safety Code.
65.Editor's Note: See now 527 CMR 1.00, the Massachusetts Comprehensive Fire Safety Code.
§ 300-7.1 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-7.1
1:246
(4) Outdoor storage of salt, deicing, pesticides or herbicides.
Dumping or disposal of any hazardous material or hazardous waste
on the ground, in water bodies, in septic systems or in other
drainage systems. This shall include the use of septic system
cleaners which contain toxic chemicals such as methylene chloride
and 1-1-1 trichlorethane.
(5)
Performance standards. All uses, whether allowed by special permit or
by right, must meet the performance standards herein:
Sodium chloride for ice control shall be used at the minimum saltto-
sand ratio which is consistent with the public highway safety
requirements, and its use shall be eliminated on roads which may
be closed to the public in winter.
(1)
The storage of sodium chloride, calcium chloride, chemically
treated abrasives or other chemicals used for the removal of ice
and snow on roads shall be covered and located in a paved surface
with berms, or within a structure designed to prevent the
generation and escape of contaminated runoff.
(2)
Fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, lawn care chemicals, or other
leachable materials shall be used in accordance with the Lawn
Care Regulations of the Massachusetts Pesticide Board, 333 CMR
10.03 (30, 31), as amended, with manufacturer's label instructions
and all other necessary precautions to minimize adverse impacts
on surface water and groundwater.
(3)
The storage of commercial fertilizers and soil conditioners shall be
within structures designed to prevent the generation and escape of
contaminated run-off or leachate.
(4)
All new long-term animal manure storage areas shall, at a
minimum, be covered or contained to prevent the generation and
escape of contaminated run-off or leachate.
(5)
All hazardous materials, as defined in MGL Chapter 21E, must
be sorted either in a freestanding container within a building, or
in a freestanding container above ground level with protection to
contain a spill the size of the container's total storage capacity.
(6)
For commercial and industrial uses, to the extent feasible, runoff
from impervious surface shall be recharged on the site by
stormwater infiltration basins or similar systems covered with
natural vegetation. Such run-off shall not be discharged directly
to rivers, streams, or other surface water bodies. Dry wells shall
be used only where other methods are infeasible. All such basins
and wells shall be preceded by oil, grease, and sediment traps
to facilitate removal of contamination. All recharge areas shall be
permanently maintained in full working order by the owner(s).
Infiltration systems greater than three feet deep shall be located at
(7)
G.
§ 300-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-7.1
1:247
least 100 feet from drinking water wells, and shall be situated at
least 10 feet down-gradient and 100 feet up-gradient from building
foundations to avoid seepage problems. Infiltration basins and
trenches shall be constructed with a three-foot-minimum
separation between the bottom of the structure and maximum
groundwater elevation.
In accordance with the State Plumbing Code, all vehicle
maintenance facilities must have floor drains, unless they receive a
variance from the State Plumbing Board, which must be connected
to a municipal sewer system or to a state-approved holding tank in
unsewered areas. All other facilities which use, store or maintain
hazardous materials or wastes must, with state approval, seal floor
drains or connect them to a sewer system or holding tank.
(8)
Excavation for removal of earth, sand, gravel and other soils shall
not extend closer than 10 feet above the annual high groundwater
table. A monitoring well shall be installed by the property owner
to verify groundwater elevations. This subsection shall not apply to
excavations incidental to permitted uses, including but not limited
to providing for the installation or maintenance of structural
foundations, freshwater ponds, utility conduit or on-site sewage
disposal. This subsection shall apply to all commercial earth
removal operations, including expansions of existing operations.
Access road(s) to extractive operations sites shall include a
gate or other secure mechanism to restrict public access to the
site.
(a)
As soon as possible after earth removal is completed, the land
shall be restored and stabilized with topsoil and plantings of
trees and natural vegetation.
(b)
(9)
Area regulations.
Within the primary watershed area, the minimum allowable lot size
shall be 30,000 square feet.
(1)
The maximum size for any mowed, grass lawn shall be 10,000
square feet.
(2)
The maximum coverage of impermeable surfaces on any lot,
including but not limited to structures, driveways and parking
areas, shall be 20% of the lot.
(3)
H.
Drainage. For all residential lots, all run-off from impervious surfaces
(see definition66) shall be recharged on the site by being diverted
toward areas covered with vegetation for surface infiltration to the
extent possible. Dry wells shall be used only where other methods are
infeasible, and shall be preceded by oil, grease and sediment traps
I.
66.Editor's Note: See Subsection B of this section.
§ 300-7.1 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-7.1
1:248
§ 300-7.2. (Reserved)
§ 300-7.3. Development within Flood Hazard Overlay Districts.
to facilitate removal of contamination. All recharge areas shall be
permanently maintained in full working order by the owner.
Utility requirements. All new residential uses must be tied in to the
municipal sewer system.
J.
Nonconforming use. Nonconforming uses which were lawfully existing,
begun or in receipt of a building or special permit prior to the first
publication of notice of public hearing for this ordinance may be
continued. Such nonconforming uses may be extended or altered, as
specified in MGL c. 40A, § 6, provided that there is a finding by the
Planning Board that such change does not increase the danger of
surface water or groundwater pollution from such use.
K.
Purpose. The purposes of establishing the foregoing development
standards within the Flood Hazard Overlay Districts of West Springfield
are to:
Ensure public safety through reducing the threats to life and
personal injury due to flooding;
(1)
(2) Eliminate new hazards to emergency response officials;
Prevent the occurrence of public emergencies resulting from water
quality, contamination, and pollution due to flooding;
(3)
Avoid the loss of utility services that, if damaged by flooding, would
disrupt or shut down the utility network and impact regions of the
community beyond the site of flooding;
(4)
Eliminate costs associated with the response to and cleanup of
flooding conditions;
(5)
Reduce damage to public and private property resulting from
flooding waters.
(6)
A.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BASE FLOOD — The one-hundred-year flood; otherwise designated as
the flood that has a 1% possibility of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The elevation reached by the onehundred-
year flood. For flood hazard areas contained within the
floodway and flood fringe, the base flood elevation is given on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map and in the Flood Insurance Study report.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to erection of buildings or other
B.
§ 300-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-7.3
1:249
structures, and mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations.
ELEVATION — Unless otherwise indicated, all elevations are above
mean sea level determined from the Town datum, and are to be
obtained by interpolation between contours on the West Springfield
Topographic Map or by field measurement.
FIA REGULATIONS — Rules and Regulations of the Federal Insurance
Administration pertaining to the National Flood Insurance Program (44
CFR 59 et seq.).
FLOOD FRINGE — That land lying between a designated floodway
and the designated limits of inundation by the base (one-hundredyear)
flood as designated within the Town of West Springfield on the
Hampden County Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) issued by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the
administration of the NFIP, dated July 16, 2013, and further defined by
the Flood Insurance Study booklet dated July 16, 2013.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — An area incorporating the base flood and
identified as Zone A and Zone AE as designated within the Town of West
Springfield on the Hampden County Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the
administration of the NFIP, dated July 16, 2013, and further defined by
the Flood Insurance Study booklet dated July 16, 2013.
FLOOD HAZARD ZONE A — The one-hundred-year floodplain area
where the base flood elevation (BFE) has not been determined. To
determine the BFE, use the best available federal, state, local, or other
data.
FLOOD HAZARD ZONE AE — The one-hundred-year floodplain where
the base flood elevation has been determined.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP — A map prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency which delineates the boundaries of
the various areas of the Town which are designated as being subject
to possible flooding, indicates the base flood elevations for those areas,
and carries certain other information for insurance purposes.
FLOODPROOFED — Structures which meet the requirements of FIA
Regulations 1910.3(c)3, 4, including for the purposes of this section all
requirements for certification contained therein.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a stream plus any portion of the adjacent
bank and land designated to be kept free of encroachment so that
the discharge of the base flood may be carried without increase in
flood elevation as designated within the Town of West Springfield on
the Hampden County Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) issued by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the
administration of the NFIP, dated July 16, 2013, and further defined by
the Flood Insurance Study booklet dated July 16, 2013.
§ 300-7.3 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-7.3
1:250
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction or improvement
of a structure, or repair of a damaged structure, the cost of which
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of such structure before the
reconstruction or improvement was commenced or before the damage
occurred.
WEST SPRINGFIELD TOPOGRAPHIC MAP — Topographic features of
West Springfield compiled by photogrammetric methods from aerial
photographs dated March 30, 1998 (as updated). The topographic map
meets National Map Accuracy Standards for one inch equals 40 feet
maps with one-foot contours. Horizontal datum is NAD83 MA State
Plane. Vertical datum is NAVD88. The map is maintained by the Town's
Information Technologies Department as part of the municipal
Geographic Information System.
Establishment of flood hazard areas. Sections 300-3.1 and 300-3.4 of
the West Springfield Zoning Ordinance establish Flood Hazard Overlay
Districts within which the restrictions of this section apply. The Flood
Hazard Overlay District includes all special flood hazard areas within
the Town of West Springfield designated as Zone A or AE on the
Hampden County Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) issued by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the
administration of the National Flood Insurance Program. The map
panels of the Hampden County FIRM that are wholly or partially within
the Town of West Springfield are panel numbers 25013C0190E,
25013C0191E, 25013C0192E, 25013C0193E, 25013C0194E,
25013C0213E, 25013C0377E, 25013C0381E, 25013C0382E,
25013C0383E, 25013C0384E, 25013C0401E, 25013C0402E,
25013C0403E, and 25013C0404E, dated July 16, 2013. The exact
boundaries of the district may be defined by the one-hundred-year
base flood elevations shown on the FIRM and further defined by the
Hampden County Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report dated July 16,
2013. The FIRM and FIS report are incorporated herein by reference.
C.
Permits required. No development shall take place in any Flood Hazard
Overlay District until all necessary local, state, and federal permits,
including those required under MGL c. 131, § 40, have been obtained
and evidence of such permits has been submitted to and recorded by
the Building Commissioner.
D.
Records. The Building Commissioner shall be the custodian of records
of all permits, data and other information, including base flood
elevations, elevation of lowest floors, and levels of floodproofing
required under this section.
E.
Alteration and relocation of streams. No river or stream shall be altered
or relocated in such a way as to reduce its carrying capacity for
floodwaters. Prior to the alteration or relocation of any river or stream,
the following parties must be notified in writing:
(1) West Springfield Conservation Commission.
F.
§ 300-7.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-7.3
1:251
(2) Abutting communities.
NFIP State Coordinator.
MA Department of Conservation and Recreation
251 Causeway Street, Suite 600-700
Boston, MA 02114
(3)
NFIP Program Specialist.
FEMA Region I
99 High Street, 6th Floor
Boston, MA 02110
(4)
(5) Any successor to the above-referenced agencies.
Prohibited structures and uses: floodway. In Zone AE, along
watercourses within the Town of West Springfield that have had a
regulatory floodway designated on the Hampden County Flood
Insurance Rate Maps, within any floodway, there shall be no new fixed
structures and no substantial improvement of existing structures, no
permanent mooring of floating structures or vessels, no storage of
vessels, vehicles, structures, or materials other than agricultural
products originating on the site, and no alteration of the channel or
topography. Encroachments are prohibited in the regulatory floodway
which would result in any increase in flood levels within the community
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
G.
Reference to existing regulations.
All development in the Flood Hazard Overlay District, including
structural and nonstructural activities, whether permitted by right
or by special permit, must be in compliance with MGL c. 131, § 40
and with the following:
Massachusetts State Building Code that addresses floodplain
and coastal high-hazard area (currently 780 CMR), as
amended;
(a)
Wetlands Protection Regulations, Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP) (currently 310 CMR 10.00), as
amended;
(b)
Inland Wetlands Restriction, DEP (currently 310 CMR 13.00),
as amended;
(c)
Minimum Requirements for the Subsurface Disposal of
Sanitary Sewage, DEP (currently 310 CMR 15, Title 5), as
amended.
(d)
(1)
H.
§ 300-7.3 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-7.3
1:252
§ 300-7.4. (Reserved)
§ 300-7.5. Special Use (Technical), Special Use (Office), Special Use
(Multifamily) and Special Use (Mobile Home) Districts.
Any variances from the provisions and requirements of the abovereferenced
state regulations may only be granted in accordance
with the required variance procedures of these state regulations.
(2)
Base flood elevation data and floodway data.
In Zones A and AE, along watercourses that have not had a
regulatory floodway designated, the best available federal, state,
local, or other floodway data shall be used to prohibit
encroachments in floodways which would result in any increase
in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge. Where no floodway data has been developed,
the floodway includes the channel of any stream within the area.
(1)
Base flood elevation data is required for subdivision proposals or
other developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is
the lesser, within unnumbered A Zones.
(2)
I.
Subdivision proposals. All subdivision proposals must be designed to
assure that:
(1) Such proposals minimize flood damage;
All public utilities and facilities are located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage; and
(2)
(3) Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
J.
Purpose. The purpose of all Special Use Zoning Districts is to
encourage the flexible, orderly and rational development of larger
parcels of land, i.e., five acres or more. More specifically, Special Use
Zoning Districts are intended to help accomplish the following goals,
subgoals and policies of the 1977 Master Plan:
To promote choice and opportunity in the living and working
environments of the Town.
(1)
(2) To offer affordable housing to all residents of West Springfield.
(3) To allow for a variety of housing types within the Town.
(4) To develop active and passive recreational areas.
To pursue land use and other policies which maintain or improve
the Town's environmental quality, e.g., air and water, and which
conserves valuable natural resources.
(5)
A.
Permitted uses. See Table 5-4 in Article V, Use Regulations, to
determine which uses are permitted in the Special Use (Technical),
B.
§ 300-7.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-7.5
1:253
§ 300-7.6. (Reserved)
§ 300-7.7. Planned Unit Development District.
Special Use (Office), Special Use (Multifamily), and Special Use
(Mobile-Home) Districts.67
Combination of Special Use Districts.
In order that the Town may retain the flexibility to encourage a
rational, well-designed mix of principal uses on any one parcel,
nothing herein shall preclude the West Springfield Town Meeting
from rezoning such parcel to two or more of the Special Use
Districts.
(1)
In the event a combination of Special Use Districts is proposed, the
total area of such combination shall not be less than five acres. In
addition, all other requirements of Subsections D through I and, if
appropriate, Subsection J shall be met.
(2)
C.
Dimensional requirements. See Tables 6-1 and 6-2 for the dimensional
requirements in all Special Use Districts.68 For additional dimensional
requirements for the Special Use (Mobile Home) District see § 300-8.3.
D.
E. Development standards. See § 300-9.8 for development standards.
F. Landscaping requirement. See § 300-9.7 for landscaping requirements.
G. Parking requirements. See § 300-9.0 for parking requirements.
H. Signs. For sign standards see § 300-9.2.
Environmental performance requirements. For environmental
performance standards see § 300-9.6.
I.
Additional development standards for mobile home parks in the SU-H
District. See § 300-8.5 for additional development standards for mobile
home parks in the SU-H District.
J.
Purpose. It is the purpose of the Planned Unit Development District
to promote greater flexibility in land use and building design by
permitting modification of the specific provisions of this ordinance for
designated areas that will be developed as a single entity, provided
that the development is compatible with the surrounding land uses and
consistent with the Town's Master Plan. A planned unit development
is also intended to provide for a mixture of land uses, including
residential, commercial and/or industrial; the creative use of open
space; the protection of natural resources and environmentally
sensitive areas; and greater amenities to the occupants and users of the
development.
A.
67.Editor's Note: Table 5-4 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
68.Editor's Note: Tables 6-1 and 6-2 are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 300-7.5 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-7.7
1:254
Minimum planned unit development area. A parcel may not be rezoned
to planned unit development unless it contains at least three acres in
area. Two or more owners of parcels which are less than three acres
in area may submit a cooperative petition for a PUD, provided that the
total area to be rezoned equals at least three acres in size.
B.
Permitted uses. A petition to Town Meeting to rezone land to planned
unit development shall designate the principal and secondary uses that
are proposed in the development. There shall be no change in the
permitted or secondary uses unless approved by Town Meeting.
Principal uses. The permitted principal uses shall be those uses
which are listed as permitted uses for a single zoning district in
Table 5-1, 5-2, or 5-3 of the West Springfield Zoning Ordinance.69
The petitioner shall select which zoning district is proposed as the
guide for permitted principal uses in the planned unit development.
All principal uses are permitted by right in the planned unit
development, subject to the restriction contained in Table 5-1, 5-2
or 5-3.
(1)
Secondary uses. The permitted secondary uses shall be those uses
which are listed as permitted uses in no more than two other
zoning districts. All proposed secondary uses must be approved by
the Planning Board.
(2)
Mixture of principal and secondary uses. Permitted principal uses
may occupy up to 100% of the land area in the planned unit
development. Permitted secondary uses may occupy up to 35% of
the land area in the planned unit development. If secondary uses
are proposed, they shall not occupy less than one acre or 10% of
the land area of the PUD, whichever is greater.
(3)
C.
Development density.
The maximum permitted development density for both principal
and secondary uses in a planned unit development shall not exceed
the density of development that is permitted in the principal zoning
district that is designated for the PUD. For the purposes of this
section, development density is defined as the ratio of the
maximum permitted floor area of all buildings on the site to the
land area of the site. The Planning Board shall also consider the
existing density of development in the surrounding area and, at
the Board's discretion, may reduce the maximum permitted
development density in the planned unit development to ensure
that it is compatible with the surrounding area.
(1)
Dimensional requirements. The following dimensional
requirements are based on the requirements of the designated
principal zoning district and shall apply to all lots in a PUD. Any
reduction in minimum lot area from that required in the principal
(2)
D.
69.Editor's Note: Tables 5-1, 5-2 and 5-3 are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 300-7.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-7.7
1:255
zoning district shall be accompanied by the provision of open space
or common areas, but not to include parking areas, equal in area to
the reduction in lot area.
Minimum lot area: 1/2 of the requirement for the principal
zoning district.
(a)
Minimum lot frontage: 2/3 of the minimum requirement for
uses in the principal zoning district.
(b)
(c) Maximum building coverage of lot: variable.
Maximum building height: maximum building height for the
principal zoning district.
(d)
(e) Minimum front yard depth: variable.
(f) Minimum side yard depth: variable.
(g) Minimum rear yard depth: variable.
(h) Required buffer around perimeter of PUD: 30 feet.
(i) Number of principal buildings on a lot: variable.
Design criteria. One of the purposes of the Planned Unit Development
District is to encourage creative and aesthetically pleasing site design
that will make efficient use of land and natural resources. In order to
further this purpose, designs incorporating the following elements and
amenities, among others, are encouraged:
(1) Open space.
(2) Park or recreational areas.
(3) Uniform or coordinated building design.
(4) Uniform signage.
(5) Clustering of buildings.
(6) Service roads.
(7) Common parking and service areas.
(8) Increased landscaping.
(9) Provision for transit service.
(10)Pedestrian walkways.
(11)Any other amenities found to be appropriate by the Planning Board.
E.
F. Approval of PUD plans.
§ 300-7.7 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-7.7
1:256
Approval of zone change. The Planned Unit Development District
and its permitted uses constitute a zoning district, the location of
which can be designated on the Official Zoning Map only through
action by Town Meeting. All procedural requirements for a zoning
change shall be adhered to.
(1)
Special permit granting authority. No planned unit development
shall be constructed unless a special permit is granted which
authorizes its construction. The Planning Board is designated as
the special permit granting authority for planned unit
developments. The Planning Board shall issue a special permit only
upon finding that all of the following conditions are met:
That the planned unit development is consistent with the
purpose stated in Subsection A of this section;
(a)
That departures by the proposed development from the zoning
regulations otherwise applicable to the principal zoning
district are consistent with the overall intent of the Zoning
Ordinance and are in the public interest;
(b)
That the planned unit development adequately provides for
control over vehicular and pedestrian traffic, both within the
planned unit development and outside of the planned unit
development;
(c)
That the planned unit development makes adequate provision
for public utilities and public safety;
(d)
That plans for the continued provision and maintenance of
common open space and common use areas are adequate and
are guaranteed;
(e)
That if the development of the planned unit development is
to occur in phases over a period of years, the terms and
conditions intended to protect the interests of the public and
the residents, occupants and owners of the proposed
development are adequate;
(f)
That the planned unit development will not have an
unreasonably adverse effect on the character and property
values of the surrounding area; and
(g)
That sufficient legal and monetary controls exist to ensure that
future development of the planned unit development will occur
in accordance with the approved plan.
(h)
(2)
Procedural requirements for Planning Board actions. The Planning
Board shall consider an application for a special permit only after
Town Meeting has approved a zone change to Planned Unit
Development District. The Planning Board shall hold a public
hearing to solicit comments from interested persons prior to
(3)
§ 300-7.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-7.7
1:257
issuing any special permit. Notice of the public hearing shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in West Springfield
on each of two successive weeks, the first date being no less than
14 days prior to the date of the hearing. Notice of the public
hearing shall be mailed to all property owners within 300 feet
of the proposed PUD. The Planning Board shall hold the public
hearing within 65 days after the filing of an application for a special
permit, and shall act on the application within 90 days following the
public hearing. Failure of the Planning Board to take final action
on the application within 90 days following the public hearing shall
constitute approval of the application.
Contents of plans. Plans submitted as part of an application for a
special permit under this section shall be prepared by a registered
engineer, architect or surveyor and shall be of a scale of one
inch equals 40 feet, or other such scale as the Board may find
acceptable. Sheet sizes shall not exceed 24 inches by 36 inches. If
multiple sheets are used, they shall be accompanied by an index
sheet. All plans shall contain the name of the owner and the
development name, boundaries, North point, date and scale. The
following plans and information shall be included:
(a) Locus map;
Site plan:
[1] Location of property lines.
Location of existing and proposed lines of streets, ways,
lots, easements and public areas.
[2]
Total acreage of the site and total acreage of each land use
within the site.
[3]
[4] The names of all abutting property owners.
(b)
Topography. Existing and proposed topography at five-foot
elevations.
(c)
Landscaping:
Inventory of existing trees or groups of trees over eight
inches in diameter and other significant natural features.
[1]
Proposed landscaping plan, including type and location of
plantings, location of buffers, and location of existing and
man-made waterways.
[2]
(d)
Utilities:
Location of existing and proposed utilities, including
water, gas, electric and television.
[1]
(e)
(4)
§ 300-7.7 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-7.7
1:258
§ 300-7.8. Age-restricted housing development in an Age-Restricted
Housing (ARH) Overlay District.
Proposed method and location of drainage for both storm
and sanitary wastes.
[2]
Plot plan: location and size of all buildings, sidewalks, service
and common areas.
(f)
Signage: a plan showing the type, size and location of all signs
on the site.
(g)
Traffic: map showing the local traffic circulation system,
existing and proposed traffic volumes, and a description of the
impacts that the development will have on the local traffic
circulation system.
(h)
Phased development: for a planned unit development which is
to occur in phases, a description of the various phases and a
proposed development schedule.
(i)
Mixed development: for developments which will include uses
from both the principal zoning district and no more than two
other secondary zoning districts, a map showing the location
and percentage of land area occupied by the principal and
secondary uses.
(j)
Modification and expiration of special permits.
The design of any planned unit development approved under the
provisions of this section shall not be modified unless approved by
the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing
prior to acting upon any request for a modification of an approved
plan.
(1)
Special permits granted under this section shall lapse two years
from their approval unless substantial use or construction has
commenced on the site.
(2)
G.
Purpose. The purpose of an age-restricted housing development is to
encourage the development of affordable and market-rate housing for
individuals aged 55 and over, by allowing for a greater variety of
building types at a higher density than would normally be allowed; by
allowing greater flexibility in site planning so as to promote the sound
development of land which reduces residents' burdens of property
maintenance and which reduces demands on municipal services; and to
promote flexibility in land use planning in order to improve site layouts,
protect natural features and environmental values and utilize land in
harmony with neighboring properties.
A.
B. Dimensional standards.
§ 300-7.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-7.8
1:259
The following dimensional, height and density standards shall
supersede any applicable dimensional standard in the underlying
zoning district and shall be applied to any age-restricted housing
development:
(a) Minimum frontage: 60 feet.
(b) Minimum lot area: five acres.
(c) Maximum lot area: 20 acres.
Minimum yard setbacks from property line:
[1] Front: 100 feet.
[2] Side: 45 feet.
[3] Rear: 45 feet.
(d)
Minimum structural setback from paved edge of access road:
[1] Front: 30 feet.
[2] Side: 30 feet.
[3] Rear: 30 feet.
(e)
(f) Maximum building height: two stories/35 feet.
(g) Maximum building coverage: 20%.
(h) Minimum landscape buffer: 20 feet.
(i) Minimum open space requirement: 25%.
(j) Maximum density: four units/developable acreage of land.
(1)
Developable acreage: all land not containing slopes greater than
20%, land identified as wetlands under MGL c. 131, § 40 or land
encumbered by easements or deed restrictions that prohibit the
development of the land.
(2)
Building and design standards. In order to achieve a development that
reflects the residential character of the neighborhood in which it is
located, the following minimum building and design standards shall
be applied to all structures constructed in an age-restricted housing
development:
(1) There shall be no more than four dwelling units per structure.
(2) No dwelling unit shall contain more than two bedrooms.
The front facade of all structures shall be oriented toward the
access road serving the premises and not toward any parking lot or
abutting property.
(3)
C.
§ 300-7.8 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-7.8
1:260
All structures, principal or accessory, shall have a gabled roofline,
articulated footprint and may have varied facades.
(4)
No structure shall be greater than 10,000 square feet in gross floor
area. Gross floor area shall include attached garages but shall not
include basements.
(5)
A minimum twenty-five-foot separation between buildings shall be
provided, which shall be landscaped.
(6)
Principal structures that abut an access road along the front and
rear yard shall be provided a landscape buffer, a minimum of six
feet in height and five feet in width, along the rear yard abutting
the access road.
(7)
Garages, if provided, shall be attached to and made an integral part
of the principal structure.
(8)
Accessory structures shall comply with all setback requirements
and shall be designed with architectural detailing of similar nature
to the principal buildings located thereon.
(9)
Access roads, pedestrian/biking facilities and all infrastructure and
utilities shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of land within
West Springfield to the extent applicable.
(10)
All lighting fixtures shall be integrated into the architectural style
of the development. All exterior structural and site lighting (not
including access road lighting) shall be retained on site and shall
not create a nuisance to abutting properties and streets. All
exterior light sources shall be appropriately shielded from offpremises
viewing. Access road lighting shall be designed to prevent
nuisance to abutting properties by reason of light and glare.
(11)
One sign, no greater than 16 square feet in size and six feet in
height, shall be allowed at the intersection of the project's access
road with the abutting public way. Signage may be illuminated
with projected lighting, but it shall not be backlit or internally
illuminated.
(12)
Stormwater management and erosion control.
All stormwater shall be managed on site. It is preferred that passive
stormwater techniques be utilized and integrated as part of the
landscaping for the site. Water quality shall be preserved by
directing all stormwater to a vegetated detention/retention basin
or swale. These basins shall be designed to filter out sediments, oils
and greases, heavy metals and other nutrients from stormwater
prior to its discharge to wetlands, water bodies or groundwater.
An approved maintenance program for the basins/swales shall be
prepared and implemented by the property owner, and approved
(1)
D.
§ 300-7.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-7.8
1:261
by the Planning Board, to ensure long-term filtration integrity.
All methodology implemented for water quality protection shall
follow the standards and guidelines of the following documents:
Stormwater Management, Volume One: Stormwater Policy
Handbook, MA DEP, MA CZM, March 1997; Stormwater
Management, Volume Two: Stormwater Technical Handbook, MA
DEP, MA CZM, March 1997; Massachusetts Erosion and Sediment
Control Guidelines for Urban and Suburban Areas, Franklin,
Hampden, Hampshire Conservation Districts, March 1997; as
amended from time to time. If replaced by updated standards,
then the new standards shall apply. In addition, all stormwater
management plans must be in compliance with any municipal
stormwater discharge ordinance.
General soil erosion of the proposed development site shall be
minimized by integrating the development into the existing terrain
by retaining natural grades and soil cover. During grading and
construction of all improvements, including all structures and
infrastructure improvements, erosion of soil shall be minimized
by implementing the guidelines and methodology outlined in the
document entitled "Massachusetts Erosion and Sediment Control
Guidelines for Urban and Suburban Areas" prepared by the
Franklin, Hampden, Hampshire Conservation Districts dated
March 1997, as amended from time to time. If replaced by updated
standards, then the new standards shall apply.
(2)
Site access, roadway design and management.
All structures located within an age-restricted development shall
be accessed by the proposed private access road. Direct access to
any proposed structure from an existing public or private road shall
be prohibited. A proposed development deriving its access from a
private road shall submit a legal opinion, acceptable to the Town
Attorney, establishing the right of access from the private road to
the development as proposed.
(1)
All access roads shall be designed, constructed and approved in
accordance with the Rules and Regulations Governing the
Subdivision of Land in the Town of West Springfield. All access
roadways and associated infrastructure improvements shall be
considered private, under the ownership of the property owner
and/or a homeowners' association established pursuant to MGL
Chapter 183A, and shall not be owned or maintained by the Town
of West Springfield.
(2)
E.
Parking. All age-restricted housing developments shall provide for
adequate off-street parking which will protect the health, safety and
welfare of the residents and guests.
A minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall be provided per
unit.
(1)
F.
§ 300-7.8 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-7.8
1:262
A minimum of two parking spaces shall be provided for postal
delivery accessory structures.
(2)
No parking spaces or parking lots shall be located within the
required minimum yard setback requirements for principal
structures from access roads and property lines except as allowed
by the following sentence. The parking of vehicles shall be allowed
within driveway areas providing access to a principal structure.
(3)
No parking areas, parking lots or access drives shall be located
within the minimum twenty-five-foot separation area between
structures.
(4)
(5) All parking lots shall be located to the rear of any structure.
All parking lots shall be screened from abutting access roads,
properties and streets through the use of landscaped berms and
evergreen shrubs and trees a minimum of four feet in height and
five feet in width.
(6)
Landscape buffers, open space and natural resources.
A minimum of a twenty-foot landscaped buffer shall be provided
along the perimeter of the property. Said landscaped buffer shall
consist of the retention of natural vegetation supplemented with
the planting of evergreen trees and shrubs.
(1)
A minimum of 25% of the total acreage of an age-restricted housing
development shall be set aside as common open space for the
use of the residents. It is the intention of this ordinance that
the common open space shall generally consist of a large, single,
contiguous area of open space, which shall retain those natural
features of the site most worthy of preservation in their natural
state, and which connect with existing or potential conservation or
open space areas on adjacent parcels. Not more than 25% of the
common open space shall consist of wetlands. A maintenance plan
shall be implemented to ensure the long-term protection of open
space areas.
(2)
All significant features, such as trees of over 12 inches diameter
at breast high (DBH), identified heritage features, watercourses,
one-hundred-year floodplains, wetlands, ponds and other water
bodies, marshes, stone walls, scenic points, and historic sites, are
encouraged to be preserved in the following manner:
Stone walls should be preserved by locating property
boundaries along the existing line of the walls.
(a)
Scenic points as identified in the Massachusetts Landscape
Inventory and historic sites identified by the Massachusetts
Historical Commission should be preserved by incorporating
them within open space or recreational areas.
(b)
(3)
G.
§ 300-7.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-7.8
1:263
Trees greater than 12 inches' DBH in size should be preserved,
if reasonably possible, by retaining natural grades and locating
houses to minimize tree removal.
(c)
Wetlands and water bodies should be incorporated into nature
trails and other passive recreational uses.
(d)
Planning Board findings. In making its decision, the Planning Board
must make written findings on the following mandatory standards
requiring that the proposed use, buildings and structures for an agerestricted
housing development will:
Be compatible with adjacent land uses and with the character of
the neighborhood in which it is located. Within its finding, the
Board shall also specifically define the extent of the neighborhood
considered during the review of the age-restricted housing project.
(1)
Constitute no nuisance to abutting land and natural resources by
reason of uncharacteristic air or water pollution or noise.
(2)
Provide safe and convenient access to the site from existing or
proposed roads, and to proposed structures thereon, with
particular reference to pedestrian and vehicular safety, traffic flow
and control, and access in case of fire or emergency.
(3)
Provide for adequate capacity for public services, facilities, and
utilities to service the proposed development, such as water
pressure and sewer capacity.
(4)
Provide for visual and noise buffering of the development to
minimize impact to abutting properties.
(5)
Create no nuisance to abutting properties by reason of light, noise,
dust, vibration or stormwater runoff.
(6)
Provide for the long-term preservation and maintenance of open
space and recreation areas.
(7)
Provide for long-term maintenance of the stormwater management
system.
(8)
Be occupied by:
Persons who are 55 years of age or older, hereinafter referred
to as "occupant";
(a)
A spouse, under 55 years of age, of an occupant may reside in
the occupant's unit, hereinafter referred to as "spouse";
(b)
(c) A spouse who survives the occupant;
A spouse where the occupant has entered into a long-term care
facility;
(d)
(9)
H.
§ 300-7.8 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-7.8
1:264
§ 300-7.9. Memorial Corridor Overlay District.
A mentally or physically handicapped child, brother or sister of
an occupant or spouse who is dependent upon said occupant
or spouse for daily care;
(e)
A paid caregiver providing medical or health care to an
occupant or spouse.
(f)
Be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this
ordinance.
(10)
Annual reporting. The organization of homeowners established for the
management of the development, or if none, the owners individually,
shall annually file a written report with the Planning Board listing the
resident of each occupied unit. The format for the annual report shall
be obtained from the Planning Department. Said annual report shall
include the names and ages of the owners and each person residing
in each unit as of January 1 of each year, and any other information
necessary to ensure compliance with and enforce any required
conditions of the special permit. The annual report shall be filed with
the Planning Board by January 15 of each year.
I.
Purpose. The purpose of the Memorial Corridor Overlay District is to
promote the health, safety, and welfare of the public and secure public
benefits by the following means:
Minimizing adverse land uses and community impacts on locations
within proximity of a gaming establishment;
(1)
Encouraging economic stimulus through appropriate commercial
development; and
(2)
Recognizing the Eastern States Exposition fairgrounds as a local as
well as a New England regional community asset by formalizing the
list of historically permitted uses.
(3)
A.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ADULT HOTEL; HOURLY HOTEL — Any hotel, motel, inn,
boardinghouse or similar establishment which rents, leases, or lets any
room for less than a six-hour period, or rents, leases, or lets any single
room more than twice in a twenty-four-hour period.
ADULT USES — See MGL c. 40A, § 9A.
BAIL BOND ESTABLISHMENT — A business that collects a fee for
obtaining the release of criminal defendants from jail by pledging
money or property as a guarantee that the defendant will appear in a
court of law.
CHECK CASHING BUSINESS — An establishment or portion thereof
engaged in the cashing of checks by individuals; or the deferred deposit
B.
§ 300-7.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-7.9
1:265
of personal checks whereby the check casher refrains from depositing
a personal check written by a customer until a specific date; or the
offering of a loan until a paycheck would be received by the person
receiving the loan. This term shall not include any of the following:
CONFERENCE CENTER — A facility designed and used for
conventions, conferences, seminars, product displays, recreation
activities and entertainment functions, along with accessory functions,
including temporary outdoor displays, and food and beverage
preparation and service for on-premises indoor and outdoor
consumption.
ELECTRONIC GAMING ESTABLISHMENT; CYBERCAFE; GAMBLING
INTERNET CAFE — A business operation, whether a principal use or
accessory use, where persons utilize electronic machines or devices,
including, but not limited to, computers and gaming terminals, to
conduct games of chance, and where cash, prizes, merchandise or other
items of value are redeemed or otherwise distributed, whether or not
the value of such redeemed or distributed items is determined by the
electronic games played or by predetermined odds.
EXPOSITION — A fair or exhibition, the primary purpose of which is the
encouragement, advancement, improvement, innovation and extension
of agriculture, education, industry and family entertainment through
a balanced variety of exhibits of livestock and agricultural products
and related arts, including, but not limited to, products of the farm
and related educational programs and contests; manufacturing and
technology conferences and trade shows, including displays,
demonstrations and related programming; recreation, entertainment,
amusement, and other complementary uses and amenities. Uses may
also include the annual Big E fair, other agricultural shows and events,
horse shows, dog shows, farm and garden shows, trade association
conventions and other nonagricultural related activities.
GAMING ESTABLISHMENT — The premises approved under a
Category 1 license issued by the Massachusetts Gaming Commission
pursuant to MGL c. 23K, which includes, without limitation, any gaming
or non-gaming uses permitted under such legislation and the
regulations promulgated by the Commission thereunder. Approval of a
gaming establishment use, as defined in this ordinance, is subject to
receipt of a Category 1 license issued by the Massachusetts Gaming
Commission pursuant to MGL c. 23K.
PAWN SHOP/CASH-FOR-GOLD STORE — An establishment or portion
thereof that requires a junk dealer's license in accordance with Chapter
A state or federally chartered bank, savings association, credit
union, or industrial loan association;
(1)
A retail store engaged primarily in selling or leasing items to retail
customers and that cashes a check for a fee not routinely exceeding
1% of the check amount as a service to its customers, incidental to
the retail store principal use.
(2)
§ 300-7.9 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-7.9
1:266
168, Junk Dealers, of the Town Code, and that purchases property on
the condition of selling it back at a stipulated price, offers secured loans
to individuals with their property used as collateral and/or purchases,
at retail, items made of or substantially consisting of silver, gold, or
platinum metals. This definition shall not apply to establishments that
purchase secondhand items and/or accept in-trade items as part of a
business substantially dedicated to the retail sale of like items in new
condition, or businesses that deal solely in clothing, furniture, or books.
(See "secondhand store.")[Amended 5-21-2018]
PAYDAY OR TITLE LOAN AGENCY —
RV PARKING LOT — An area of land intended for overnight parking
of recreational vehicles as a temporary dwelling. Services such as
electricity, water, and wastewater hookups may be provided.
Any establishment which advances or lends a small, short-maturity
loan on the security of:
(a) A check;
Any form of assignment of an interest in the account of an
individual at a depository institution;
(b)
Any form of assignment of income payable to an individual,
other than loans based on income tax refunds; or
(c)
(d) Title of a motor vehicle.
(1)
This term shall not include any of the following:
A state or federally chartered bank, savings association, credit
union, or industrial loan association.
(a)
A retail store engaged primarily in selling or leasing items
to retail customers and that cashes a check for a fee not
routinely exceeding 1% of the check amount as a service to its
customers, incidental to the retail store principal use.
(b)
(2)
Scope of authority. The Memorial Corridor Overlay District is an overlay
district and shall be superimposed on existing districts established by
this ordinance. All proposed uses and/or activities occurring within
the Memorial Corridor Overlay District are subject to the underlying
zoning ordinance, except as noted herein. Where definitions, permitted
or prohibited uses, standards, or other requirements listed as part of
this Memorial Corridor Overlay District may conflict with those in the
underlying district or elsewhere in the zoning ordinance, the Memorial
Corridor Overlay District provisions shall apply. The Planning Board
shall act as the administering permit granting authority for any review
procedures associated with this ordinance. The permitted uses in the
Fairgrounds Subdistrict shall only apply to that subdistrict while an
agriculturally exempt nonprofit exhibition organized under the General
Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts owns and controls the
C.
§ 300-7.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-7.9
1:267
land while operating said land as a fairground. Should another, similar
organization come to own and control the land, it would have to be
operated in substantially the same manner to benefit from the by-right
uses permitted by this ordinance.
District delineation.
The Memorial Corridor Overlay District incorporates properties
in the southeast corner of West Springfield and contains one
subdistrict area: Fairgrounds Subdistrict. The Memorial Corridor
Overlay District is bounded by:
(a) The Westfield River to the west and south.
(b) The Agawam Town line to the southeast.
(c) The Connecticut River to the east.
(d) Park Street and Park Avenue to the north.
(1)
The Fairgrounds Subdistrict of the Memorial Corridor Overlay
District is bounded by:
(a) The Westfield River to the south.
(b) Memorial Avenue/Route 147 to the west and north.
(c) The westerly side of Circuit Avenue to the east and northeast.
(2)
The map entitled "Memorial Corridor Overlay District, Town of
West Springfield," on file with the Town Clerk, delineates the
boundaries of the overlay district, including the Fairgrounds
Subdistrict.
(3)
D.
Uses. Uses within the Memorial Corridor Overlay District are subject to
the underlying zoning regulations, except as noted herein:
Prohibited uses: Memorial Corridor Overlay District. The following
uses are prohibited throughout the Memorial Corridor Overlay
District, including but not limited to the Fairgrounds Subdistrict:
Adult uses, subject to regulation pursuant to MGL c.40A § 9A,
including adult bookstore, adult club which displays live nudity
for its patrons, adult paraphernalia store, adult motion-picture
theater.
(a)
(b) Adult hotel, hourly hotel.
(c) Bail bond establishment.
(d) Check cashing business.
Electronic gaming establishment, cybercafe, gambling internet
cafe.
(e)
(1)
E.
§ 300-7.9 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-7.9
1:268
Gambling establishment that does not meet the definition of
"gaming establishment as defined in Subsection B.
(f)
(g) Pawn shop, cash-for-gold store.
(h) Payday or title loan agency.
Special permit uses: Memorial Corridor Overlay District.
The following uses shall be allowed by special permit in the
Memorial Corridor Overlay District, including but not limited
to the Fairgrounds Subdistrict:
The following three uses: personal service establishments,
take-out restaurants and tradesmen, as defined by Article
II, shall be allowed in the underlying industrial zoning
district subject to the following additional restrictions:
Any such business shall not occupy a space greater
than 900 square feet; and
[a]
Signage shall be limited to that of signs for home
occupational use within residential districts and
directional signage as defined in Article IX.70
[b]
The special permit granting authority may, if its
findings so demonstrate, grant a reduction in parking
requirements of Article IX of this ordinance so long
as said reductions are no greater than 25% of the
original requirements.71
[c]
[1]
All uses allowed in the Fairgrounds Subdistrict by
Subsection E(3)(b) below shall also be allowed by special
permit unless the use is regularly permitted by the License
Commission, then allowed by license, in the larger
Memorial Corridor Overlay District but limited to the
underlying industrial zoning districts.
[2]
(a)
Special permits issued in accordance with this section shall
follow the procedures in Article XII of this ordinance.
(b)
(2)
Permitted uses: Fairgrounds Subdistrict. The following uses shall
be allowed by-right within the Fairgrounds Subdistrict:
All uses and structures as are allowed in the underlying zoning
districts.
(a)
In addition, the following uses associated with an exposition
grounds are permitted by-right with site plan review in the
Fairgrounds Subdistrict if they involve the construction of a
(b)
(3)
70.Editor's Note: See § 300-9.2, Signs.
71.Editor's Note: See § 300-9.0, Off-street parking and loading standards.
§ 300-7.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-7.9
1:269
new building (excluding temporary structures), or by-right in
the Fairgrounds Subdistrict without site plan review, provided
they do not involve the construction of one or more buildings:
[1] Expositions.
Conference centers, meeting facilities and banquet
facilities.
[2]
[3] Car shows.
[4] Boat shows.
[5] Antique shows.
[6] Art fairs and shows.
[7] Hobby shows.
[8] Circuses.
[9] Craft shows and fairs.
[10]Trade association conventions.
[11]Educational and cultural shows and events.
[12]Sporting events.
[13]Concerts.
[14]Youth sports and other athletic competitions.
[15]Public events.
Disaster preparedness and/or emergency response site
staging related activities, including but not limited to
temporary activities such as a public address system,
heliport, communications equipment, command center
and/or temporary shelter.
[16]
Administrative offices and business uses associated with
operations of the Eastern States Exposition, including,
without limitation, conduct of the annual Big E fair and
other events and permitted uses.
[17]
Food and beverage service uses associated with permitted
events or approved principal uses.
[18]
Temporary warehousing of equipment or materials related
to a permitted use and/or the storage and distribution uses
during permitted uses or events.
[19]
Other agricultural, educational, cultural, recreational,
economic or social uses similar in size, scope, type and
impact to those above-listed uses.
[20]
§ 300-7.9 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-7.9
1:270
Accessory parking, including RV parking lots, for
Exposition uses.
[21]
Any event or activity so licensed by the West Springfield
License Commission.
[22]
Dimensional requirements. The dimensional requirements for principal
and accessory structures within the Fairgrounds Subdistrict shall be
those of the underlying zoning district, as modified below:
Table 300-7.9F
Dimensional Requirements
Requirement Fairgrounds Subdistrict
Minimum lot area 15,000 square feet
Maximum building height 75 feet1,2,3
Maximum building stories 6 stories
Minimum landscaped buffer Street line: 20 feet
Side yard: 10 feet
Notes:
1Buildings or portions of buildings greater than 60 feet in height shall
be set back from the front and side building lot line a minimum of 0.5
times the building height.
2The building height limitations shall not prevent the erection of an
ornamental feature, including but not limited to parapet wall or
cornice, which would occupy not more than 50% of the ground area
of the underlying building element on which such feature is erected
and shall not extend above such height limit for not more than 15
feet. The height limitations on buildings shall not apply to chimneys,
cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, skylights, TV or wireless antennas,
ventilators and other necessary appurtenances usually carried above
roofs, nor to domes, stacks, or spires if not used for human occupancy.
3Special permits as to larger height limits may be granted by the Zoning
Board of Appeals.
Principal buildings. More than one principal building may be
permitted per building lot in the Fairgrounds Subdistrict.
(1)
Accessory structures. More than one accessory structure may be
permitted per building lot in the Fairgrounds Subdistrict.
Accessory and principal structures are not required to share an
adjoining wall and may be independent structures. Dimensional
controls on accessory structures shall meet the requirements set
forth in Table 300-7.9F.
(2)
F.
G. Signs.
§ 300-7.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-7.9
1:271
General.
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 300-9.2, the following
signage standards shall apply to the construction, erection,
alteration, use, location, and maintenance of out-of-doors onpremises
signs within the Fairgrounds Subdistrict of the
Memorial Corridor Overlay District.
(a)
Recognizing the unique character of the Exposition use as
a local as well as a New England regional community asset
for education and entertainment as well as for use as an
emergency shelter in times of need, the Memorial Corridor
Overlay District provides for unique signage within the
Fairgrounds Subdistrict. In addition to signs permitted under
§ 300-9.2, Exposition uses within the Fairgrounds Subdistrict
as defined in Subsection E(3)(b) are permitted up to three
digital/electronic signs, as defined below, subject to the
following standards.
(b)
Sign content is limited to information about permitted
Fairgrounds Subdistrict uses as outlined in Subsection E(3) or
to public safety messages, including disaster preparedness and
traffic control.
(c)
No freestanding sign larger than one square foot shall be
erected, altered, displayed, relocated, enlarged, or created
without first obtaining a permit from the Building Inspector.
The Building Inspector shall review the sign design for
consistency with the State Building Code.
(d)
(1)
Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
DIGITAL OR ELECTRONIC SIGN — A changeable-copy sign that
uses a matrix of illumination elements (white and/or colored),
including but not limited to light-emitting diodes (LEDs), liquid
crystal display (LCD), plasma display, or other digital or electronic
media to display or project text and/or images that can be modified
by electronic processes.
(2)
Freestanding electronic/digital sign standards. In addition to signs
permitted under § 300-9.2, up to three freestanding electronic/
digital signs are permitted for an Exposition use in the Fairgrounds
Subdistrict, provided they conform to the following standards:
Permitted locations. Signs for the Exposition or other use
outlined at Subsection E(2)(a)[2] shall be allowed within the
Fairgrounds Subdistrict at the below locations; though in no
instance shall a digital/electronic sign be located within 200
feet of another permitted digital/electronic sign. The face of
all signs on parcels contiguous to Memorial Avenue shall be
perpendicular to Memorial Avenue.
(a)
(3)
§ 300-7.9 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-7.9
1:272
One freestanding sign on the Eastern States Exposition
property as a replacement for the existing sign in front of
the Brooks Building at Memorial Avenue.
[1]
One freestanding sign on the Eastern States Exposition
property as a replacement for the existing sign at Gate
2 (located between the Moses Building and Hampden
County Building) at Memorial Avenue.
[2]
One freestanding sign on the Eastern State Exposition
property at Gate 9 (at Circuit Avenue).
[3]
Dimensions.
The area of each sign listed above shall not exceed the
following dimensions per face (each sign may have two
faces):
Brooks Building sign: 75 square feet per total area of
sign face.
[a]
Gate 2 sign: 50 square feet per side per total area of
sign face.
[b]
Gate 9 sign: 100 square feet per side per total area of
sign face.
[c]
[1]
For all signs listed above, the sign shall not exceed 25 feet
in width and the top of the sign shall not be more than
25 feet above ground elevation for the Brooks Building, 15
feet for Gate 2 and 20 feet for Gate 9. No greater than
75% of each side of the sign shall be comprised of a digital/
electronic element. The entire sign may be internally or
externally illuminated. Freestanding signs shall not be
placed so as to interfere with vehicular or pedestrian
traffic.
[2]
(b)
Setbacks. The following setbacks shall be maintained between
the signs and the front lot line:
[1] Brooks Building sign and Gate 9 sign: 25 feet.
[2] Gate 2 sign: 10 feet.
(c)
Brightness. The brightness of an electronic/digital sign shall
not exceed 0.3 footcandle above ambient light conditions. The
ambient light reading shall be taken at least 30 minutes past
sunset with the sign turned off or displaying all black copy.
The fully lit reading shall be taken with the sign displaying
all white copy. Measurement of the light levels shall be taken
perpendicular to the face of the sign at a distance of 100 feet
from the source.
(d)
§ 300-7.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-7.9
1:273
Dimmer control. Signs shall have at least one photo sensor and
automatic dimmer control to produce a distinct illumination
change from a higher illumination level to a lower level for the
time period between one-half hour before sunset and one-half
hour after sunrise. Each photo sensor shall:
[1] Be designed to continually operate in direct sunlight;
[2] Be situated to measure ambient light;
Be contained in a waterproof enclosure which shall allow
easy access to the photo sensors;
[3]
[4] Allow light sensing; and
Be capable of dimming all pixels of the sign collectively to
compensate for surrounding ambient light levels.
[5]
(e)
Illumination. Signs shall be allowed to be illuminated seven
days a week between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
unless the premises on which they are located is open for
business. A sign or its illumination shall not, by reason of its
location, shape, or color, interfere with traffic or be confused
with or obstruct the line-of-sight or effectiveness of any official
traffic sign, traffic signal or traffic marking.
(f)
Pixel pitch. The pitch of the LED portion of the sign shall be a
maximum of 36 millimeters.
(g)
Duration. Each static display shall last at least 10 seconds
to avoid quick and frenetic changes of content that can be
distracting and compromise public safety.
(h)
Transition. The display transition must be accomplished by
means of instantaneous repixalization and shall not use fading,
shading, dissolving, or similar effects as part of the change.
(i)
Message sequencing. The images and messages displayed
shall be complete in themselves without continuation in
content to the next image or message.
(j)
Malfunction mechanism. Signs shall contain a default design
that will shut the sign off if a malfunction occurs.
(k)
Back-up power. The sign at the Brooks Building shall be
connected to a back-up power source to provide public safety
and emergency message capabilities during power outages or
when regular systems fail. Providing a back-up power source
reinforces the use of the sign as an emergency management
asset for the Town, public safety personnel and residents.
(l)
(m) Electronic signs shall not:
§ 300-7.9 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-7.9
1:274
Incorporate video, animation, or scrolling of text or
images;
[1]
[2] Emit any sound nor utilize pyrotechnics;
Cause beams or rays of light to be directed at any portion
of the traveled way, when such beams or rays are of such
intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or to impair the
vision of the driver of any motor vehicle or otherwise
interfere with the operation of a motor vehicle;
[3]
Obscure or interfere with the effectiveness of an official
traffic sign, device or signal. Signs located within 200 feet
of a traffic signal shall not be illuminated in a solid red,
solid yellow, or solid green color;
[4]
Obscure or otherwise interfere with a motor vehicle
operator's view of approaching, merging, or intersecting
traffic;
[5]
Changing images shall not rotate, sparkle, blink, or
fluctuate in light intensity or use intermittent strobing, or
moving light, or in any manner to create the illusion of
movement.
[6]
Compliance and enforcement. The Building Inspector or the Sign
Officer shall inspect any sign installed in accordance with this
Subsection G within 30 days of installation to confirm the sign's
compliance with this ordinance. Enforcement actions shall follow
the requirements of § 300-9.2I of this ordinance.
(4)
§ 300-7.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-7.9
1:275

ARTICLE VIII
Development Methods
§ 300-8.0. General development standards.
All developments in the Town shall conform to the Rules and Regulations
Governing the Subdivision of Land in the Town of West Springfield,
Massachusetts, as amended.
§ 300-8.1. Conventional residential development.
Conventional residential development includes: any subdivision of land, as
defined in the Subdivision Control Laws, MGL c. 41, §§ 81K to 81GG, to be
developed for residential purposes; and the development of a single-family
home on a lot which does not require approval under MGL Chapter 41.
§ 300-8.2. Multifamily housing with site plan review.
Multifamily dwellings permitted by site plan review. Multifamily
dwellings shall be permitted only upon site plan review by the Planning
Board, as specified in Articles XIII and XIV of this ordinance and in
accordance with the additional requirements specified in § 300-8.2, in
the Residence C (RC) District as noted in Table 5-172 and the Business
A-1 (BA-1) and Business B-1 (BB-1) districts as noted in Table 5-2.73
A.
Dimensional requirements.
All multifamily dwellings shall conform to the dimensional
requirements specified in Table 6-1 and Table 6-2 in Article VI.74
(1)
The maximum permitted lot dimension is up to, but not including,
five acres for one or more contiguous complexes in common
ownership.
(2)
B.
Open space requirements. Any required open space must be:
(1) Maintained by the owner;
(2) Devoted to plantings (including grass areas); and
Devoted to pedestrian -oriented paved areas designated for social
or recreational use in common by the residents of the complex,
and provided that such areas are kept essentially open to the outof-
doors and are at ground level. Paved open space areas will be
clearly designated on building plans and provided and maintained
with appropriate recreational equipment. Specifically excluded
from required open space are those areas devoted to parking,
parking access, and service drives, whether or not designed for
(3)
C.
72.Editor's Note: Table 5-1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
73.Editor's Note: Table 5-2 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
74.Editor's Note: Tables 6-1 and 6-2 are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 300-8.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-8.2
1:277
§ 300-8.3. Multifamily dwellings by special permit with site plan
review in Residence C (RC), Business A-1 (BA-1) and Business B-1
(BB-1) Districts.
multiple use, and those areas deemed not usable for recreational
or other tenant use. In designating open space, due regard shall
be shown for all natural features which, if preserved, will add
attractiveness and value to the development.
Since the dimensional requirements of § 300-8.2 may inhibit the
imaginative use of various parcels, these dimensional regulations may
be waived by the issuance of a special permit from the Zoning Board of
Appeals with site plan review from the Planning Board, as specified in
Articles XII, XIII and XIV of this ordinance and in accordance with the
additional requirements specified herein.
A.
Site plans for special permits.
Site plans for special permits shall be drawn on Mylar or similar
durable materials at a scale of one inch equals 40 feet on standard
18-inch by 24-inch sheets or 24-inch by 36-inch sheets. Such plans
shall contain or be accompanied by the following information:
The name of the proposed development, its boundaries, North
point, size in acres, scale, soil types as determined by the
United States Soil Conservation Service75 (available in the
Planning Board office) or as determined by the project
engineer, number of units proposed, total floor area of all
buildings, and number of parking spaces;
(a)
Name and address of owner, landscape architect, and architect
or engineer;
(b)
Existing and proposed topography at one-foot contour intervals
and methods of disposing of surface water. The project
engineer shall indicate on the site plan and also in writing that
the proposed topography shall not adversely affect abutting
parcels through erosion, flooding or similar conditions;
(c)
(d) Location of utilities;
Major existing site features, including but not limited to walls,
fences, buildings, large trees and stands of trees, rock ridges
and outcroppings, swamps, wetlands, one-hundred-year
floodplains and water bodies (Note: The developer shall
indicate in writing his intentions with respect to preservation,
removal or alteration of existing site features.);
(e)
(1)
B.
75.Editor's Note: Now the Natural Resources Conservation Service
§ 300-8.2 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-8.3
1:278
Location of proposed structures, buildings and roadways.
Elevation drawings of buildings and cross-sections of roadways
shall be included;
(f)
Solid waste storage and other storage facilities, if any, and
proposed methods of screening such facilities from public view
of the residents of the proposed development;
(g)
(h) Proposed location and type of bicycle paths, if any; and
Proposed location and type or design of plantings, signs,
recreation areas, and pedestrian walkways.
(i)
Those aspects of the site plan dealing with building placement,
design of pedestrian walkways and motor vehicle parking areas,
screening of storage and other facilities and development of
landscaping plans shall be prepared by a landscape architect
licensed to practice in the commonwealth.
(2)
Dimensional requirements for multifamily dwellings in the RC, BA-1
and BB-1 Districts.
All multifamily dwelling units shall conform to the dimensional
requirements specified in Table 6-1 and Table 6-2,76 in addition to
the dimensional requirements specified herein.
(1)
The number of allowable densities for multifamily developments
shall be permitted as follows:
(a) One story: 10 units/acre.
(b) Two stories: 20 units/acre.
(c) Three stories: 25 units/acre.
(d) Four stories or more: 30 units/acre.
(2)
Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio (FAR) of principal buildings
shall not exceed 0.52.
(3)
Open space ratios.
Open space ratios (OSR) shall not be less than a 1:1 ratio
(50%); not more than 40% of that portion of any site which
exceeds a slope of 15% may be used to fulfill open space
requirements. All portions of a lot not devoted to a building
or to required parking shall be designated as open space.
The required open space shall not be less than 50% of the
area of the multifamily development. All areas not used for
building, parking or required open space shall be maintained
in a natural and clean condition. Such areas may be used to
complement recreational areas.
(a)
(4)
C.
76.Editor's Note: Tables 6-1 and 6-2 are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 300-8.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-8.3
1:279
The OSR is defined as the total area of open space divided by
the total site area in which the open space is located.
(b)
Maximum permitted lot dimension. The maximum permitted lot
dimension is up to, but not including, five acres for one or more
contiguous complexes in common ownership.
(5)
Minimum distance between buildings. The minimum distance
between principal buildings is twice the height of the higher
building but not less than 30 feet.
(6)
Setback of a building or structure from public streets or ways.
Setback of a building or structure from public streets or ways shall
not be less than 1.2 times the height of said building.
(7)
Distance of a building or structure from adjoining property lines.
Distance of a building or structure from adjoining property lines
shall not be less than 0.5 times the height of the building at its
highest point or 15 feet, whichever is greater.
(8)
Additional requirements for multifamily dwellings in the Residence C
(RC), Business A-1 (BA-1) and Business B-1 (BB-1) Districts.
(1) All utilities shall be placed underground.
Pedestrian walkways shall be provided to connect all buildings to
parking facilities and recreation areas. Walkways serving parking
facilities shall extend to the most distant portions of such facilities
and shall be clearly distinguished, through design and/or material,
and shall be protected from automobile parking spaces and driving
lanes.
(2)
Buffers and plantings shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of Table 13-1,77 Article XIII, of this ordinance. (Note:
That percentage of parking areas required to be landscaped may
be calculated as a portion of the required open space.)
(3)
Existing structures of historic value as listed by the West
Springfield Historical Commission, the Lower Pioneer Valley
Planning Commission publication, A Future For the Past, or
subsequent directory or the National Register of Historic Places
may be retained for any use permitted in the zoning district in
which they are located if refurbished to a sound condition and
if external architectural features are preserved and/or restored.
Floor areas available in such structures shall be permitted in
addition to floor areas developed through the use of the floor area
ratio noted in Subsection C. Building coverage occupied by such
structures may be deducted from the open space requirement set
forth, and intrusion of such structures into required landscaped
buffers is permitted.
(4)
D.
77.Editor's Note: See § 300-13.8.
§ 300-8.3 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-8.3
1:280
§ 300-8.4. Multifamily dwellings by special permit with site plan
review in Special Use (Multifamily) District.
Open space requirements. Any required open space must be:
(1) Maintained by the owner;
(2) Devoted to plantings (including grass areas); and
Devoted to pedestrian-oriented paved areas designated for social
or recreational use in common by the residents of the complex,
and provided that such areas are kept essentially open to the outof-
doors and are at ground level. Paved open space areas will be
clearly designated on building plans and provided and maintained
with appropriate recreational equipment. Specifically excluded
from required open space are those areas devoted to parking,
parking access, and service drives, whether or not designed for
multiple use, and those areas deemed not usable for recreational
or other tenant use. In designating open space, due regard shall
be shown for all natural features which, if preserved, will add
attractiveness and value to the development.
(3)
E.
Multifamily dwellings shall be permitted in the Special Use
(Multifamily) Districts as noted in Table 5-478 only upon issuance of
a special permit with site plan review from the Planning Board, as
specified in Articles XII, XIII and XIV of this ordinance and in
accordance with the additional requirements as specified in § 300-7.5.
A.
Dimensional requirements. All multifamily dwellings shall conform to
the dimensional requirements specified in Table 6-1 and Table 6-2.79
B.
Open space requirements. Any required open space must be:
(1) Maintained by the owner;
(2) Devoted to plantings (including grass areas); and
Devoted to pedestrian-oriented paved areas designated for social
or recreational use in common by the residents of the complex,
and provided that such areas are kept essentially open to the outof-
doors and are at ground level. Paved open space areas will be
clearly designated on building plans and provided and maintained
with appropriate recreational equipment. Specifically excluded
from required open space are those areas devoted to parking,
parking access, and service drives, whether or not designed for
multiple use, and those areas deemed not usable for recreational
or other tenant use. In designating open space, due regard shall
be shown for all natural features which, if preserved, will add
attractiveness and value to the development.
(3)
C.
78.Editor's Note: Table 5-4 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
79.Editor's Note: Tables 6-1 and 6-2 are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 300-8.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-8.5
1:281
§ 300-8.5. Mobile home parks in Special Use (Mobile Home)
District.
In addition to all other appropriate regulations of § 300-7.5, mobile home
parks in the Special Use Mobile Home (SU-H) District shall be subject to the
following requirements:
Site selection criteria. Sites for mobile home parks shall be well drained
and such drainage shall not adversely affect surrounding areas; in
addition, significant environmental assets such as streams, brooks,
large stands of trees, etc., shall be preserved. Mobile home sites shall
not be subject to flooding, fire or safety hazards nor exposed to chronic
nuisances such as noise, smoke, fumes, or odors.
A.
Density. Densities within mobile home parks shall not exceed six units
per acre.
B.
Buffers. Mobile home parks shall provide the following buffers along
their property lines. Such buffers, exclusive of reasonable access, shall
be landscaped.
(1) Depth of required buffer along arterial ways: 50 feet.
(2) Depth of buffer along all other public streets or ways: 25 feet.
(3) Depth of buffer along all other property lines: 15 feet.
C.
Access and interior roadways.
A mobile home park shall have at least one direct access to a public
street by a roadway at least 30 feet in width.
(1)
All other roadways within the park shall be at least 24 feet in width
and shall provide access to each mobile home space.
(2)
(3) All roadways within a mobile home park shall be paved.
D.
Setbacks and required mobile home spaces. The following
requirements shall govern the placement of mobile homes within any
mobile home park:
Mobile home space: at least 4,000 square feet shall be provided for
each mobile home.
(1)
Required front and rear yard: 20 feet. (Note: All required front yard
areas shall be landscaped, except for access to required parking
spaces.)
(2)
Required side yards: 10 feet. (Note: A side yard abutting a roadway
within a mobile home park shall be at least 20 feet deep.)
(3)
E.
Recreational areas. Any mobile home park shall provide an area not less
than 8% of the total area of the park or 25,000 square feet, whichever
is greater, for recreational use by the residents of the park. Such area
F.
§ 300-8.5 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-8.5
1:282
shall be distinct from any area designated a roadway, parking area,
circulation and access drive, mobile home space, storage, management
or service area or any buffer area required elsewhere in this ordinance.
Areas within the park possessing such characteristics as severe
wetness, extreme slope, shape or such other conditions which would
preclude reasonable use for recreation shall not be included within the
required area.
Walkways and required lighting.
Those areas within a mobile home park, such as recreation areas,
service and management facilities which can be expected to
generate pedestrian traffic shall be provided with paved walkways
at least 3.5 feet wide.
(1)
All roadways and walkways within a mobile home park shall be
well-lighted at night.
(2)
G.
Storage areas.
An open storage area for boats, boat trailers, camping units and
similar vehicles and surfaced with gravel, asphalt, concrete or
similar substance shall be provided within the mobile home park at
the rate of at least 50 square feet per mobile home space.
(1)
An enclosed storage area of structure for the personal use of
mobile home residents shall be provided at the rate of at least 50
square feet but not more than 100 square feet per mobile home
space. Such storage structure or area may be located on each
mobile home space or within a conveniently located building(s).
All storage structures placed on mobile home spaces shall be
considered an integral part thereof and shall be subject to the
front, rear and side yard requirements applicable to such mobile
home.
(2)
H.
Parking and other requirements.
On-street parking and parking within the required front yard of any
mobile home space is not permitted.
(1)
Parking for each mobile home space shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements for single-family homes
contained in § 300-9.0 of this ordinance. However, fewer parking
spaces than required by § 300-9.0 may be proposed by the
petitioner and approved by the Planning Board, provided:
The petitioner demonstrates to the Planning Board that the
number of spaces he will provide is sufficient to meet the needs
of residents and visitors of the mobile home park; and
(a)
Further provided that the petitioner reserves sufficient
undeveloped land to meet the full requirements of § 300-9.0.
(b)
(2)
I.
§ 300-8.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-8.5
1:283
§ 300-8.6. (Reserved)
§ 300-8.7. Cluster developments.
Such land shall be distinct from required recreational, buffer,
storage and walkway areas.
In no case shall less than one space per mobile home space be
provided.
(c)
Required parking spaces may be included within each mobile home
space.
(3)
No building within a mobile home park shall exceed a height of 20
feet above finished grade.
(4)
All mobile homes within a mobile home park shall have a skirting
of a rigid type of material. Such skirting shall be in place within 30
days after a mobile home is placed on a mobile home space.
(5)
Required facilities. The location of required facilities, including but not
limited to open and enclosed storage areas, recreational space, buffer
areas and parking areas, shall be clearly designated on the site plan
required under the special use provisions of this § 300-8.5.
J.
Ownership and management. Mobile home parks shall be owned by
a legal entity which shall be responsible for the management of the
park in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and the
provisions of MGL c. 140, §§ 32A through 32Q, as amended.
K.
Residential cluster developments shall be allowed by special permit
in Residence A, Residence A-1 and Residence A-2 Zoning Districts in
accordance with Table 6-1A80 and this ordinance. For the purposes of
this section, the Planning Board shall be the special permit granting
authority.
A.
Cluster applications shall be accompanied by two preliminary plans,
one of which shall depict the tract developed in a conventional manner
and one which shall show the tract developed in a cluster fashion. Five
prints of each plan shall be filed with the Planning Board.
B.
The number of building lots permitted on the cluster plan shall not
exceed the number shown on the conventional plan. Lot area, width
and yard dimensions for each plan shall be governed by the appropriate
zone requirements set forth in this ordinance. Cluster construction on
existing ways shall conform to the conventional requirements of the
zone in which it is located.
C.
All land in the tract not used for lots or roads shall be open space as set
forth herein.
D.
80.Editor's Note: Table 6-1A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 300-8.5 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-8.7
1:284
§ 300-8.8. Registered marijuana dispensaries (RMD) and off-site
medical marijuana dispensaries (OMMD).
Open space.
The required open space within the cluster development shall be
owned and maintained by the developer for park or open space use
until it is owned in one or more of the following ways:
By a mandatory association of the owners of the lots within the
cluster development.
(a)
(b) By a private nonprofit conservation trust or foundation.
(c) By the Town of West Springfield for park or open space use.
(1)
In any case where such land is not conveyed to the Town, a
restriction enforceable by the Town of West Springfield shall be
recorded providing that such land shall be kept in an open or
natural state and not be built for residential use or developed for
accessory uses such as parking or roadways.
(2)
E.
Open space in a cluster development, whether publicly or privately
owned, may be used only for noncommercial open recreation or
conservation purposes, including accessory structures related to
recreation, such as shelters for players or play equipment, tennis
courts, and swimming pools.
F.
Purpose.
It is recognized that the nature of the substances cultivated,
processed, and/or sold by medical marijuana treatment centers
and off-site medical marijuana dispensaries may have objectionable
operational characteristics and should be located in such a way as
to ensure the health, safety, and general well-being of the public
as well as patients seeking treatment. The specific and separate
regulation of registered marijuana dispensaries as medical
marijuana treatment centers and off-site medical marijuana
dispensaries is necessary to advance these purposes and ensure
that such facilities are not located within close proximity of minors
and do not become concentrated in any one area within the Town
of West Springfield.
(1)
Subject to the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 40A
of the Massachusetts General Laws, and 105 CMR 725.000,
registered marijuana dispensaries and off-site medical marijuana
dispensaries will be permitted to provide medical support, security,
and physician oversight that meet or exceed state regulations as
established by the Massachusetts Department of Health (MDPH).
Nothing in this zoning ordinance shall be construed to supersede
federal and state laws governing the sale and distribution of
narcotic drugs.
(2)
A.
§ 300-8.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-8.8
1:285
Additional requirements/conditions. In addition to the standard
requirements for uses requiring a special permit, the following shall
also apply to all registered marijuana dispensaries and off-site medical
marijuana dispensaries.
Use.
RMD and OMMD facilities may only be involved in the uses
permitted by its definition and may not include other
businesses or services.81
(a)
No marijuana shall be smoked, eaten or otherwise consumed
or ingested within the premises.
(b)
The hours of operation shall be set by the special permit
granting authority, but in no event shall an RMD or OMMD
facility be open to the public, and no sale or other distribution
of marijuana shall occur upon the premises or via delivery from
the premises, between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(c)
RMD facilities that can demonstrate that they comply with the
agricultural exemption under MGL c. 40A, § 3 must still apply
for site plan approval.
(d)
(1)
Physical requirements.
All aspects of the use/facility relative to the acquisition,
cultivation, possession, processing, sales, distribution,
dispensing, or administration of marijuana, products
containing marijuana, related supplies, or educational
materials must take place at a fixed location within a fully
enclosed building and shall not be visible from the exterior of
the business.
(a)
(b) No outside storage is permitted.
No OMMD facility shall have a gross floor area in excess of
4,500 square feet; any proposed facility in excess of said floor
area shall be allowed at the discretion of the special permit
granting authority.
(c)
Ventilation. All RMD and OMMD facilities shall be ventilated in
such a manner that no:
Pesticides, insecticides or other chemicals or products
used in the cultivation or processing are dispersed into the
outside atmosphere; and
[1]
No odor from marijuana or its processing can be detected
by a person with an unimpaired and otherwise normal
[2]
(d)
(2)
B.
81.Editor's Note: See the definitions of "off-site medical marijuana dispensary" and
"registered marijuana dispensary" in § 300-2.1 of this chapter.
§ 300-8.8 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-8.8
1:286
sense of smell at the exterior of the medical marijuana
business or at any adjoining use or property.
Signage shall be displayed on the exterior of the RMD and
OMMD facility's entrance in plain sight of clients stating
"Registration Card issued by the MA Department of Public
Health required." in text at least two inches in height.
(e)
Location.
No RMD and OMMD facility shall be located on a parcel which
is within 500 feet (to be measured in a straight line from the
nearest points of each property line) of a parcel occupied by:
[1] A residential use;
A public or private elementary, junior high, middle,
vocational or high school;
[2]
[3] A day-care center or early education facility;
[4] A park, playground or structure for religious worship;
Any facility intended principally as a place for on-site
services for children or wherein children commonly
congregate in a formal, structured or scheduled manner;
or
[5]
[6] Another RMD or OMMD facility.
(a)
No RMD or OMMD facility shall be located on a lot which abuts
a residential use (including commercial residential uses such
as hotels, motels and lodging houses) or residential zoning
district.
(b)
RMD and OMMD facilities shall not be located in buildings
that contain any medical doctors' offices or the offices of any
other professional practitioner authorized to prescribe the use
of medical marijuana.
(c)
No RMD or OMMD facility shall be located inside a building
containing residential units, including transient housing such
as motels and dormitories.
(d)
The commencement of one or more of the above uses (i.e.,
school, residential use, etc.) within 500 feet of a proposed RMD
or OMMD location during the review of an application for an
RMD or OMMD (beginning on the date of submittal), following
the issuance of a special permit or site plan review decision,
or following the commencement of the RMD or OMMD use
shall not invalidate the RMD or OMMD use, the special permit
issued therefor, or the ability to renew any unexpired or
unrevoked special permit.
(e)
(3)
§ 300-8.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-8.8
1:287
Any of the above location requirement buffers shall not apply
to any property which is separated from any of the above
uses (i.e., school, residential use, etc.) by Interstate Highway
91, or Interstate Highway 90. The previously listed barriers
cannot be legally crossed by pedestrians and therefore create a
physical barrier between any potential RMD or OMMD facility
and any of the above uses (i.e., school, residential use, etc.).
(f)
Reporting requirements.
All special permit holders for an RMD or OMMD facility shall
provide the Police Department, Fire Department, Building
Commissioner/Inspector, Board of Health and the special
permit granting authority with the names, phone numbers and
e-mail addresses of all management staff and key-holders,
including a minimum of two operators or managers of the
facility identified as contact persons to whom one can provide
notice if there are operating problems associated with the
establishment. All such contact information shall be updated as
needed to keep it current and accurate.
(a)
The local Building Commissioner/Inspector, Board of Health,
Police Department, Fire Department, and special permit
granting authority shall be notified in writing by an RMD or
OMMD facility owner/operator/manager:
A minimum of 30 days prior to any change in ownership or
management of that facility;
[1]
A minimum of 12 hours following a violation or potential
violation of any law or any criminal or potential criminal
activities or attempts of violation of any law at the RMD or
OMMD; and
[2]
A maximum of 14 days after the hiring of any dispensary
agent.
[3]
(b)
Permitted RMD and OMMD facilities shall file an annual report
to and appear before the special permit granting authority no
later than January 31, providing a copy of all current applicable
state licenses for the facility and/or its owners and
demonstrate continued compliance with the conditions of the
special permit.
(c)
The owner or manager is required to respond by phone or email
within 24 hours of contact by a Town officer, as defined by
the West Springfield Home Rule Charter, concerning the RMD
or OMMD at the phone number or e-mail address provided to
the Town as the contact for the business.
(d)
(4)
(5) Issuance or transfer of permit; discontinuance of use.
§ 300-8.8 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-8.8
1:288
(a) Special permits shall be issued to the RMD operator.
(b) Special permits shall be issued for a specific site/parcel.
Special permits shall be nontransferable to either another
RMD operator or site/parcel.
(c)
Special permits shall have a term limited to the duration of the
applicant's ownership/control of the premises as an RMD or
OMMD, and shall lapse:
[1] If the permit holder ceases operation of the RMD; and/or
If the permit holder's registration by MDPH expires or is
terminated.
[2]
(d)
The permit holder shall notify the Zoning Enforcement Officer
and special permit granting authority in writing within 48
hours of such lapse, cessation, discontinuance or expiration.
(e)
An RMD or OMMD facility shall be required to remove all
material, plants, equipment and other paraphernalia prior to
surrendering its state registration or ceasing its operation.
(f)
Application requirements. In addition to the standard application
requirements for special permits, such applications for an RMD or
OMMD facility shall include the following:
The name and address of each owner of the RMD or OMMD facility/
operation.
(1)
A copy of its registration as an RMD from the Massachusetts
Department of Public Health or documentation that demonstrates
that said RMD or OMMD facility, and its owners/operators, qualify
and are eligible to receive a certificate of registration and meet
all of the requirements of an RMD in accordance with 105 CMR
725.000 of the Massachusetts Department of Public Health.
(2)
Evidence that the applicant has site control and the right to use
the site for an RMD or OMMD facility in the form of a deed or
valid purchase and sales agreement or, in the case of a lease, a
notarized statement from the property owner and a copy of the
lease agreement.
(3)
A notarized statement signed by the RMD or OMMD organization's
chief executive officer and corporate attorney disclosing all of its
designated representatives, including officers, directors,
shareholders, partners, members, managers, or other similarly
situated individuals and entities and their addresses. If any of the
above is an entity rather than a person, the applicant must disclose
the identity of all such responsible individual persons.
(4)
C.
§ 300-8.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-8.8
1:289
§ 300-8.9. Therapeutic massage service establishments.
A detailed floor plan identifying the areas available and functional
uses (including square footage).
(5)
(6) All signage being proposed for the facility.
A traffic study to establish the RMD or OMMD impacts at peak
demand times, unless waived by the special permit granting
authority.
(7)
A management plan and a security management plan as follows:
A management plan including a description of all activities
to occur on site, including all provisions for the delivery of
medical marijuana and related products to OMMDs or off-site
direct delivery to patients.
(a)
A security management plan including a description of the
measures to be taken in order to ensure the safety of the
employees, patients and public, how the applicant intends to
monitor said measures and procedures once a problem is
discovered or an incident occurs.
(b)
(8)
Findings. In addition to the standard findings for a special permit, the
special permit granting authority shall also find all the following:
That the RMD or OMMD facility is designed to minimize any
adverse visual or economic impacts on abutters and other parties
in interest;
(1)
That the RMD or OMMD facility demonstrates it will meet all
the permitting requirements of all applicable agencies within the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts and will be in compliance with all
applicable state laws and regulations, including Chapter 369 of the
Acts of 2012;82
(2)
That the applicant has satisfied all of the conditions and
requirements of this section and other applicable sections of this
ordinance;
(3)
(4) That the RMD or OMMD project meets a demonstrated need;
That the RMD or OMMD facility provides adequate security
measures to ensure that no individual participant will pose a direct
threat to the health or safety of other individuals, and that the
storage and/or location of cultivation is adequately secured; and
(5)
That the RMD or OMMD facility adequately addresses issues of
traffic demand, circulation flow, parking and queuing, particularly
at peak periods at the facility, and its impact on neighboring uses.
(6)
D.
82.Editor's Note: See the appendix to MGL c. 94C, Humanitarian Medical Use of Marijuana.
§ 300-8.8 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-8.9
1:290
§ 300-8.10. Recreational marijuana facilities. [Added 2-6-2017]
For the purposes of this use, the Planning Board shall be the special
permit granting authority.
A.
The property for the use of a massage service establishment shall not
be located within 100 feet of any property utilized for any adult theater,
adult bookstore or adult club as defined by this ordinance.
B.
In addition to the requirements of the special permit, the proposed
use of the property shall conform to all requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance as it relates to parking, landscaping and signage.
C.
By vote at the state election on November 8, 2016, the voters of the
commonwealth approved an initiative petition for a law relative to the
regulation and taxation of marijuana for non-medical or recreational
purposes. The law provides that it is effective on December 15, 2016,
and the State Cannabis Control Commission is required to issue
regulations regarding implementation no later than September 15,
2017. Currently, under the zoning ordinance, a recreational marijuana
facility is not a permitted use in the Town and any regulations
promulgated by the Cannabis Control Commission are expected to
provide guidance to the Town in regulating recreational marijuana,
including recreational marijuana facilities. The regulation of
recreational marijuana raises novel and complex legal, planning, and
public safety issues and the Town needs time to study and consider the
regulation of recreational marijuana facilities and address such novel
and complex issues, as well as to address the potential impact of the
state regulations on local zoning and to undertake a planning process
to consider amending the zoning ordinance regarding regulation of
recreational marijuana facilities and other uses related to the
regulation of recreational marijuana. The Town intends to adopt a
temporary moratorium on the use of land and structures in the Town
for recreational marijuana facilities so as to allow the Town sufficient
time to engage in a planning process to address the effects of such
structures and uses in the Town and to enact ordinances in a manner
consistent with sound land use planning goals and objectives.
A.
Temporary moratorium. For the reasons set forth above and
notwithstanding any other provision of the zoning ordinance to the
contrary, the Town hereby adopts a temporary moratorium on the use of
land or structures as a recreational marijuana facility. The moratorium
shall be in effect through December 31, 2018. During the moratorium
period, the Town shall undertake a planning process to address the
potential impacts of recreational marijuana in the Town, consider the
Cannabis Control Commission regulations regarding recreational
marijuana facilities and related uses, and consider adopting new zoning
ordinances to address the impact and operation of recreational
marijuana facilities and related uses.
B.
§ 300-8.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-8.10
1:291
Relation to registered marijuana dispensaries and off-site medical
marijuana dispensaries. This section shall not be construed to affect
the provisions of the zoning ordinance relating to registered marijuana
dispensaries, also known as "medical marijuana treatment centers" or
"off-site medical marijuana dispensaries."83
C.
83.Editor's Note: See § 300-8.8.
§ 300-8.10 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-8.10
1:292
ARTICLE IX
Additional Land Use Regulations
§ 300-9.0. Off-street parking and loading standards.
Purpose. The purpose of this section of the ordinance is to provide
provisions for adequate parking which will protect the health, safety
and welfare of the general public while providing convenience to
citizens, opportunity for economic development and growth, addressing
preexisting nonconforming properties and ensuring adequate access
for the development and redevelopment of land in the Town of West
Springfield.
A.
General.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
PARKING LOT RECONSTRUCTION — The reconfiguring and
pavement of an existing parking lot where the impervious footprint
is increased or modified and the existing topography, elevations,
and stormwater drainage patterns are modified.
PARKING LOT REPAVEMENT/RESURFACING — The replacement
of pavement of an existing parking lot where the footprint of
impervious surface is not expanded or modified and the existing
topography, drainage, and stormwater runoff are not modified.
(1)
Changes to parking or curb cuts for residential structures greater
than four-family and all nonresidential structures shall be subject
to site plan review.
(2)
Minimum parking space dimensions shall comply with "The
Dimensions of Parking," Fifth Edition or latest edition, published
by the Urban Land Institute and the National Parking Association.
See Diagram 9-3, Parking Dimensions, and Diagram 9-4, Parking
Dimensions Illustrated.84
(3)
Except for single- and two-family uses, parking areas shall be
designed so that vehicles will not need to back into the street.
(4)
No parking area shall encroach upon public property. Parking areas
shall be designed so that vehicles cannot extend beyond the
perimeter of the property onto adjacent properties or public rightsof-
way. Such areas shall also be designed so that the vehicles do
not extend over sidewalks or tend to bump against or damage any
wall, vegetation, or other obstructions.
(5)
By right, parcels fronting on a single public street are allowed no
more than two access drives and parcels fronting on more than one
public street are allowed two access drives for the first fronting
(6)
B.
84.Editor's Note: Diagrams 9-3 and 9-4 are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 300-9.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-9.0
1:293
street and one additional access drive per additional street.
Applicants may request additional access drives through a special
permit process with the Planning Board in accordance with Article
XII of this ordinance.
Access drives for one-way travel shall be 12 feet in width and for
two way travel shall be 24 feet in width, but not wider than the
internal driveway, at their intersection with the street right-of-way
except as approved through site plan review.
(7)
Mobile homes, campers, boats, trailers and other similar vehicles
shall not be parked in the front yard, as defined in § 300-2.1, or
between the principal structure and the street line on corner lots,
of a residential property for more than seven consecutive days or
more than 30 days in a calendar year.
(8)
A structure in existence prior to January 1, 1997, which is enlarged,
or a use in existence prior to January 1, 1997, which is extended,
shall be required to provide parking and loading spaces in
accordance with Table 9.185 for the entire structure or use unless
the increase in units or measurements amounts to less than 25%,
whether such increase occurs at one time or in successive stages.
(9)
The reconstruction of an existing structure shall not be required to
provide parking and loading in accordance with Table 9-186 as long
as the parking spaces which existed at the time of demolition of
the existing building are maintained as available parking. The new
building shall not be built so as to reduce the number of parking
spaces which were provided prior to the demolition of the existing
building.
(10)
All activities other than those discussed in Subsection B(10) shall
require parking and loading in accordance with Table 9-1.87
(11)
Location.
Except for single- and two-family structures, no parking shall be
permitted within the required front yard. Where feasible, all
parking areas should be located to the rear of the principal
structure.
(1)
Parking for nonresidential purposes may be shared with abutting
businesses, provided that:
(a) The uses are similar and compatible with one another;
The uses and underlying land are located in the same zoning
district or different districts allowing the same uses;
(b)
(2)
C.
85.Editor's Note: See Table 9.1, following Subsection G of this section.
86.Editor's Note: See Table 9.1, following Subsection G of this section.
87.Editor's Note: See Table 9.1, following Subsection G of this section.
§ 300-9.0 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-9.0
1:294
The total number of curb cuts is reduced by the use of common
driveways;
(c)
There is evidence that the parking areas have enough parking
spaces to accommodate both uses;
(d)
A plan outlining the proposed parking has been approved by
the Planning Board through site plan review; and
(e)
An easement allowing for the sharing of parking is recorded in
the Hampden County Registry of Deeds. Said easement shall
be subject to approval by the Town Attorney.
(f)
Access drives initially constructed after March 1, 2009, shall not
be located within 40 feet of the intersection of any two streets.
The forty-foot offset standard shall not apply to the repavement
or resurfacing of an existing access drive, provided the existing
driveway does not exceed maximum allowable driveway width.
(3)
Access drives initially constructed after March 1, 2009, shall not
be located within 30 feet of another access drive. The thirty-foot
separation standard shall not apply to the reconstruction or
resurfacing of an existing access drive, provided the existing
driveway does not exceed maximum allowable driveway width.
(4)
For commercial and industrial uses, access drives shall not be
located within 15 feet of a property line. The fifteen-foot separation
shall not apply to the reconstruction or resurfacing of an existing
access drive, provided the existing driveway does not exceed
maximum allowable driveway width.
(5)
Internally, access drives shall be separated from abutting access
drives by a five-foot landscaping buffer. The required internal
landscaping buffer shall not apply to the reconstruction or
resurfacing of an existing access drive, provided the existing
driveway does not exceed maximum allowable driveway width.
(6)
Additional required parking in the Central Business (CB) District.
With the exceptions noted below, parking shall be provided
in accordance with the requirements of this section of this
ordinance.
(a)
Parking in the Central Business District.
Off site parking. Parking required by this section need not
be provided on the same site as the proposed development
but may be located on any parcel of suitable size with
available excess parking spaces located within the Central
Business District, provided there is a legally binding
easement filed with the Hampden County Registry of
Deeds between the owner of the parcel to be used for
parking and the owner of the proposed development and
[1]
(b)
(7)
§ 300-9.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-9.0
1:295
such site is landscaped in accordance with the provisions
of Subsection E.
No additional off-street parking or loading space is
required for the following:
[a] Town buildings and Town properties.
Continued use or reuse of a building with the same
use or new use with lesser parking requirements in
existence prior to January 1, 1997, provided the
proposed use does not increase the total square
footage of floor area within the building.
[b]
[2]
Uses shall be considered in existence provided the use is
continuous and no vacancy of more than 50% of the total floor
area of the building exists for more than 365 days.
(c)
Drainage.
No surface water shall be allowed to enter a public or private
street or way. Surface water from parking areas constructed or
reconstructed after January 1, 2015, shall meet the requirements of
the Town of West Springfield Stormwater Ordinance and Chapter
204, Stormwater Management, Article I, of West Springfield's
General Ordinances.
(1)
Adequate measures shall be implemented to prevent pollution of
surface water or groundwater, to minimize erosion and
sedimentation, and to prevent changes in groundwater levels,
increased run-off and potential for flooding. Drainage shall be
designed in accordance with the Massachusetts Stormwater
Handbook so that off-site run-off shall not be increased,
groundwater recharge is maximized, and neighboring properties
will not be adversely affected. Increased runoff from parking areas
shall be recharged on-site by being diverted to vegetated surfaces
for infiltration or through the use of detention ponds.
(2)
The Planning Board shall require that all applicable design criteria
are followed for LID parking area design as defined in Subsections
F(3) of this section unless it determines, upon petition from the
applicant, that the successful implementation of a LID parking area
design is infeasible or would impose an undue hardship on the
applicant. Where the Planning Board determines that LID parking
area design is infeasible, the applicant shall comply with those
specifications for conventional parking area design listed in
Subsection F(2). Evidence that may be used by an applicant to
demonstrate the infeasibility of implementing LID techniques on a
site may include, without limitation:
The presence of subsurface geologic conditions such as ledge
or large quantities of poor fill;
(a)
(3)
D.
§ 300-9.0 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-9.0
1:296
Applicant does not own existing lot to be used for off-site
parking allowances;
(b)
(c) The presence of soil contamination; and/or
(d) Existing topography or site geometry;
Provided there is no classification of the facility as a higher
potential pollutant load facility.
(e)
Landscaping.
Except for single- and two-family structures, all parking areas shall
be screened from abutting streets by a landscaped buffer which
shall be a minimum of five feet in width and which may include
plantings, earthen berms or fences complemented with plantings.
Plantings shall be in accordance with Subsection E(6).
(1)
At all street or driveway intersections, trees or shrubs shall be
planted so that they do not present a pedestrian or vehicular
visibility hazard. No trees or shrubs shall be planted in a way so as
to obstruct sight lines of motorists. At intersections within parking
lots, landscaping shall be maintained so as to not obscure site
distances.
(2)
All landscaped areas as required by this ordinance shall be
properly installed and maintained in accordance with § 300-13.8.
Shrubs or trees which die shall be replaced within one growing
season.
(3)
Within parking areas which have internal parking spaces, an
intermediary landscaped island shall be installed at regular
intervals. (See Diagram 9-2.88) This interval shall not be more than
every 10 spaces. The width of landscaped islands shall be nine
feet. In parking areas which only include perimeter parking, no
intermediary landscaped islands shall be required. (See Diagram
9-1.89) A landscape island with a minimum of nine feet in width
at the ends of all internal parking rows shall be required. (See
Diagram 9-2.)
There shall be no parking space which directly abuts the
principal or accessory building; there shall be at least eight
feet of separation between all parking and buildings. This
separation may consist of landscaping or a sidewalk/walkway
area. (See Diagram 9-1.90)
(a)
At least four shade tree and eight shrubs per 20 parking spaces
or fraction thereof shall be provided within the landscaped
(b)
(4)
E.
88.Editor's Note: Diagram 9-2 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
89.Editor's Note: Diagram 9-1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
90.Editor's Note: Diagram 9-1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 300-9.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-9.0
1:297
islands. The Planning Board may approve alternative
configurations of landscape islands through site plan review as
long as the ratio of parking spaces and landscaping remains
the same.
In cases where landscaped islands are not required, a minimum of
two ornamental shade trees and four shrubs per 10 parking spaces,
or fraction thereof, must be provided and maintained along the
border of the parking area. In no case shall fewer than two trees
and four shrubs be provided.
(5)
Plant selection. No tree, shrub or plant shall be proposed for
use within a parking area that has been identified as an invasive
species by the Massachusetts Plant Advisory Group in the latest
version of the Evaluation of Non-Native Plant Species for
Invasiveness in Massachusetts (with annotated list), has been
identified as invasive or banned on the Massachusetts Prohibited
Plant List as periodically updated by the Massachusetts
Department of Agricultural Resources, or in any other reputable
scientific publication that may be acceptable to the Board. All
size and location design elements shall comply with the following
specifications:
Shade or canopy trees shall be three inches' DBH with a height
of not less than 12 feet above grade at the time of planting;
(a)
Ornamental, small or flowering fruit trees shall be two inches'
DBH with a height of not less than seven feet above grade at
the time of planting;
(b)
Shrubs shall be not less than two feet in height above grade at
the time of planting;
(c)
(d) Ornamental grasses shall not be considered shrubs;
Within the property, maintained lawn areas are encouraged
over mulch or stone;
(e)
All landscaping within the public right-of-way shall be
maintained lawn. Bark mulch and stone are not allowed.
(f)
(6)
Landscaping standards for parking lot stormwater management.
Landscaping is required for all parking lots for new projects or
for existing businesses if the impervious footprint is expanded.
Such parking lots may be designed in one of two ways as related
to stormwater management: 1) low-impact development (LID)
parking area design; or 2) conventional parking area design.
LID landscaping plans shall retain the first one inch of runoff
from all impervious surfaces on-site or provide the level of
pollutant removal equal to or greater than the level of pollutant
removal provided through the use of biofiltration on the first
(a)
(1)
F.
§ 300-9.0 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-9.0
1:298
one inch of runoff from all impervious surfaces on site. This
standard shall be met through a combination of practices
designed to retain runoff on site where technically feasible,
and stormwater BMPs designed to treat the remainder of
runoff that cannot be retained on site due to site constraints.
The level of pollutant removal from BMPs shall be calculated
consistent with EPA Region 1's BMP Performance
Extrapolation Tool. (http://www.epa.gov/regionl/npdes/
stormwater/)
Conventional parking area design shall denote a parking lot
landscape design that does not meet the criteria for LID
parking area design.
(b)
Acceptable LID techniques shall include, but are not limited
to: vegetated swales, rain gardens or bioretention facilities,
permeable pavers, infiltration facilities and constructed
wetlands. Cisterns and grey water systems that recycle
stormwater runoff may also be included in these calculations.
(c)
Conventional parking area design standards. The landscaping
requirements in this section are intended to provide a baseline
set of standards toward reducing the visual impacts of large areas
of pavement, improving the overall environment or parking areas
by providing areas for shade and heat reduction, and enhancing
the overall aesthetic appeal of parking areas. The landscaping
standards in Subsection E shall apply to conventional parking lot
design as defined in this ordinance.
(2)
LID parking area design standards. The purpose of these standards
is provide the Zoning Enforcement Officer or the parties involved
with site plan review the opportunity to review plans for a lowerimpact
approach to managing stormwater in parking areas. The
following information is therefore required of an applicant
choosing to treat any portion of a parking lot with LID stormwater
management techniques. This information shall be prepared by a
Massachusetts registered professional engineer and shall comply
with the design and implementation guidelines provided in the
latest version of the Massachusetts DEP Stormwater Management
Manual. Where portions of the parking lot are not using acceptable
LID techniques, the standards for conventional parking lot design
in Subsection F(2) shall apply.
Delineation of all drainage areas, inclusive of areas outside of
the parking envelope that will contribute stormwater runoff to
the parking area;
(a)
(b) Proposed topography at two-foot contour intervals;
Site plan showing drainage pathways and locations of
proposed BMPs;
(c)
(3)
§ 300-9.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-9.0
1:299
(d) Typical profiles of BMPs;
Sizing calculations for BMPs that demonstrate adequate
conveyance and/or water quality treatment of the first half inch
of stormwater runoff from impervious surfaces;
(e)
Sizing calculations for BMPs that illustrate proposed
management of runoff resulting from two-, ten-, and onehundred-
year events;
(f)
(g) List of plantings associated with vegetated BMPs;
(h) Location of areas reserved for snow storage;
Location of test pits, depth to seasonal high groundwater and
soil percolation rates for those areas designated for recharge;
(i)
Schematic diagrams of any gray water or cistern systems
proposed for the parking area;
(j)
An operation and maintenance (O&M) plan shall be submitted
by the applicant to the Planning Board that conforms to the
standards for O&M plans detailed in the most recent version of
the Massachusetts DEP Stormwater Management Manual.
(k)
Space requirements. For the uses herein set forth, motor vehicle
parking accommodations shall be provided as in Table 9-1 as follows:
In the case of mixed uses and uses with two or more different
functional areas, the total requirements for off-street parking
spaces shall be the sum of the requirements for each of the various
uses.
(1)
Where parking is determined by the number of seats and
continuous seating such as pews or benches is provided, every 18
inches of bench or pew shall represent one seat.
(2)
The Planning Board may approve a reduction in the number of
improved parking spaces with the remainder being set aside as
future parking, provided that the total number of improved and
set-aside parking spaces meets or exceeds the minimum number
of parking spaces required by this section, except as provided by
Subsection G(4).
(3)
The number of required parking spaces may be reduced through a
special permit process. See Subsection H.
(4)
All display areas, customer parking, and employee parking shall be
clearly marked for all uses included in Table 9-1.
(5)
G.
§ 300-9.0 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-9.0
1:300
Table 9-1
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use
Motor Vehicle Parking
Accommodations
Residential Use
Single- and two-family
dwellings
2 spaces per dwelling unit
Multifamily uses:
1-room efficiency unit 1 1/2 spaces per unit
Units with 2 or more rooms 2 spaces per unit
Boarding or lodging house 1 space per boarding/lodging unit
Home occupation 2 spaces plus 1 space per employee
Housing for the elderly (i.e.,
dwellings designed for and
occupied exclusively by
persons 60 years of age or
older)
2 spaces per unit, except 1 space
per unit for subsidized housing
Health Services
Medical and dental offices
and office buildings
1 space per 200 square feet of
gross floor area, exclusive of
basements and garages used solely
for utility and storage purposes, or
5 for each practitioner, whichever
is greater
Hospitals 1 space per bed, plus 1 space per
employee on the largest shift
Convalescent and nursing
homes
1 space per 4 beds, plus 1 space
per employee on the largest shift
Adult day health facility 2 spaces, plus 1 space per
employee, plus adequate stacking
for drop-off and pick-up vans
Commercial and Industrial
Retail establishment 1 space per 200 square feet of
gross floor area, exclusive of
basements and garages used solely
for utility and storage purposes
Furniture store 1 space per 750 square feet of
gross floor area, exclusive of
basements and garages used solely
for utility and storage purposes
§ 300-9.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-9.0
1:301
Table 9-1
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use
Motor Vehicle Parking
Accommodations
Major appliance store 1 space per 700 square feet of
gross floor area, exclusive of
basements and garages used solely
for utility and storage purposes
Convenience store 1 space per 150 square feet of
gross floor area, exclusive of
basements and garages used solely
for utility and storage purposes; a
minimum of 4 spaces is required
Professional, business and
insurance office
1 space per 300 square feet of
gross floor area, exclusive of
basements and garages used solely
for utility and storage purposes
Bed-and-breakfast use 2 spaces plus 1 space per rooming
unit
Bank 1 per 200 square feet of gross floor
area plus 6 stacking spaces for
each drive-up window
Motel and hotel 1 1/4 spaces per unit
Health club 1 space per 150 square feet of
gross floor area, exclusive of
basements and garages used solely
for utility and storage purposes
Child-care facility 2 spaces, plus 1 space per
employee, plus adequate stacking
for drop-off and pick-up vans
Barber shop, nail salon, and
beauty parlor
2 spaces per chair or station
Motor vehicle repair, motor
vehicle body shop, detailing
shop, and service station
3 spaces per service bay (The
service bay shall not be used to
meet the required parking
standard.)
Automotive sales 1 space per 600 square feet of
gross floor area
§ 300-9.0 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-9.0
1:302
Table 9-1
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use
Motor Vehicle Parking
Accommodations
Car wash 1 space for each wash stall, plus 2
additional. The wash stall shall not
be construed as a required parking
space.
Additional requirement for selfservice
car wash: 3 stacking spaces
per wash stall
Restaurant 1 space per 2 1/2 seats; 1
additional space for each employee
on largest shift
Fast-food restaurant; take-out
restaurant
1 space per 1 3/4 seats; minimum
of 5 spaces is required
Bar, tavern or nightclub 1 space per 100 square feet of
gross floor area
Membership club; lodge 1 space per 50 square feet of
assembly area
Drive-through business In addition to the parking spaces
required by this section, all drivethrough
business operations
wherein patrons customarily stop
or wait in line in motor vehicles
for service shall have on premises
space to accommodate any waiting
line so that such vehicles do not
wait on streets and sidewalks and
do not obstruct traffic flow and
parking spaces within the site. A
minimum of 6 stacking spaces shall
be provided. Through the special
permit process, the Planning Board
may require additional stacking
spaces due to specific use and
location.
Industrial, manufacturing,
warehouse and wholesale use
1 space per 2 employees of the 2
largest shifts combined and
customarily employed on the
premises
Supermarket 1 space per 200 square feet of
gross floor area
§ 300-9.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-9.0
1:303
Table 9-1
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use
Motor Vehicle Parking
Accommodations
Discount club, warehouse
club, warehouse supermarket
1 space per 200 square feet of
gross floor area
Contractor's yard 1 space per employee on the
largest shift, plus 1 space per
1,000 square feet of gross floor
area
Personal and consumer
service establishment,
including, but not limited to:
laundry or dry cleaning;
photographer; repair shop for
household appliances or
business equipment;
photocopy shop; typically an
establishment where items
are dropped off and picked
up at a later date
1 space per 300 square feet of
gross floor area
Recreational
Billiard hall 2 spaces per table
Bowling alley 4 spaces per alley
Golf course 4 spaces per hole
Golf driving range 1 1/4 spaces per tee
Miniature golf 1 1/2 spaces per hole
Shooting range 1 space per target area
Tennis, handball or
racquetball facility
3 spaces per court
Indoor place of assembly
with fixed seating capacity,
including theaters,
auditoriums, churches and
arenas
1 space per 4 seats
Indoor place of assembly
without fixed seats, including
libraries, art galleries,
recreation and community
centers or other places of
amusement
1 space per 250 square feet of floor
area
Educational
§ 300-9.0 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-9.0
1:304
Table 9-1
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use
Motor Vehicle Parking
Accommodations
Elementary and middle
school
1 space per employee, plus 1 space
per classroom
High school 1 space per employee, plus 1 space
per 10 students
Trade school 1 space per employee, plus 1 space
per 2 students
Other
Any use permitted by this
ordinance not interpreted to
be covered by this table
Closest similar use as shall be
determined by the Planning Board
Accessible parking spaces.
In accordance with the requirements of the 521 CMR
Architectural Access Board, Table 9-2 establishes the minimum
number of accessible parking spaces in addition to the spaces
required by Table 9-1 of this section. All accessible spaces
shall comply with the 521 CMR Architectural Access Board
accessibility guidelines.
(a)
One in every eight accessible spaces, but not less than one,
shall be van-accessible and have an access aisle eight feet in
width.
(b)
Accessible spaces are required to be located with and adjacent
to access aisles of five feet in width.
Table 9-2
Accessible Parking Spaces
Total Parking Spaces in
Lot
Accessible Spaces
(required minimum)
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
(c)
(6)
§ 300-9.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-9.0
1:305
Table 9-2
Accessible Parking Spaces
Total Parking Spaces in
Lot
Accessible Spaces
(required minimum)
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of total
1,001 and over 20, plus 1 space for each 100
over 1,000
Off-street loading facilities.
Adequate off-street loading/unloading space with proper access
from a street shall be provided whenever the normal operation of
any development requires that foods, merchandise or equipment be
routinely delivered to or shipped from that development.
(1)
The loading/unloading area must be of sufficient size to
accommodate the number and types of vehicles that are likely to
service the use of the property, given the nature of the development
proposed. Off-street loading/unloading areas shall be provided for
each use as set forth below:
Retail, restaurant; one space for the first 10,000 square feet
of floor area, plus one space for each additional 15,000 square
feet.
(a)
Office: one space for the first 10,000 square feet of floor area,
plus one space for each additional 40,000 square feet.
(b)
Hotel, motel, recreational facility: one space for the first
10,000 square feet of floor area, plus one space for each
additional 100,000 square feet.
(c)
Service and repair enterprises: one space for the first 10,000
square feet of floor area, plus one space for each additional
30,000 square feet.
(d)
Warehousing, wholesale, manufacturing, and motor vehicle
sales, rental and service establishments: one space for the
first 5,000 square feet of floor area, plus one space for each
additional 30,000 square feet.
(e)
(2)
All off-street loading/unloading areas shall be designed and
constructed to accommodate the largest vehicles likely to service
the use of the property, but in no case shall loading/unloading
spaces be less than 12 feet in width and 25 feet in length and have
a minimum of 14 feet of overhead clearance from roadway grade.
(3)
H.
§ 300-9.0 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-9.0
1:306
Loading/Unloading areas shall be so located and designed so that
the vehicles intended to use them can maneuver safely and
conveniently to and from a public right-of-way and complete the
loading/unloading operations without obstructing or interfering
with any public or private right-of-way or impede the circulation of
vehicles in any off-street parking or driving area.
(4)
No area allocated for loading/unloading facilities or for dumpsters
or trash facilities may be used to satisfy the area requirements for
off-street parking, nor shall any portion of any off-street parking
area be used to satisfy the area requirements for loading/unloading
facilities or dumpster or trash facilities.
(5)
Special permit exception.
In order to alleviate any substantial hardships resulting from
§ 300-9.0, to encourage cooperative development of parking areas
and, in general, promote more efficient use of land within West
Springfield, the Planning Board may grant a special permit to allow
petitioners to waive or reduce the requirements of this ordinance
and/or provide fewer than the required parking spaces.
The Planning Board shall not grant such a permit until it has
received written recommendations from the Planning Division,
Traffic Safety Officer, Fire Department, and Town Engineer,
provided such recommendations are presented to the Planning
Board within 14 days of the publication of the first legal notice
for any required public hearing. The request for a special
permit shall be accompanied by:
A site plan clearly depicting parking spaces and required
landscaping, including arrangement of proposed trees,
shrubs, pedestrian paving and other such features.
[1]
A written statement including the reasons why the
ordinances should be waived or reduced which will clearly
demonstrate to the Planning Board that the petitioner
cannot meet the required standards.
[2]
For a reduction in parking, a written statement including
parking data for similar land uses within the zoning
district which will clearly demonstrate to the Planning
Board that the number of parking spaces proposed will
be sufficient to meet current and projected demand and
will not impose a burden on on-street parking on adjacent
public or private ways. For on-site shared parking, a
written statement including the amount of parking
required for each parcel involved which will clearly
demonstrate to the Planning Board that the number of
parking spaces proposed to be shared is adequate.
[3]
(a)
(1)
I.
§ 300-9.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-9.0
1:307
Note 1. Any conditions set forth by the Planning Board as
prerequisites for the granting of a special permit shall run with
the land and shall be contained in a covenant, recorded in the
Hampden County Registry of Deeds, between the petitioner(s)
and the Town.
(b)
Note 2. Expansion, alteration or change of use shall not be
allowed for any structure served by parking facilities for which
a special permit has been granted under this Subsection I(1)
unless the owners and/or operators of such structure obtain a
new special permit dealing with any changed parking needs
resulting from such expansion, alteration or change of use.
(c)
Contained within the application for a special permit, the Planning
Board may require a formal parking study prepared by an engineer
registered in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts that will include
the following:
(a) Size and type of existing uses on site;
(b) Size and type of proposed uses on site;
(c) Rate of parking turnover;
(d) Peak traffic and parking loads to be encountered;
Availability of public transit, bicycle infrastructure, and
pedestrian infrastructure;
(e)
(f) Professional recommendations;
(g) Other factors identified by the Planning Board.
(2)
Through the special permit process to reduce parking space
requirements or utilize on-site shared parking areas, the Planning
Board may:
Reduce the number of required parking spaces by no more
than 25% of the required spaces where the parcel is located
in a walkable neighborhood, a bus pass sponsor program is
offered by the applicant, or when the property is located within
1/4 mile of a bus stop;
(a)
Allow for, in accordance with the Traffic Rules and Orders,91
the use of 100% of on-street parking located along a parcel's
boundaries where parking is allowed on both sides of the street
and 50% of on-street parking along a parcel's boundaries
where parking is allowed on one side of the street. The
applicant must:
(b)
(3)
91.Editor's Note: See Ch. 400, Traffic Orders.
§ 300-9.0 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-9.0
1:308
§ 300-9.1. Common driveways.
Common driveways shall be allowed in all Residential, Business and
Industrial Districts as an accessory use subject to the following
performance standards:
Pay for the marking of the on-street parking lines per Town
standards;
[1]
Obtain a permit from the DPW before working in the
public way; and
[2]
[3] Receive a final inspection of the marking by the DPW.
Allow for on-site shared parking between building uses and
abutting properties where applicants may propose a reduction
in parking requirements based on an analysis of peak
demands. Up to 75% of the requirements for the predominant
use may be waived by the Planning Board if the applicant
can demonstrate that the peak demands for two uses do not
overlap. An applicant shall provide the latest peak demand
analyses published by the Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE)
or other source acceptable to the Planning Board.
(c)
In making its decision, the Planning Board must make written
findings on the following mandatory standards requiring that the
proposed deviation will:
Be in harmony with the purpose and intent of the parking
ordinance;
(a)
Provide adequate off-street parking to serve the use(s) for
which it is intended.
(b)
(c) Not create, or add to, an unsafe traffic situation; and
Allow for the proposed parking layout and landscaping to be in
conformity with all applicable zoning ordinance requirements.
(d)
(4)
The frontage of any lot served by the common driveway shall provide
safe and adequate access to the respective individual lots and shall not
be encumbered by steep slopes, wetlands or vehicular safety devices
required by a government agency (guard rails, barriers, etc.) which
prohibit access to the buildable portion of the individual lots.
A.
Each common driveway shall serve no more than two building lots and
shall be designed to provide safe and convenient access to the lots
served.
B.
All vehicular parking areas associated with a common driveway shall be
located to the side or rear of the principal structure which the parking
area serves and shall be separate and distinct from the driveway
required for ingress and egress to the parking area.
C.
§ 300-9.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-9.1
1:309
§ 300-9.2. Signs.
An easement that details access and maintenance rights shall be
recorded at the Registry of Deeds to the benefit of the parties served by
the common driveway.
D.
Purpose. The purpose of the sign regulations as set forth in this section
shall be the following:
To protect public and private investments in buildings and open
spaces;
(1)
To encourage signs which, by their location and design, are
harmonious to the buildings and sites which they occupy, and which
eliminate excessive and confusing sign display;
(2)
To promote more effective visual identification of commercial,
industrial and other activities within the Town;
(3)
To maintain and enhance the Town's ability to attract sources of
economic development and growth;
(4)
(5) To eliminate potential hazards to motorists and pedestrians;
(6) To promote the public health, safety, and general welfare;
To regulate on-premises signs in a legal and reasonable manner;
and
(7)
To ensure compliance with constitutionally protected First
Amendment rights.
(8)
A.
Applicability.
The provisions of this section shall apply to the construction,
erection, alteration, use, location, and maintenance of all onpremises
signs located out-of-doors, to those signs affixed on any
part of a building or freestanding for the express purpose of being
visible from the exterior of the building.
(1)
No sign larger than one square foot related to a residential and/
or commercial use shall be erected, altered, displayed, relocated,
enlarged or created without first obtaining a permit from the
Building Inspector. At minimum, all applications shall include a
scale drawing specifying dimensions, illumination, materials and
location on land or buildings.
(2)
B.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
A-FRAME SIGN — A single- or double-faced movable sign that is
intended to be used on a sidewalk or pedestrian way in front of the
business for which the commercial message is intended.
C.
§ 300-9.1 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-9.2
1:310
AREA OF SIGN —
BANNER — Any sign made of fabric or other non-rigid material with no
enclosing framework, that is mounted to a pole or building at one or
more edges.
BUILDING SIGN — Any sign attached to any part of a building, as
contrasted to a freestanding sign.
CANOPY SIGN — Any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning,
canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a
door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a
canopy.
CHANGEABLE-COPY SIGN, ELECTRONIC (ECCS) — A sign or portion
thereof that displays electronic, pictorial or text information in which
each alphanumeric character/image is defined by a small number of
matrix elements using different combinations of light-emitting diodes
(LEDs), fiber optics, light bulbs or other illumination devices within
the display area. Electronic changeable-copy signs include computerprogrammable,
microprocessor or controlled electronic displays.
Electronic changeable-copy signs include projected images or
The area of a sign shall be considered to include all lettering,
wording, and accompanying designs and symbols, together with
the background on which they are displayed, any frame around
the sign and any "cutouts" or extensions, but shall not include any
supporting structure or bracing.
(1)
The area of a sign consisting of individual letters or symbols
attached to or painted on a surface, building, wall or window shall
be considered to be that of the smallest quadrangle or triangle
which encompasses all of the letters and symbols.
(2)
The area of a sign consisting of a three-dimensional object shall be
considered to be the area of the largest vertical cross-section of
that object.
(3)
In computing the area of back-to-back signs, only one side of such
signs shall be included.
(4)
The supporting structure around the perimeter of a sign area as
defined above shall not exceed 50% of the allowable sign area and
shall not be internally illuminated.
(5)
The area of a base and supporting structure for a freestanding
sign shall not exceed 50% of the size of the allowable sign square
footage and shall not be internally illuminated. Raised landscaping
features less than 24 inches in height shall not be included in this
calculation.
(6)
The area of a base and supporting structure for a monument sign
shall not exceed 100% of the size of the allowable sign square
footage and shall not be internally illuminated.
(7)
§ 300-9.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-9.2
1:311
messages with these characteristics onto buildings or other objects.
Also known as "electronic message centers."
CHANGEABLE-COPY SIGN, MANUAL (MCCS) — A sign or portion
thereof which displays information in which each alphanumeric
character, graphic or symbol may be changed or rearranged manually
or mechanically with characters, letters, or illustrations without
altering the face or the surface of the sign. Said characters, letters, or
illustrations shall not consist of individually illuminated devices.
COMMERCIAL MESSAGE — Any sign wording, logo, or other
representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls
attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity.
The erection of more than two flags on property used for a commercial
purpose shall be considered a commercial message.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN — A temporary sign of an architect, engineer,
or contractor, erected during the period such person is performing
work on the premises on which such sign is erected.
DEVELOPMENT SIGN — A sign used to direct attention to a site which
includes a lot or lots considered as a unit for development purposes
where the lot or lots are occupied by more than one use, whether in the
same structure or not.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — An off-premises sign which indicates the
direction or distance to a geographic area, but does not identify or
advertise any particular commercial or noncommercial enterprise or
group of commercial or noncommercial enterprises.
FOR SALE, RENT OR LEASE SIGN — A temporary sign advertising real
property for sale, rent or lease.
FREESTANDING SIGN — A self-supporting sign not attached to any
building, wall, or fence, but in a fixed location. This does not include
portable or trailer-type signs.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign used simply to identify the name,
address and title of an individual family or firm occupying the premises
on which the sign is located.
INCIDENTAL SIGN — A sign, generally informational, that has a
purpose secondary to the use of the lot on which it is located, such as
"no parking," "entrance," "loading only," "telephone," and other similar
directives. No sign with a commercial message legible from a position
off the lot on which the sign is located shall be considered incidental.
LOGO — A graphic representation or symbol of a company name,
trademark, abbreviation, etc., often designed for ready recognition.
LOT — For the purposes of this section, "lot" shall refer to a site which
includes a single lot or multiple lots which are utilized as a single unit.
A lot may contain more than one building or business.
MARQUEE — Any permanent, roof-like structure projecting beyond
a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the
§ 300-9.2 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-9.2
1:312
building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection
from the weather.
MARQUEE SIGN — Any sign attached to, in any manner, or made part
of a marquee.
MONUMENT SIGN — A freestanding sign fixed to the ground by means
of a permanent foundation in which the area containing the support
poles is replaced or covered by a pedestal structure and the total height
of the sign and support structure is not more than eight feet.
NONCOMMERCIAL MESSAGE — A message that does not, in any
sense, involve commerce.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — Any sign that does not conform to the
requirements of this ordinance.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — Any sign that advertises or indicates someone
other than the person occupying the premises on which the sign is
erected or maintained, or some business or businesses other than that
transacted thereon, or advertises another property or any part thereof
as for sale or rent.
ON-PREMISES SIGN — Any sign that advertises or indicates the
occupant of the premises on which the sign is erected or maintained.
POLITICAL SIGN — A noncommercial sign erected to show support for
a candidate for public office or to express a political opinion.
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground
or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported,
including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means
of wheels; balloons used as signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and
signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the
public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day
operations of a business.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign which is affixed to a building or other
structure and which extends more than six inches beyond the surface
to which it is affixed.
ROOF SIGN — A sign which is located above, or projected above, the
lowest point of the eaves or the top of the parapet wall of any building,
or which is painted on or fastened to a roof.
SIGN — Any symbol, design, or device used to identify or advertise any
place, business, product, activity, person, idea or statement.
SPECIAL EVENT SIGN — A temporary sign used in connection with a
circumstance, situation, or event (i.e., church bazaar, grand opening,
fair, circus, festival, performance, or competition) that is expected to be
complete within a reasonably short or definite period.
TEMPORARY SIGN — Any sign, including its support structure,
intended to be maintained for a continuous period of not more than 30
days.
§ 300-9.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-9.2
1:313
VIDEO DISPLAY SIGN, ELECTRONIC (EVDS) — A sign that changes its
message or background in a manner or method of display characterized
by motion or pictorial imagery, which may or may not include text, and
depicts action or a special effect to imitate movement, the presentation
of pictorials or graphics displayed in a progression of frames which give
the illusion of motion, including but not limited to illusion of moving
objects, moving patterns, bands of lights, expanding or contracting
shapes, not including electronic changeable-copy signs. Video display
signs also include projected images with these characteristics onto
buildings or other objects.
WALL SIGN — Any sign which is painted on, incorporated into, or
affixed parallel to the wall of a building, and which extends not more
than six inches from the surface of that building.
WINDOW SIGN — Any sign, pictures, symbol, or combination thereof
or any material affixed directly to the surface of the window and/or
inside a building within three feet of the window or door, the purpose
of which is to be viewed or visible from the outside. A window sign
does not include any item of merchandise normally displayed within a
merchant's window.
General regulations.
Permitted signs. Only signs which refer to a permitted use or
an approved conditional use as set forth in the West Springfield
Zoning Ordinance are permitted, provided such signs conform to
the provisions of this section.
(1)
Prohibited signs.
(a) Off-premises signs are not permitted.
(b) Signs which project above the peak of a roof are not permitted.
(c) Portable signs are not permitted.
Flashing signs, signs containing moving parts, inflatable signs,
tethered balloon signs, and signs containing reflective
elements which sparkle in the sunlight are not permitted.
Notwithstanding any other provisions related to
nonconforming signs within this ordinance, any freestanding
sign in existence as of December 1, 2008, containing a flashing
element shall be allowed to remain in existence in its current
geometric dimensions and illumination.
(d)
Any sign advertising or identifying a business or organization
which is either defunct or no longer located on the premises is
not permitted.
(e)
(f) No private sign shall be placed on a public property.
(2)
(3) Exempted signs.
D.
§ 300-9.2 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-9.2
1:314
Any traffic, informational or directional sign owned and
installed by a governmental agency shall be permitted.
(a)
Signs necessary to warn of a hazard shall be permitted as
required to accomplish these purposes.
(b)
Signs relating to trespassing and hunting not exceeding two
square feet in area shall be permitted. One sign per 50 feet of
frontage is allowed.
(c)
Any sign required by law or by governmental order, rule or
regulations.
(d)
Numbers used to identify the street address of a building or
structure.
(e)
Signs identifying the occupants of a dwelling, provided that
such signs do not exceed one square foot in area and, if
freestanding, do not exceed six feet in height.
(f)
(g) Signs not visible off the premises on which they are located.
(h) Window signs.
General standards. Any exterior sign or advertising device hereafter
erected or maintained must, unless expressly provided; conform to the
following restrictions in all districts:
With the exception of canopy and marquee signs, no sign shall
project over or into any pedestrian or vehicular way.
(1)
No sign, together with any supporting framework, shall extend to
a height above the maximum building height in the underlying
zoning district.
(2)
A sign or its illuminator shall not, by reason of its location, obstruct
the view of any official traffic sign, traffic signal or traffic marking.
(3)
All signs shall comply with the regulations for the erection and
construction of signs contained in other applicable Town
regulations, except as shall be under the jurisdiction of MGL c. 93,
§§ 29 through 33, inclusive.
(4)
Only sign types in Table 9-3, Types of Permitted Signs, shall be
permitted.92
(5)
No sign permit shall be issued for an additional sign or to allow
for a structural alteration to an existing sign on a lot or structure
upon which exists a preexisting nonconforming sign unless the
nonconforming nature of the preexisting sign is brought into
conformity with the ordinance. Structural maintenance or repair is
allowed.
(6)
E.
92.Editor's Note: Table 9-3 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 300-9.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-9.2
1:315
Signs requiring a special permit from the Planning Board. The
Planning Board shall be the special permit granting authority for
§ 300-9.2.
The special permit granting authority shall consider requests
for special permits in accordance with Article XII of this Zoning
Ordinance. Site plan review is not required, provided that all
special permit requirements of this article are met.
(a)
The special permit granting authority may grant a special
permit for signs requiring special permits per the provisions of
this article, provided that:
The sign's scale is determined to be in reasonable relation
to the development scale, viewer distance and travel
speed, and sign sizes on nearby structures; and
[1]
The sign's size, shape, and placement serve to define or
enhance architectural elements of the building such as
columns, sill lines, cornices, and roof edges, and do not
unreasonably interrupt, obscure, or hide them; and
[2]
The sign's design is in harmony with other signage on
the same or adjacent structures, and provides reasonable
continuity in the mounting location and height,
proportions and materials; and
[3]
The sign's materials, colors, lettering style, illumination
and form are reasonably compatible with the building
design, neighborhood context and use; and
[4]
The sign's size, location, design and illumination are not
judged to present a safety hazard to vehicular or
pedestrian traffic.
[5]
(b)
Notwithstanding the above, the special permit granting
authority shall not grant special permits for signs specifically
prohibited by Subsection D(2).
(c)
The special permit granting authority may add conditions in
granting a special permit, including, but not limited to: color,
size, illumination, hours of illumination, and removal.
(d)
(7)
Illumination standards.
No sign shall incorporate or be lighted by flashing or blinking
lights, or be designed to attract attention by a change in intensity
or by repeated motion, unless otherwise allowed by Subsection
H(8).
(1)
(2) The light source shall be shaded from view off the premises.
F.
§ 300-9.2 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-9.2
1:316
Sign location and size. All signs must conform to the sign standards in
Tables 9-4A and 9-4B.93
G.
Standards for specific types of signs. In addition to conforming to the
sign standards of Tables 9-4A, 9-4B, Permitted Sign Uses,94 signs must
comply with the following applicable standards:
Wall signs.
Wall signs shall be firmly anchored to the wall of the principal
structure and shall not extend above the wall of the structure.
(a)
Signs on adjacent storefronts and on multitenant buildings
shall be coordinated in terms of lighting, style, and mounting
height.
(b)
(1)
Freestanding signs.
Freestanding signs may be placed in a side or a rear yard in
accordance with site plan review.
(a)
Freestanding signs shall not be placed so as to interfere with
vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(b)
(2)
Canopy signs.
Canopy signs must be integrated into the material of the
canopy or attached flat against the surface of the canopy and
be no thicker than 3/4 inch.
(a)
A minimum of eight feet above sidewalk level must be allowed
for pedestrian clearance.
(b)
The area of a canopy sign shall be calculated upon the smallest
quadrangle or triangle which encompasses all of the letters
and symbols.
(c)
(3)
Construction signs. One temporary sign of an architect, engineer,
or contractor erected during the period such person is performing
work on the premises on which such sign is erected shall be
permitted.
(4)
For sale, rent, or lease signs. Any temporary sign advertising
property for sale or lease shall be permitted, provided:
Such signs shall advertise only the property on which the sign
is located.
(a)
The sign shall be removed by the owner or agent within 30
days of rent, sale, or lease.
(b)
(5)
H.
93.Editor's Note: Tables 9-4A and 9-4B are included as attachments to this chapter.
94.Editor's Note: Tables 9-4A and 9-4B are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 300-9.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-9.2
1:317
Signs related to noncommercial messages. Noncommercial
messages are permitted in all zoning districts.
(6)
Off-premises signs. All current off-premises signs in existence as of
the date of this ordinance must meet the following requirements:
All off-premises signs shall be required to obtain a permit from
the Outdoor Advertising Board as outlined in 711 CMR 3.00 et
seq.95
(a)
An off-premises sign which advertises multiple businesses,
products, or the like shall be designed in an integrated and
uniform manner.
(b)
No off-premises sign shall be located with 1,000 feet of any
other off-premises sign or within 250 feet of another sign.
(c)
(7)
Changeable-copy sign, electronic.
A changeable-copy sign that uses a matrix of illumination
elements (white and/or colored), including but not limited to
light-emitting diodes (LEDs), liquid crystal display (LCD),
plasma display, or other digital or electronic media to display
or project text and/or images that can be modified by
electronic processes.
Permitted locations. Electronic changeable-copy signs are
permitted only in accordance with Table 9-3.96
[1]
Electronic changeable-copy signs are only allowed as a
component or element of a permitted sign in accordance
with Table 9-3.
[2]
Dimensions. The area of each electronic changeable-copy
sign as a component or element of a specific sign type
shall be restricted to the percentage of the specific sign
type in which it is a component as per Table 9-3. Where
applicable, the percentage area listed in Table 9-3 shall
apply per sign face (each sign may have two faces).
[3]
Permitted signs containing electronic changeable-copy
signs components may be internally or externally
illuminated.
[4]
Setbacks: 10 feet from the property line or half the
distance from the property line if less than 10 feet.
[5]
Pixel pitch. The pitch of the LED portion of the sign shall
be a maximum of 36 millimeters.
[6]
(a)
(8)
95.Editor's Note: See now 700 CMR 3.00, Control and Restriction of Billboards, Signs and
Other Advertising Devices.
96.Editor's Note: Table 9-3 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 300-9.2 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-9.2
1:318
Electronic image sign: a sign or portion thereof that displays
electronic pictorial information, in which each static display
image is defined by a small number of matrix elements using
different combinations of light-emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber
optics, light bulbs or other illumination devices within the
display area. Electronic image sign display may include
pictorial images, which may or may not include alphanumeric
characters. Electronic image signs include computerprogrammable,
microprocessor or controlled electronic
displays. Each static display may contain multiple colors and
color shading. Electronic image signs shall conform to the
provisions of Subsection H(8)(d), General requirements for all
electronic signs.
(b)
Electronic message sign: a sign or portion thereof that displays
electronic, nonpictorial information, in which each is defined
by a small number of matrix elements using different
combinations of light-emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber optics, light
bulbs or other illumination devices within the display area.
Electronic message signs include computer-programmable,
microprocessor or controlled electronic displays. Electronic
message signs are restricted to display alphanumeric
characters only; pictorials, video, animation, images and
scrolling text are prohibited. Electronic message signs are
restricted to no more than three colors, including the
background as one color during each static display; shading of
colors is prohibited. Electronic message signs shall conform to
the provisions of Subsection H(8)(d), General requirements for
all electronic signs.
(c)
General requirements for all electronic signs.
Electronic signs shall not:
Incorporate video, animation, or scrolling of text or
images.
[a]
[b] Emit any sound.
Cause beams or rays of light to be directed at any
portion of the traveled way, when such beams or rays
are of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or
to impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle
or otherwise interfere with the operation of a motor
vehicle.
[c]
Obscure or interfere with the effectiveness of an
official traffic sign, device or signal. Signs located
within 200 feet of a traffic signal shall not be
illuminated in a solid red, solid yellow, or solid green
color.
[d]
[1]
(d)
§ 300-9.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-9.2
1:319
Changing images or messages shall not rotate,
sparkle, blink, or fluctuate in light intensity or use
intermittent stroking, or moving light, or in any
manner create the illusion of movement.
[e]
Content. Sign content, including, but not limited to,
information, advertising, promotion and images, shall be
restricted to the uses, services, products and activities
specific to the property on which the sign is located.
[2]
Brightness. The brightness of an electronic sign shall not
exceed 0.3 footcandle above ambient light conditions. The
ambient light reading shall be taken at least 30 minutes
past sunset with the sign turned off or displaying all black
copy. The fully lit reading shall be taken with the sign
displaying all white copy. Measurement of the light levels
shall be taken perpendicular to the face of the sign at a
distance of 100 feet from the source.
[3]
Dimmer control. Signs shall have at least one photo sensor
and automatic dimmer control to produce a distinct
illumination change from a higher illumination level to
a lower level for the time period between one half-hour
before sunset and one half-hour after sunrise. Each photo
sensor shall:
[a] Be designed to continually operate in direct sunlight;
[b] Be situated to measure ambient light;
Be contained in a waterproof enclosure which shall
allow easy access to the photo sensors;
[c]
[d] Allow light sensing; and
Be capable of dimming all pixels of the sign
collectively to compensate for surrounding ambient
light levels.
[e]
[4]
Illumination. Signs shall be allowed to be illuminated
seven days a week between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and
11:00 p.m. unless the premises on which it is located are
open for business. A sign or its illumination shall not,
by reason of its location, shape, or color, interfere with
traffic or be confused with or obstruct the line-of-sight or
effectiveness of any official traffic sign, traffic signal or
traffic marking.
[5]
Duration. Each static display shall last at least 10 seconds
to avoid quick and frenetic changes of content that can be
distracting and compromise public safety.
[6]
§ 300-9.2 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-9.2
1:320
Transition. The display transition must be accomplished by
means of instantaneous re-pixalization and shall not use
fading, shading, dissolving, or similar effects as part of the
change.
[7]
Sequencing. The images and messages displayed shall be
complete in themselves without continuation in content to
the next static display, image or message.
[8]
Malfunction. Signs shall contain a default design that will
shut the sign off if a malfunction occurs.
[9]
No electronic sign shall be permitted less than five feet
from the inside of a window facing a street, public way, or
public pedestrian way.
[10]
No sign permit shall be issued for an LED message sign
upon which exists a preexisting nonconforming sign unless
the nonconforming nature of the preexisting sign is
brought into conformity with the ordinance.
[11]
Gas station canopy sign.
The sign area shall be limited to 10% of each face of the canopy
on which it is displayed.
(a)
The area of the sign shall be calculated in accordance with
the definition of "area of sign" in Subsection C of this section,
which shall include all background material, emblems, logos,
or decorative elements.
(b)
(9)
Signs which do not require a sign permit.
Government signs. Signs, including portable signs, erected and
maintained by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or the
federal government on any land, building or structure in use
by such governmental entity do not require a sign permit;
any other signs erected by such governmental entity at any
location required for public or environmental health, safety or
notification purposes, or announcing the date, time and place
of elections or other events.
(a)
(10)
Secondary signs. Occupants/Tenants in a multitenant commercial
building which is located adjacent to or abuts the I-91 Corridor
shall be permitted to locate a secondary wall sign on an area of the
building that is not contiguous to the occupant's/tenant's premises;
under the condition that the sign would not otherwise be visible to
I-91 traffic and the sign complies with all other conditions under
this ordinance.
(11)
I. Enforcement.
§ 300-9.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-9.2
1:321
§ 300-9.3. (Reserved)
Designation of Sign Officer. The Building Inspector (or any other
qualified person) shall be appointed by the Mayor as the Sign
Officer. The Sign Officer is authorized to order the repair or
removal of any sign and supporting structure which is erected or
maintained contrary to this ordinance. Whenever a Sign Officer is
designated, the Mayor should notify the State Outdoor Advertising
Board.
(1)
Compliance and enforcement. The Building Inspector or the Sign
Officer shall inspect any sign installed in accordance with
§ 300-7.9G of this ordinance within 30 days of installation to
confirm the sign's compliance with this ordinance. Enforcement
actions shall follow the requirements of this Subsection I.
(2)
Maintenance and removal. Every sign shall be maintained in good
structural condition at all times. All signs shall be kept neatly
painted, including all metal parts and supports thereof that are not
galvanized or of rust-resistant material. The Building Inspector or
the Sign Officer shall inspect and shall have the authority to order
the painting, repair, alteration or removal of a sign which shall
constitute a hazard to safety, health, or public welfare by reason of
inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, or obsolescence.
(3)
Abandoned signs. Except as otherwise provided in this section,
any sign that is located on property which becomes vacant and is
unoccupied for a period of 12 months or more shall be deemed to
have been abandoned and shall be removed by the owner of the
sign or owner of the premises.
(4)
Nonconforming signs.
Continuance. A nonconforming sign lawfully existing at the time
of adoption or subsequent amendment of this ordinance may
continue, although such sign does not conform to the provisions of
this ordinance.
(1)
Alterations. No alterations shall be made to a nonconforming sign
unless the nonconforming nature of the sign is brought into
conformity with this ordinance. Structural maintenance and repair
are allowed.
(2)
Replacement. Any sign replacing a nonconforming sign shall
conform to the provision of this section, and the nonconforming
sign shall no longer be displayed. Excludes replacing the face plate
content, as long as it does not increase the nonconformity of the
sign.
(3)
J.
§ 300-9.2 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-9.4
1:322
§ 300-9.4. Fences.
The installation of any permanent man-made fence shall require the
issuance of a fence permit and/or building permit as required by the State
Building Code. Any temporary fence erected for the protection of public
safety and associated with an approved construction project, demolition
project or a temporary event (an event not lasting more than 30 consecutive
calendar days) shall not require the issuance of a fence permit. The Building
Inspector shall be notified in writing prior to the installation of any
temporary fence. Any permanent man-made fence erected in the Town of
West Springfield must comply with the standards outlined in this section.
§ 300-9.5. (Reserved)
No fence located between the principal structure and the street line
and greater than two feet in height shall be more than 50% solid. No
fence between the principal structure and the street line shall be more
than four feet in height.
A.
No man-made fence erected in any residential zoning district shall
exceed six feet in height.
B.
No man-made fence in any nonresidential district shall exceed 10 feet
in height.
C.
The finished side of all fences shall be erected outward to abutting
properties.
D.
Security fencing (barbed wire and similar type of wire) shall not be
allowed in any residence district.
E.
Security fencing shall be allowed only in the side and rear yard of
properties located in nonresidential districts. Security fencing shall be
set back five feet from a side or rear property line abutting a residence
use or district.
F.
Any retaining wall creating a difference in elevation of more than four
feet in height shall be protected by fencing of not less than three feet in
height located at the top of said retaining wall.
G.
All permanent outdoor swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by
fencing not less than four feet in height with gates capable of being
locked. Said gates shall be kept locked or secured whenever said pools
are not in use.
H.
All fences and walls shall be properly maintained. Any fence found to
be in disrepair shall be promptly repaired or removed.
I.
No fence shall be constructed so as to create a safety hazard for
vehicles or pedestrians entering or exiting driveways.
J.
§ 300-9.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-9.6
1:323
§ 300-9.6. Environmental performance standards in Industrial Park
(IP), Industrial Park-Light (IP-L), and Special Use (SU-T, SU-O, SUM,
and SU-H) Districts.
All business and industrial uses permitted in accordance with the Table of
Use Regulations, § 300-5.3, Table 5-3 and Table 5-4,97 in the IP, IP-L, SU-T,
SU-O, SU-M, and SU-H Districts are subject to the following standards:
§ 300-9.7. Landscaping standards.
Dust, dirt, fly ash and smoke. Dust, dirt, fly ash or smoke shall not be
emitted into the air in quantities exceeding those amounts established
by federal and state environmental agencies.
A.
Odors. No offensive odors shall be emitted into the air from any lot so
as to impair the value and enjoyment of any other lot.
B.
Gases and fumes. Noxious, toxic or corrosive fumes or gases shall not
be emitted into the air from any lot so as to endanger the public health
and safety or to impair safety on or the value and enjoyment of any
other lot.
C.
Noise. With the exception of noise necessarily involved in the
construction or demolition of buildings and other structures, no noise
which is objectionable due to volume, intermittence, beat frequency or
shrillness shall be transmitted outside the lot where it originates.
D.
Vibration. With the exception of vibration necessarily involved in the
construction or demolition of buildings, no vibration shall be
transmitted outside the lot where it originates.
E.
Wastes. No wastes shall be discharged or dumped into any river,
stream, watercourse, storm drain, pond, lake or swamp.
F.
Light, glare and heat. No offensive glare from lighting shall be
transmitted so as to endanger the public health and safety nor shall it
be transmitted into or within any Residence District so as to impair the
value and enjoyment of any other lot therein. No radiant heat shall be
perceptible outside the lot where it originates.
G.
Danger. No material which is dangerous due to explosion, extreme fire
hazard or radioactivity shall be used, stored, manufactured, processed
or assembled except in accordance with applicable codes and
regulations of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
H.
Required landscaping requirements for the Central Business (CB),
Industrial Park-Light (IP-L), and Special Use (SU-T, SU-O, SU-M, and
SU-H) Districts. All developments in the IP, SU-T, SU-O, SU-M, and SU-H
Districts shall be subject to the following landscaping requirements. All
developments other than "off-site" parking areas, "off-street" parking
A.
97.Editor's Note: Tables 5-3 and 5-4 are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 300-9.6 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-9.7
1:324
areas and gasoline filling stations in the CB District shall also be subject
to the following landscaping requirements.
With the exception of reasonable access to parking and service
areas, required front yards shall be reserved for landscaping and
pedestrian use. At least 1/2 of any required front yard shall be
landscaped and provided with plantings as noted herein:
Two shrubs, a minimum of 18 inches in diameter and/or height
at the time of planting, shall be provided for each 10 feet, or
fraction thereof, of frontage.
(a)
One tree, a minimum of two inches in diameter at the time of
planting, shall be provided for each 50 feet, or fraction thereof,
of frontage.
(b)
(1)
Those portions of required front yards devoted to pedestrian use
shall not be paved with bituminous concrete, i.e., asphalt.
(2)
With the exception of front yard landscaping requirements, the
provisions of Table 13-198 of this ordinance shall govern
development within the CB, IP-L, SU-T, SU-O, SU-M, and SU-H
Districts. In addition, at least 2/3 of the land area not used for
building, required parking, required front yard areas and Table
13-1 requirements shall be landscaped and reserved for open space
in the SU-T, SU-O, SU-M and SU-H Districts.
(3)
Additional landscaping requirements for the Central Business (CB)
Districts. In addition to the required landscaping standards in
Subsection A, the listed developments in the CB District shall be subject
to the following:
Gasoline filling stations. Landscaping requirements for gasoline
filling stations shall be governed by Table 13-1 of this ordinance.99
(1)
Off-site and off-street parking areas.
With the exception of reasonable access, off-street and off-site
parking areas shall be provided with a ten-foot landscaped
buffer along each street line and each lot line abutting a
residential zone and/or use.
(a)
Two trees, a minimum of 1 1/2 inches to two inches in diameter
at the time of planting, and eight shrubs, from 18 inches to 24
inches in diameter and/or height at the time of planting, shall
be provided for each 20 parking spaces or fraction thereof
within each parking area.
(b)
With the exception of required buffers and plantings, the
requirements of Table 13-1100 of this ordinance shall govern
(c)
(2)
B.
98.Editor's Note: See § 300-13.8.
99.Editor's Note: See § 300-13.8.
§ 300-9.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-9.7
1:325
§ 300-9.8. Development standards for Industrial Park (IP),
Industrial Park-Light (IP-L) and all Special Use (SU-M, SU-T, SU-O,
SU-H) Districts.
landscaping within commercial off-street and off-site parking
areas. That percent of total "automobile parking and
circulation area" required by Table 13-1 shall not abut required
buffers.
Required landscaping requirements in the Industrial Park (IP) District.
All development shall be subject to the following landscaping
requirements:
The provisions of Table 13-1101 of this ordinance shall govern
development within Industrial Park Zoning Districts. In addition, at
least 2/3 of the land area not used for building purposes, required
parking, required front yard and Table 13-1 requirements shall be
suitably landscaped.
(1)
Loading and unloading facilities required elsewhere in this
ordinance shall not be located in such a manner as to be visible
from the street on which the principal buildings faces; in addition,
such facilities shall be screened from public view from any side
streets abutting the lot on which such building is located.
(2)
C.
All plans for development within the IP, IP-L, SU-T, SU-O, SU-M, SU-H
Zoning Districts shall include the following:
Proposed buildings, drives and walkways, parking areas,
landscaping and signs.
(1)
Existing and proposed topographical features of significance and
an indication of how the proposed development will affect these
features.
(2)
All existing environmental features, including trees, streams,
wetlands, swamps, wildlife areas and the like. The plan shall
indicate how the proposed development will affect these features
and shall also indicate whether or not permits from other Town
agencies, e.g., the Board of Health, Conservation Commission, will
be required.
(3)
Soil types as classified by the United States Soil Conservation
Service102 in its report, Soils and Their Interpretations for Various
Land Uses: Town of West Springfield, and the limitations such soils
place on the proposed development. (Note: The report, Soils and
Their Interpretations, is available in the West Springfield Planning
Board office.)
(4)
A.
100. Editor's Note: See § 300-13.8.
101. Editor's Note: See § 300-13.8.
102. Editor's Note: Now the Natural Resources Conservation Service.
§ 300-9.7 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-9.8
1:326
§ 300-9.9. Temporary structures.
Any temporary structure erected, constructed or raised on a parcel of land
in West Springfield must comply with the following standards:
(5) Any zoning "overlay" area.
In addition, all plans for development within the SU-T, SU-O, SU-M, and
SU-H Zoning Districts shall be prepared by a landscape architect and
engineer licensed to practice in the commonwealth.
B.
The placement of any temporary structure on a property used for
business purposes shall require a permit issued by the Building
Inspector.
A.
Temporary structures located in business districts shall conform to all
setback requirements for accessory structures for the district in which
they are located.
B.
The placement of a temporary structure shall not prohibit the use of
required off-street parking and shall not interfere with vehicular or
pedestrian access to the property or buildings located thereon.
C.
No temporary structure shall be erected for a period of more than 21
days in a calendar year.
D.
A business may obtain only one permit per calendar year for a
temporary structure.
E.
Temporary structures located on property used for residential purposes
shall be exempt from the provisions of this section of the ordinance.
F.
G. All signage shall conform to the requirements of this ordinance.
§ 300-9.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-9.9
1:327

ARTICLE X
Additional Use Regulations
§ 300-10.0. Home occupations.
The following uses shall be permitted by right in all Residence Districts:
§ 300-10.1. Parcels over 30,000 square feet in Central Business
District.
The office of a physician, optometrist or dentist (provided there are no
hospital facilities in connection therewith) and the office or studio of an
accountant, architect, artist, lawyer, musician, professional engineer, or
teacher of scholastic subjects, when situated in the same building used
as the residence of the person engaged in such occupation and provided
that not more than 1/3 of the dwelling shall be so used.
A.
Customary home occupation uses, such as dressmaking and apartment
used as a private residence by the person carrying on the occupation,
provided that no person outside the family unit may be so employed,
and provided that no more than 1/3 of the dwelling or apartment
shall be used therefor. No signs shall be permitted for such uses.
Hairdressing and beauty parlors shall not be deemed to be such
customary home occupation uses.
B.
Parcels over 30,000 square feet in the Central Business (CB) District
by special permit. The coordinated development of parcels in excess
of 30,000 square feet, whether or not these abut, shall be permitted
only by a special permit from the Board of Appeals with site plan
review from the Planning Board, as specified in Article XII, Special
Permits, and Article XIII, Site Plan Review, and Article XIV, Site Plan
Administration, of this ordinance, and in accordance with the additional
requirements specified herein.
A.
Additional requirements. The following standards shall be used as
additional requirements in the special permit process for all parcels
over 30,000 square feet of size in the Central Business District:
The design of such development shall be prepared by an architect
licensed to practice in the commonwealth. Said design shall also
incorporate a landscaping plan prepared by a landscape architect
licensed to practice in the commonwealth.
(1)
Parking areas associated with such development shall be
landscaped in accordance with the requirements of § 300-9.7B(2),
Off-site and off-street parking areas. No such parking area shall run
for more than 80 feet along a front street line and such parking
areas shall run for not more than 150 feet along any side street
line.
(2)
Pedestrian walkways shall be provided within each parking area
to connect such area with buildings and public sidewalks. Such
(3)
B.
§ 300-10.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-10.1
1:329
§ 300-10.2. Sale of used motor vehicles and trailers.
§ 300-10.3. Hospitals, sanatoriums and medical/dental centers,
offices, clinics or laboratories.
walkways shall extend to the most distant portions of such parking
areas and shall be clearly distinguished through design and/or
material. Such walkways shall also be protected from automobile
parking spaces and driving lanes.
Such development shall be subject to all other requirements of this
ordinance.
(4)
The Board of Appeals shall not grant a special permit until it
has received written recommendations from the Planning Board,
provided such recommendations are presented to the Board of
Appeals within 30 days of the publication of the first legal notice
for any required public hearing.
(5)
Sale of used motor vehicles and trailers by special permit.
Establishments for the sale of used motor vehicles and trailers shall
be permitted in the Business B (BB) District only upon issuance of
a special permit with site plan review from the Planning Board, as
specified in Article XII, Special Permits, and Article XIII, Site Plan
Review, and Article XIV, Site Plan Administration, of this ordinance and
in accordance with the additional requirements specified herein.
A.
Additional requirements. The following standards shall be used as
additional requirements in the special permit process for
establishments for the sale of used motor vehicles or trailers:
Repair of vehicles shall be limited to those which are sold on-site.
All repair and detailing work shall be conducted within a garage
and shall not be conducted in the open.
(1)
No vehicles utilized for parts shall be stored on site. The salvaging
or scrapping of motor vehicles or trailers on the premises shall be
prohibited.
(2)
All provisions for landscaping and parking shall be in compliance
with the requirements of this ordinance.
(3)
B.
Hospitals, sanitariums and medical/dental centers, offices, clinics and
laboratories with site plan review.
In Business and Industrial Districts, hospital and sanitariums shall
be permitted in the Business A (BA), Business B (BB), Business B-1
(BB-1) and Industrial (I) Districts only with site plan review from
the Planning Board, as specified in Article XIII, Site Plan Review,
and Article XIV, Site Plan Administration, of this ordinance and in
accordance with the additional requirements specified herein.
(1)
A.
§ 300-10.1 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-10.3
1:330
§ 300-10.4. Recreation community centers.
Only medical/dental offices shall be permitted in the Residence
C (RC), Neighborhood Business (NB), or Central Business (CB)
Districts with site plan review from the Planning Board, as
specified in Article XIII, Site Plan Review, and Article XIV, Site
Plan Administration, of this ordinance and in accordance with the
additional requirements specified herein.
(2)
Medical/Dental centers, offices, clinics or laboratories shall be
permitted in the Business A (BA), Business A-1 (BA-1), Business
B (BB), Business B-1 (BB-1), or Industrial (I) Districts only with
site plan review from the Planning Board, as specified in Article
XIII, Site Plan Review, and Article XIV, Site Plan Administration, of
this ordinance and in accordance with the additional requirements
specified herein.
(3)
Hospitals, sanitariums and medical/dental centers, offices, clinics and
laboratories by special permit with site plan review.
In the residential districts, hospitals and sanitariums shall be
permitted in the Residence A-2 (RA-2), Residence B (RB),
Residence C (RC) Districts only upon issuance of a special permit
from the Board of Appeals with site plan review from the Planning
Board, as specified in Article XII, Special Permits, and Article XIII,
Site Plan Review, and Article XIV, Site Plan Administration, of
this ordinance and in accordance with the additional requirements
specified herein.
(1)
Medical/Dental centers, offices, clinics or laboratories shall be
permitted in the Special Use - Technical (SU-T) District only upon
issuance of a special permit with site plan review from the Planning
Board, as specified in Article XII, Special Permits, and Article XIII,
Site Plan Review, and Article XIV, Site Plan Administration, of
this ordinance and in accordance with the additional requirements
specified herein.
(2)
B.
Additional requirements. The following standards are additional
requirements for all hospitals, sanitariums, medical/dental centers,
offices, clinics or institutions:
All parking shall be located to the side or rear of the principal
building and in accordance with this ordinance.
(1)
A landscaped buffer a minimum of five feet in height and five feet
in width shall be provided along abutting property lines.
(2)
In residential districts, light poles shall not exceed 15 feet in
height. All lighting shall be contained on site.
(3)
All waste disposal facilities shall be located to the rear of the
principal structure.
(4)
C.
§ 300-10.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-10.4
1:331
§ 300-10.5. Junkyards, junk storage, scrapping of motor vehicles
and parts and salvage.
Recreation community center with site plan review. Recreation
community centers shall be permitted in the Business A (BA), Business
A-1 (BA-1), Business B (BB) and Business B-1 (BB-1) Districts only with
site plan review from the Planning Board, as specified in Article XIII,
Site Plan Review, and Article XIV, Site Plan Administration, of this
ordinance and in accordance with the additional requirements specified
herein.
A.
Recreation community center by special permit with site plan review.
Recreation community centers shall be permitted in the Residence A
(RA), Residence A-1 (RA-1), Residence A-2 (RA-2), Residence B (RB),
Residence C (RC), and Central Business (CB) Districts only upon
issuance of a special permit from the Board of Appeals with site plan
review from the Planning Board, as specified in Article XII, Special
Permits, and Article XIII, Site Plan Review, and Article XIV, Site Plan
Administration, of this ordinance and in accordance with the additional
requirements specified herein.
B.
Additional requirements. The following standards are additional
requirements for all recreation community centers:
All parking shall be located to the side or rear of the principal
structure.
(1)
In residential districts, light poles shall not exceed 15 feet in
height. All lighting shall be contained on site.
(2)
All waste disposal facilities shall be located to the rear of the
principal structure.
(3)
(4) The sale of alcoholic beverages shall be prohibited.
C.
Junkyards, junk storage, scrapping of motor vehicles and parts and
salvage by special permit with site plan review. Junkyards, junk storage,
scrapping of motor vehicles and parts shall be permitted in the
Industrial (I) District only upon issuance of a special permit from the
Board of Appeals with site plan review from the Planning Board, as
specified in Article XII, Special Permits, and Article XIII, Site Plan
Review, and Article XIV, Site Plan Administration, of this ordinance and
in accordance with the additional requirements specified herein.
A.
Additional requirements. The following standards are additional
requirements in the special permit process for junkyards, junk storage,
scrapping of motor vehicles and parts and salvage:
A landscaped buffer a minimum of five feet in height and 15 feet in
width shall be provided along abutting property lines.
(1)
B.
§ 300-10.4 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-10.5
1:332
§ 300-10.6. Warehouse/Retail trade and distribution.
In its review and issuance of a special permit to allow for the operation of
a warehouse/retail trade and distribution facility, the Planning Board shall
make the following findings:
§ 300-10.7. Adult theaters, adult bookstores and adult clubs.
All waste shall be stored and handled in accordance with state and
federal regulations.
(2)
Monitoring wells shall be installed and biannual reports submitted
to the SPGA (special permit granting authority).
(3)
Biannual reports shall be submitted to the SPGA detailing type of
materials received and method of disposal.
(4)
The operation of the warehouse/retail trade and distribution facility
is considered compatible with surrounding industrial uses in terms of
trip generation, traffic impacts to abutting roadways and impacts from
general industrial activities, including but not limited to noise, vibration
and odor.
A.
The operation of the warehouse/retail trade and distribution facility
is limited to the sales and distribution of a single product category
(examples of single product categories are meat products, lighting
fixtures, textiles) and not a variety of product categories for retail sales
(examples of retail uses not permitted are Sears, Old Navy, Target, Wal-
Mart, Home Depot, Dick's Sporting Goods).
B.
A substantial portion of the sales of the single product category must be
to industrial, commercial, institutional or professional business users
and not retail sales to the general public.
C.
The building, or portion thereof, used as a warehouse/retail trade and
distribution facility establishment shall be dedicated for warehousing
and storage of goods and materials of its single product category and
not for general retail floor space.
D.
Adult theaters, adult bookstores and adult clubs by special permit.
Adult theaters, adult bookstores and adult clubs shall be permitted in
the Business B (BB) District only upon issuance of a special permit from
the Zoning Board of Appeals with site plan review from the Planning
Board, as specified in Article XII, Special Permits, and Article XIII, Site
Plan Review, and Article XIV, Site Plan Administration, of this ordinance
and in accordance with the additional requirement specified herein.
A.
Additional requirements. The following standards are additional
requirements in the special permit process for adult theaters, adult
bookstores and adult clubs:
B.
§ 300-10.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-10.7
1:333
§ 300-10.8. Repair garages.
§ 300-10.9. Energy use and conservation.
The property for the proposed use shall not be located within 1,000
feet of a district designated for any residential use.
(1)
The property for the proposed use shall not be located within 1,000
feet of another adult theater, adult bookstore, adult club or any
establishment licensed under the provisions of MGL c. 138, § 12.
(2)
No obscene matter, material or conduct, as defined in MGL c. 272,
§ 31, shall be permitted.
(3)
A minimum five -foot-wide landscaped buffer shall be required
along the side and rear property lines, which shall be a minimum
of five feet in height.
(4)
(5) All parking areas shall be located in the side or rear yards.
All parking areas shall be illuminated and all lighting shall be
contained within the property.
(6)
In addition to the requirements of the special permit, the proposed
use of property shall conform to all requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance as it relates to parking, landscaping and signage.
(7)
No person convicted of violating the provisions of MGL c. 119, § 63
or MGL c. 272, § 28 shall be issued a special permit related to this
Subsection B.
(8)
Repair garage by special permit. Repair garages shall be permitted
in accordance with the provisions of Article V and only upon issuance
of a special permit with site plan review from the Planning Board,
as specified in Article XII, Special Permits, and Article XIII, Site Plan
Review, and Article XIV, Site Plan Administration, of this ordinance and
in accordance with the additional requirement specified herein.
A.
Additional requirements. The following standards are additional
requirements in the special permit process for repair garages:
Storage of vehicles for parts or storage of parts in the open is
prohibited.
(1)
No work shall be conducted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m.
(2)
B.
Purpose. The regulations contained in this section are intended to
promote more effective use of energy in the Town and, more
specifically, the accomplishment of energy-related goals, subgoals and
policies of the West Springfield Master Plan. The accomplishment of
these objectives is pursued, in part, by the encouragement of
alternative sources of energy, e.g., solar, wind and wood.
A.
§ 300-10.7 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-10.9
1:334
Definitions. For the purposes of this section and ordinance, the
following definitions shall apply:
WINDMILL — A device which converts wind energy to mechanical or
electrical energy.
WINDMILL ROTOR — That portion of the windmill, i.e., blades,
associated hub and shaft, intended to be moved or activated by the
wind.
WINDMILL TOWER — The supporting structure on which the rotor and
accessory equipment are mounted.
B.
Regulations with respect to windmills. Unless otherwise noted,
windmills not described and regulated in this section are not permitted
unless a variance is obtained from the Board of Appeals.
General regulations.
Abandonment/Safety. A windmill will be considered abandoned
if not operated for a period of two years or if it is designated
a safety hazard by the Building Inspector. Once a windmill
is designated as abandoned, the owner shall be required to
immediately dismantle the installation.
(a)
Access. Climbing access to the windmill tower shall be limited
either by:
The installation of a fence with locked gate around the
tower base; or
[1]
Limiting tower climbing apparatus to no lower than 10
feet from the ground. If a fence is used, it shall be no
lower than five feet and constructed in such a manner
as to restrict passage through said fence, including such
construction as stockade, woven wood, chain link, etc.
Note: Open construction such as "split rail" is expressly
prohibited.
[2]
(b)
Height, freestanding windmills. Permissible height shall be
measured as the vertical distance from the grade of the ground
adjoining the windmill to the center of the windmill rotor. The
permissible height of windmills with rotors which are mounted
vertically shall be measured from the grade of the ground
adjoining the windmill to a point halfway between the lowest
and highest points of the rotor.
(c)
Height, roof windmills. Permissible height shall be measured
as the vertical distance from the top of the roof of the building
on which the windmill is mounted to the center of the windmill
rotor. The permissible height of windmills with rotors which
are mounted vertically shall be measured from the top of the
(d)
(1)
C.
§ 300-10.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-10.9
1:335
roof of the building on which the windmill is mounted to a point
halfway between the lowest and highest points of the rotor.
Noise and electrical interference. Setback requirements
notwithstanding, no windmill shall be located so as to generate
excessive noise and/or electrical interference, e.g., with radio
and television reception on neighboring premises. If such
interference or excessive noise is created, the Town Council,
following a duly authorized public hearing, shall be
empowered to order appropriate corrective action, including a
cessation of the windmill's operation.
(e)
Placement. No windmill shall be constructed in any front or
side yard area. All other setback requirements shall be
measured from property lines to the center of the base of the
windmill tower.
(f)
Any roof-mounted windmills shall be installed in strict
compliance with the manufacturer's instructions; in the event
such instructions do not so specify, any roof-mounted windmill
shall be bolted through the roof with bearing plates installed
on the roof's underside.
(g)
Specific regulations. Windmills permitted upon issuance of
appropriate permits by the Inspector of Buildings, Wiring Inspector
and/or Plumbing Inspector.
Freestanding windmills permitted in any zoning district.
[1] Maximum height: 75 feet.
[2] Maximum rotor diameter: 35 feet.
[3] Setback: 1.75 times the height of the windmill.
(a)
Roof-mounted windmills permitted in RA, RA-1, RA-2, and RB
Zoning Districts.
[1] Maximum height: 15 feet.
[2] Maximum rotor diameter: six feet.
(b)
Roof-mounted windmills permitted in all other zoning districts.
[1] Maximum height: 25 feet.
[2] Maximum rotor diameter: 16 feet.
(c)
Exemptions. Freestanding windmills 25 feet or less in height,
roof-mounted windmills 10 feet or less in height, or windmills
used solely for agricultural purposes may be installed without
building permits. In addition, windmills not connected to
building systems, e.g., those used for irrigation, motor vehicle
recharging systems, swimming pool filters and the like, may
(d)
(2)
§ 300-10.9 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-10.9
1:336
§ 300-10.10. Commercial ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installations.
be installed without permits from the Wiring or Plumbing
Inspector.
Windmills allowed by special permit granted by the Board of
Appeals.
Maximum heights and rotor diameters.
Freestanding, any zoning district.
[a] Height: 100 feet.
[b] Rotor diameter: 65 feet.
[1]
Roof-mounted, RA, RA-1, RA-2, RB Zoning Districts.
[a] Height: 25 feet.
[b] Rotor diameter: 16 feet.
[2]
Roof-mounted, all other zones.
[a] Height: 40 feet.
[b] Rotor diameter: 20 feet.
[3]
(a)
Setback, freestanding windmills: 2.00 times the height of the
windmill. In the event a special permit is sought for a windmill
which is to be jointly owned by abutting landowners, required
setbacks may be measured from the farthest property lines of
such abutting properties.
(b)
In considering a special permit the Board of Appeals shall
determine that no substantial detriment to the public good or
safety shall occur; in addition, the Board shall ensure that the
permit sought will not adversely affect the environmental and
visual quality of the Town. The Board shall also ensure that any
special permits granted for jointly owned windmills contain
provisions to guarantee that responsibility for maintenance
and repair of such windmills "runs with the land" of each
participating landowner.
(c)
(3)
Purpose. The purpose of this section of the ordinance is to promote the
creation of commercial ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations
by providing standards for the placement, design, construction,
operation, monitoring, modification and removal of such installations
that address public safety, minimize impacts on scenic, natural and
historic resources and provide adequate financial assurance for the
eventual decommissioning of such installations.
A.
B. Applicability.
§ 300-10.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-10.10
1:337
This section applies to large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic (PV) installations measuring 1.25 acres and larger.
This section of the West Springfield Zoning Ordinance does not
apply to solar PV facilities mounted on buildings or to solar PV
facilities for residential use.
(1)
The provisions of this section shall not apply to land owned by the
Town of West Springfield.
(2)
General requirements for all solar power general installations.
Compliance with laws, ordinances and regulations. The
construction and operation of all ground-mounted solar PV
installations shall be consistent with all applicable local, state and
federal requirements, including but not limited to all applicable
safety, construction, electrical, and communications requirements.
All buildings and fixtures forming part of a solar PV installation
shall be constructed in accordance with the State Building Code.
(1)
Building permit. No ground-mounted solar PV installation shall
be constructed, installed or modified as provided in this section
without first obtaining a building permit.
(2)
C.
Site plan review.
Ground-mounted solar PV installations measuring 1.25 acres and
larger shall undergo a site plan review as outlined in Articles
XIII and XIV of the West Springfield Zoning Ordinance prior to
construction, installation or modification of the facility as provided
in this section. The total area of ground-mounted solar PV
structures shall include the areas where the solar panels are
installed, all appurtenant and accessory buildings, access roads,
landscaping and visual screening elements.
(1)
Required documents.
Pursuant to the required site plan content described in
§ 300-13.6 of the Zoning Ordinance, the project proponent
shall provide the following additional documents and
information. The Planning Board may waive any of these
requirements as it deems appropriate.
A site plan showing:
Property lines and physical features, including roads
for the project site, wetlands, wildlife corridors and
other relevant features;
[a]
Location and approximate height of tree cover,
including any trees on public property that are age
75 years and older or with a diameter of 36 inches or
greater, and any trees that are within the jurisdiction
of the Tree Warden;
[b]
[1]
(a)
(2)
D.
§ 300-10.10 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-10.10
1:338
Proposed changes to the landscape of the site,
including roads, grading, vegetation clearing and
planting, roads, parking areas, exterior lighting,
screening vegetation or structures;
[c]
Elevations of the solar PV installation signed by a
professional engineer showing the proposed layout of
the system and any potential shading from structures
and vegetation, including those on abutting
property(ies);
[d]
A three-line electrical diagram detailing the solar PV
installation, associated components, and electrical
interconnection methods, with all National Electrical
Code compliant disconnects and overcurrent devices;
[e]
Documentation of the major system components to
be used, including the photovoltaic panels, mounting
system, and inverter;
[f]
Name, address, and contact information for the
proposed system installer;
[g]
Name, address, phone number and signature of the
project proponent, as well as all co-proponents and
property owners, if any;
[h]
The name, contact information and signature of any
agents representing the project proponent; and
[i]
Documentation of actual or prospective access and
control of the project site (see also Subsection E);
[j]
An operation and maintenance plan (see also
Subsection E).
[k]
Proof of liability insurance consistent with industry
standards for the proposed facility;
[2]
Description of financial surety that satisfies Subsection I;
and
[3]
A public outreach plan, including a project development
time line, which indicates how the project proponent will
inform and educate abutters and the community.
[4]
All plans shall be prepared, stamped and signed by a
professional engineer licensed to practice in Massachusetts.
(b)
Site control, operation and maintenance plan, and utility notification.
The project proponent shall submit documentation of actual or
prospective access and control of the project site sufficient to allow
(1)
E.
§ 300-10.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-10.10
1:339
for construction and operation of the proposed solar photovoltaic
installation.
The project proponent shall submit a plan for the operation and
maintenance of the ground-mounted solar PV installation, which
shall include measures for maintaining safe access to the
installation, stormwater controls, as well as general procedures for
operational maintenance of the installation.
(2)
No ground-mounted solar PV installation shall be constructed until
evidence has been given to the Planning Board that the utility
company that operates the electrical distribution system grid
where the installation is to be located has been informed by the
owner or operator of the proposed solar PV installation of his/her
intent to install an interconnected customer-owned generator. Offgrid
systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
(3)
Dimension and density requirements.
Setback and height requirements. The setbacks for groundmounted
solar photovoltaic installations, including appurtenant
structures and parking areas, shall be at least 50 feet from any
property boundary. The setback areas shall not be included in
the calculation of the size of the ground-mounted solar voltaic
installation. The height of a ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installation or any appurtenant structure shall comply with the
requirements of § 300-6.0 of the West Springfield Zoning
Ordinance.
(1)
Lot coverage. The lot coverage requirements of Table 6-2 of the
West Springfield Zoning Ordinance do not apply to groundmounted
solar PV installations.103
(2)
Appurtenant structures. All appurtenant structures to groundmounted
solar PV installations shall comply with the requirements
of § 300-6.3E, Accessory structures, of the West Springfield Zoning
Ordinance All such appurtenant structures include but are not
limited to equipment shelters, storage facilities, transformers, and
substations.
(3)
F.
Design, safety, and environmental standards.
Lighting. Lighting of solar PV installations shall be consistent with
local, state and federal law. Lighting of other parts of the
installation, such as appurtenant structures, shall be limited to
that required for safety and operational purposes, and shall be
reasonably shielded from abutting properties. Where feasible,
lighting of the solar PV installation shall be directed downward and
shall incorporate full-cut-off fixtures to reduce light pollution.
(1)
G.
103. Editor's Note: Table 6-2 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 300-10.10 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-10.10
1:340
Signage. Any signs on ground-mounted solar PV installations and
property shall comply with § 300-9.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. A
sign shall be required to identify the owner and provide a twentyfour-
hour emergency contact phone number. Solar PV installations
shall not be used for displaying any advertising except for
reasonable identification of the manufacturer or operator of the
solar photovoltaic installation.
(2)
Utility connections. Reasonable efforts, as determined during the
site plan review, shall be made to place all utility connections from
the solar PV installation underground, depending on appropriate
soil conditions, shape, and topography of the site and any
requirements of the utility provider. Electrical transformers for
utility interconnections may be above ground if required by the
utility provider.
(3)
Landscaping. All land associated with the ground-mounted solar
PV installation shall be covered and grown in natural vegetation.
All ground surface areas beneath solar arrays and setback areas
shall be pervious to maximize on-site infiltration of stormwater.
Impervious paving of areas beneath solar arrays is prohibited. To
the greatest extent possible, a diversity of plant species shall be
used, with preference given to species that are native to New
England. Use of plants identified by the most recent copy of the
Massachusetts Prohibited Plant List maintained by the
Massachusetts Department of Agricultural Resources is prohibited.
Herbicides shall be applied only by properly licensed personnel in
conformance with all applicable state regulations.
(4)
Parking and access. Reasonable on-site parking is required for
vehicles that will service the installation only. The requirements
of § 300-9.0, Off-street parking and loading standards, of the West
Springfield Zoning Ordinance do not apply.
(5)
Visual impact mitigation. The plan for a ground-mounted solar PV
installation shall be designed to maximize the preservation of onsite
and abutting natural and developed features. In undeveloped
areas, existing vegetation shall be retained to the greatest extent
possible, especially where such vegetation provides a benefit to
the natural environment. In developed areas, the design of the
installation shall consider and incorporate human-designed
landscape features to the greatest extent, including contextual
landscaping and landscape amenities that complement the physical
features of the site and abutting properties. Whenever reasonable,
structures should be screened from view by vegetation and/or
joined or clustered to avoid adverse visual impacts and be
architecturally compatible with each other. Vegetation shall be of
varieties native to New England. Vegetative screening shall reach a
mature form to effectively screen the installation within five years
of installation. The mature height of the vegetated screening shall
be such that the installation's structures are not apparent to a
(6)
§ 300-10.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-10.10
1:341
person upon any public road and viewing the installation from a
height of 10 feet. Planting of the vegetative screening shall be
completed prior to final approval of the solar PV installation by the
Building Inspector.
Emergency services. The owner or operator of the ground-mounted
solar PV installation shall provide a copy of the project summary,
electrical schematic, and site plan to the West Springfield Fire
Department. Upon request, the owner or operator shall cooperate
with local emergency services in developing an emergency
response plan. All means of disconnecting the solar PV installation
shall be clearly marked. The owner or operator shall identify and
provide contact information for a person who is responsible for
responding to all public and emergency inquiries related to the
installation. This information shall be updated as needed.
(7)
Land clearing, soil erosion and habitat impacts. Clearing of natural
vegetation shall be limited to that which is necessary for the
construction, operation and maintenance of the ground-mounted
solar PV installation or otherwise prescribed by applicable laws,
regulations, and ordinances. Sufficient vegetation shall be
maintained to minimize soil erosion. Ground-mounted solar PV
installations shall be installed only upon water-permeable surfaces
as approved during site plan review.
(8)
Preservation of trees. Ground-mounted solar PV installations shall
be designed and constructed to preserve and maintain the health
and root systems of significant trees on public property and within
the jurisdiction of the Tree Warden that are age 75 years and older
or at least three feet in diameter at a height of four feet above the
ground. Any removal of trees on public property shall be consistent
with MGL Chapter 87, Shade Trees, MGL c. 40, § 15C, Scenic road
designations, and all other applicable regulations.
(9)
Wildlife corridors. Ground-mounted solar PV installations shall be
designed and constructed to minimize the impacts on wildlife
corridors.
(10)
Sound levels. Sound levels under normal operating conditions of
the ground-mounted solar PV installation measured at the
boundary of the lot on which the installation is sited shall not be
more than 10 decibels greater than would otherwise exist in the
absence of the facility.
(11)
Hazardous materials. Hazardous materials that are stored, used,
or generated on site shall not exceed the amount for a very small
quantity generator of hazardous waste as defined by
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection
regulations 310 CMR 30.000 and shall meet all applicable
requirements, including storage of hazardous materials in a
building with an impervious floor that is not adjacent to any floor
(12)
§ 300-10.10 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-10.10
1:342
drains to prevent discharge to the outside environment. If
hazardous materials are utilized within the solar electric
equipment, then impervious containment areas capable of
controlling any release to the environment and to prevent potential
contamination of groundwater are required.
Independent engineer. Upon request of the Planning Board, the
proponent shall pay for a licensed third-party independent
engineer selected by the permitting authority to review submittals
on its behalf.
(13)
Monitoring and maintenance.
Solar photovoltaic installation conditions. The owner or operator of
the ground-mounted solar PV installation shall maintain the facility
in good condition. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to,
painting, structural repairs, landscaping and integrity of security
measures. Site access shall be maintained to a level acceptable to
the West Springfield Fire Chief, Building Inspector and Electrical
Inspector. The owner or operator shall be responsible for the cost
of maintaining the installation and any access road(s), unless
accepted as a public way.
(1)
Modifications. All material modifications to a solar PV installation
made after issuance of the required building permit shall require
approval by the Planning Board.
(2)
Removal requirements and abandonment.
Abandonment. Absent notice of a proposed date of
decommissioning or written notice of extenuating
circumstances, the solar PV installation shall be considered
abandoned when it fails to operate for more than one year
without a written waiver of consent of the Planning Board. If
the owner or operator of the large-scale ground-mounted solar
PV installation fails to remove the installation in accordance
with the requirements of this section within 150 days of
abandonment or the proposed date of decommissioning, the
Town or its agents may enter the property and physically
remove the installation, the full cost of which shall be the
responsibility of the owner or operator.
(a)
Removal requirements. Any ground-mounted solar PV
installation which has reached the end of its useful life or
has been abandoned consistent with Subsection H(3)(a) of
this ordinance shall be removed. The owner or operator shall
physically remove the installation no more than 150 days after
the date of discontinued operations. The owner or operator
shall notify the Planning Board by certified mail of the
proposed date of discontinued operations and plans for
removal. Decommissioning shall consist of:
(b)
(3)
H.
§ 300-10.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-10.10
1:343
Physical removal of all ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installations, structures, equipment, security barriers and
electrical lines from the site;
[1]
Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance
with local, state, and federal waste disposal regulations;
[2]
Stabilization and revegetation of the site as necessary
to minimize erosion. The Planning Board may allow the
owner or operator to leave landscaping or designated
below-grade foundations to minimize erosion and
disruption to vegetation.
[3]
Financial surety. The project proponent of ground-mounted solar PV
projects shall provide a form of surety, either through escrow account,
bond or otherwise, to cover the cost of removal in the event the Town
becomes responsible for removing the installation and remediating the
landscape. The amount and form of the surety shall be determined
to be reasonable by the permitting authority, but in no event should
exceed more than 125% of the cost of removal and compliance with the
additional requirements set forth herein, as determined by the project
proponent. Such surety is not required for municipally owned or stateowned
facilities. The project proponent shall submit a fully inclusive
estimate of the costs associated with removal prepared by a qualified
engineer. The amount shall include a mechanism for calculating
increased removal costs due to inflation.
I.
§ 300-10.10 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-10.10
1:344
ARTICLE XI
Wireless Communications Facilities
§ 300-11.1. Purpose; overlay districts.
§ 300-11.2. Applicability; special permit granting authority.
§ 300-11.3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
The purposes of these regulations are to minimize adverse impacts of
wireless communications facilities, satellite dishes and antennas to the
community's neighborhoods and traveled ways; minimize the overall
number and/or height of such facilities to provide mandated coverage
pursuant to the Telecommunications Act; and promote the integration
of such facilities with existing buildings and the shared use of existing
facilities to reduce the need for new individual towers to maintain
existing neighborhood and community characteristics.
A.
To further these purposes, two overlay districts are established as
follows:
Commercial Communications Overlay District to provide
opportunity for wireless communications facilities of a height and
design consistent with neighboring multi-storied and densely
developed commercial uses and to provide collocation
opportunities; and
(1)
Residential Communications Overlay District to provide
opportunity for wireless communications facilities of a height and
design consistent with existing neighborhood structures and
recreational and municipal uses.
(2)
B.
No wireless communications facility shall be erected or installed except
in compliance with the provisions of this article of the ordinance.
A.
The requirements of this article shall apply to all wireless
communications facilities, except where federal or state law or
regulations exempt certain users or uses from all or portions of the
provisions of this article.
B.
For the purposes of administering the permitting process for this article
of the zoning ordinance, the Planning Board shall be the special permit
granting authority (SPGA).
C.
For the purpose of administering this article of the zoning ordinance,
wireless communications facilities shall be considered accessory in use
and structure to any principal use or structure located on the subject
parcel.
D.
§ 300-11.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-11.3
1:345
ANTENNA — A device by which electromagnetic waves are sent or received
(whether a dish, rod, mast, pole, set of wires, plate, panel, line, cable or
other arrangement serving such purpose).
CAMOUFLAGED — A wireless communications facility or its components
are camouflaged when they are:
CONCEALED — A wireless communications facility or components are
concealed when they are within parts of a building or other structure that
was built for another purpose and that is (are) not visible from outside
the structure. A change of building materials may be required to enable
antennas to function while concealed. For example, a church spire or belfry
may require replacement of wood or shingled materials with radiotransparent
synthetics. As long as the change of materials does not
substantially alter the shape, look, and function of the existing structure, it
may be considered a concealment rather than camouflage.
EQUIPMENT SHELTER/CABINET —
MOUNT —
Not concealed within an existing or proposed structure built for
another purpose, and
A.
Disguised, painted, textured or colored to blend in to surrounding
neighborhood structures or hidden by a purpose-built decoy that is
made part of an existing or proposed structure, or made to resemble
an architectural feature of the building or structure upon which it is
placed.
B.
EQUIPMENT SHELTER — An enclosed structure built to contain
wireless transmission/reception equipment and related equipment
supporting the operation of a wireless communications facility. An
equipment shelter is sufficiently large for an individual to enter and be
sheltered from the weather while working on the equipment.
A.
EQUIPMENT CABINET — An enclosure that contains wireless
transmission/reception and related equipment supporting the operation
of a wireless communications facility from the exterior of which an
individual would perform maintenance or repair.
B.
The structure or surface upon which antennas are mounted and are
defined as follows:
Side-mount: A structure attached to the side or other non-roof
portion of a building to which antennas are mounted.
(1)
Roof-mount: A structure attached to a building roof to which
antennas are mounted.
(2)
Structure-mount: A structure, frame, bracket, or the like to which
antennas are attached and which is attached to an existing
structure other than a building, such as a water tank, electrical
transmission tower or silo.
(3)
A.
§ 300-11.3 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-11.3
1:346
TIER — The arrangement of preferred mounting applications for wireless
communications facilities. A Tier I mount is most preferred; a Tier IV is
least preferred. Tier I is defined as a side-mount, Tier II is defined as a roofmount,
Tier III is defined as a structure-mount, and Tier IV is defined as a
ground-mount.
§ 300-11.4. District overlay regulations.
Ground-mount: A structure anchored into the ground to which
antennas are mounted. Ground-mounts include purpose-built
structures such as poles, bases, posts, monopoles, and towers.
(4)
In the absence of a separate structural component to hold an antenna,
the antenna shall be considered to be its own ground-, roof-, sideor
structure-mount. When considering the dimensions of the mount,
the dimensions of the attached antennas and related fixtures shall be
included.
B.
Applicants seeking approval for the construction of a new groundmount
shall demonstrate that they have investigated configurations
lower in numerical rank in the following tier ranking than the one for
which they are applying and make a showing that demonstrates that
the alternatives are singly or in aggregate insufficient to provide the
necessary coverage, are more visible, are not available or feasible for
aesthetic or have/has more of a detrimental impact on surrounding
neighborhoods and the general community than use of the proposed
location. In considering alternatives, the SPGA need not assess only
single-site options. It may assess the combination of two or more
locations to satisfy the needs of the applicant in an area.
Residential
Communications
Overlay District
Commercial
Communications
Overlay District
Tier I Side-
Mount
SPR (see Note 1) SPR
Tier II Roof-
Mount
SPR (see Note 1) SPR
Tier III
Structure-
Mount
SPR SPR
Tier IV
Ground-Mount
SPB (see Note 2) SPB
NOTES:
Note 1: Side- or roof-mounts within the Residential Communications
Overlay District shall utilize either concealment or camouflage
techniques.
A.
§ 300-11.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-11.4
1:347
§ 300-11.5. General standards.
The following guidelines shall be used when preparing plans for the siting
and construction of all wireless communications facilities:
Note 2: All new ground-mounts within the Residential Communications
Overlay District shall be either: a) camouflaged and set back a
minimum of 200 feet from any existing single-, two- or three-family
residential structure not on the subject parcel; or b) designed utilizing
conventional exposed structural and mounting components and set
back a minimum of 550 feet from any existing single-, two- or threefamily
residential structure not on the subject parcel.
New ground-mount facilities shall only be considered after a finding by
the SPGA that one or more existing buildings, structures or groundmount
facilities cannot provide equivalent service for the service
provider(s) than that of the proposed facility.
B.
Collocation of new antennas on existing ground-mount facilities shall be
allowed through the site plan review process, provided that the height
of the ground-mount is not increased and the proposed equipment
shelter/cabinet complies with the provisions of this article. A collocation
that results in an increase in the height of the ground-mount shall
require the issuance of a special permit.
C.
Side- and roof-mounts, including antennas, and roof-mounted
equipment shelters shall not project more than 20 feet above the roof in
the vicinity of their point of attachment. Side-mounts shall not extend
more than two feet horizontally from the mounting surface to which
they are attached, unless camouflaged within a purpose-built decoy
that integrates with the architecture of the building, in which case the
dimension shall be established by the permit granting authority in the
context of the case. Roof-mounts shall not project past the plane of
the wall or other vertical surfaces that form a perimeter around the
area of the mount. Side- and roof-mounts may locate on a building
that is legally nonconforming with respect to height, provided that
the mounts, with antennas, do not project above the existing building
height, unless camouflaged, in which case the mount or antennas may
exceed the nonconforming building height by up to 20 feet without the
need for a variance or a finding under the provisions of § 300-4.2A of
this ordinance, provided that the mount and antenna are compatible
with the existing structure and surrounding neighborhood.
A.
Structure-mounts, including those to be installed on existing structures
that are legally nonconforming with respect to height, may extend up
to 20 feet in height above the height of the existing structure by the
installation of antennas and mounts without the need for a variance or
a finding under the provisions of § 300-4.2A of this ordinance, provided
that the extension is compatible with the structure and the surrounding
neighborhood.
B.
§ 300-11.4 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-11.5
1:348
§ 300-11.6. Design standards.
The following standards shall be incorporated into the design of a proposed
wireless communications facility in order to mitigate the visual impact of
the proposed facility:
All ground-mount facilities shall be designed to be constructed at the
minimum height necessary to achieve an RF signal strength in
compliance with the communication provider's respective FCC license,
or if no RF signal strength is set forth in the license, then the RF
signal strength stated in FCC Form 601 or its replacement form on file
with the FCC. In no case shall the height of a ground-mount facility
exceed 190 feet as measured from the original ground level at the base
of the mount. The SPGA shall make a finding regarding the minimum
height necessary to comply with this provision. In order to facilitate
collocation, the SPGA may require that a new ground-mount be
constructed in a manner structurally sufficient to accommodate an
increase in its height. The setback of a ground-mount from the property
line of the lot on which it is located shall be at least equal to 25% of the
height of the mount.
C.
The permitting and construction of a ground-mount for speculation
purposes is prohibited. All special permit and building permit
applications for the construction of a ground-mount shall include an
FCC-licensed provider of wireless service as an applicant or coapplicant
for the site. The licensed FCC provider shall file with its
application a copy of its license and its current FCC Form 601, or its
replacement form.
D.
Residential communication links shall be located in the side or rear
yard or attached to the principal structure unless approved by the
Planning Board through the site plan review process. All ground-mount
residential communication links shall be screened from view from
abutting streets or properties through the use of vegetative buffers.
Building-mounted residential communication links shall not exceed six
feet in height above the roofline of the structure, nor shall any buildingmounted
satellite reception dish be greater than three feet in diameter.
E.
In accordance with MGL c. 40A, § 3 and 47 CFR 97.15, the height of
antennas associated with federally licensed amateur radio operators
shall not exceed the minimum height necessary to allow for reasonable
communications.
F.
When a wireless facility's antennas and mount extend above the height
of a building or structure on which they are mounted, every reasonable
effort shall be made to conceal them within or behind existing or
custom-made architectural features to limit visibility from public ways
and abutting property. Absent effective concealment alternatives,
antennas, cables, and mounts should be placed to minimize their
visibility and their impact on the building's or structure's silhouette.
The use of coloration, purpose-built decoys and other methods of
A.
§ 300-11.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-11.6
1:349
camouflaging the antennas shall be applied as suited to the
circumstances.
Wireless communications facilities that are side-mounted on buildings
shall be designed to be in harmony with the existing structure. Absent
effective concealment alternatives, antennas, cables, and mounts
should be painted or constructed of materials to match the color of
the building material directly behind them in order to minimize their
visibility and their obtrusiveness in the context of their installation.
B.
If a wireless communications facility is not suitably screened from
public view by existing buildings, structures or vegetation, the permit
granting authority may require the installation of additional screening
that may include a combination of fencing and deciduous and evergreen
landscaping. The permit granting authority shall determine the types of
trees and plant materials and depth of the needed buffer based on site
conditions. All landscaping and screening shall be maintained. Trees or
shrubs which die shall be replaced.
C.
Where a wireless facility cannot be sufficiently screened from view
as provided above, the permit granting authority may require that
such facility must be designed to blend or be compatible with the
natural and built features of the surroundings. Antenna mount designs
may include, but are not limited to, flagpole, lookout tower, or faux
tree designs. Other portions of wireless facilities, such as equipment
cabinets, shelters, cables and utility connections, may require different
degrees and types of mitigation than the associated mount, including
but not limited to installation inside existing structures, installations of
site-compatible structures with surrounding neighborhood structures.
D.
To the extent that any wireless facility extends above the height of
the structures and vegetation immediately surrounding it, the permit
granting authority may require that it be colored in a manner that
best blends with the visual background from the most critical points of
view, unless the camouflage or concealment method requires different
coloration (such as a white flagpole).
E.
There shall be no signs, except for those necessary to control access,
assure safety, provide emergency contact information or otherwise
required by law. No sign shall be greater than eight square feet in size
and six feet in elevation.
F.
Night lighting of wireless communications facilities shall be prohibited
unless said lighting prohibition results in a prohibition of service under
the Telecommunications Act.
G.
If required by the Planning Board, there shall be a minimum of one
parking space for each wireless communications facility to be used in
connection with the maintenance of the site, and it shall not be used for
the permanent storage of vehicles or other equipment.
H.
§ 300-11.6 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-11.7
1:350
§ 300-11.7. Application procedures.
General.
Prior to the submission of an application under the provisions of
this section, the applicant is strongly encouraged to meet with
the Planning Board at a public meeting to discuss the proposed
wireless communications facility in general terms and to clarify the
filing and permitting requirements.
(1)
Applications for wireless communications facilities that are subject
to the site plan review process shall include the documents
required in § 300-13.4 of this ordinance, and, in addition, photo
simulations of the proposed facility that detail location, color and
visibility from abutting properties and streets.
(2)
In addition to the application criteria outlined in the special permit
section of this ordinance and the related rules and regulations
as adopted by the Planning Board, the following information shall
be included with a special permit application for a ground-mount
wireless communications facility:
(3)
A.
Location requirements:
A map indicating the location and ownership of existing wireless
communications facilities in the Town and outside the Town within
a one-mile radius of the proposed site.
(1)
Tree cover on the subject property and adjacent properties within
300 feet, by dominant species and average height, as measured by
or available from a verifiable source.
(2)
Proposed location and elevations of antenna, mount and equipment
shelter(s).
(3)
Proposed security barrier, if any, indicating type and extent as well
as point of controlled entry.
(4)
Representations, dimensioned and to scale, of the proposed mount,
antennas, equipment shelters, cable runs and parking areas.
(5)
Lines representing the sight line showing viewpoint (point from
which view is taken) and visible point (point being viewed) detailed
as follows:
A sight line representation shall be drawn from any public
road within 300 feet and the closest facade of each residential
building (viewpoint) within 300 feet to the highest point
(visible point) of the wireless facility. Each sight line shall be
depicted in profile, drawn at one inch equals 40 feet. The
profiles shall show all intervening trees and buildings. In the
event there is only one residential building within 300 feet,
(a)
(6)
B.
§ 300-11.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-11.7
1:351
there shall be at least two sight lines from the closest habitable
structures or public roads, if any.
Existing ("before") condition photographs. Each sight line shall
be illustrated by one four-inch by six-inch or larger color
photograph of what can currently be seen from any public road
within 300 feet of the site.
(b)
Proposed ("after") condition photographs. Each of the existing
condition photographs shall have the proposed wireless facility
superimposed on it to show what will be seen from public roads
if the proposed facility is built.
(c)
A visibility map prepared by a qualified professional indicating
areas in West Springfield from which all or portions of the
facility will be visible, with separate indications of locations
where visibility of the facility through defoliated vegetation
will be possible. The map may be created after the application
is filed, in conjunction with a crane or balloon test.
(d)
Siting elevations, or views at-grade from the north, south, east and
west for a one-hundred-foot radius around the proposed wireless
communications facility plus from all existing public and private
roads that abut the subject property. Elevations shall be at either
one-quarter inch equals one foot or one-eighth inch equals one foot
scale and show the following:
Antennas, mounts and equipment shelter(s), with elevation
dimensions of each.
(a)
Existing trees and shrubs at current height and proposed trees
and shrubs at proposed height at time of installation, with
approximate elevations dimensioned.
(b)
(7)
Design requirements:
If requested by the permit granting authority, equipment brochures
such as manufacturer's specifications or trade journal reprints for
the proposed wireless facility shall be provided for the antennas,
mounts, equipment shelters, cables as well as cable runs, and
security barrier, if any.
(1)
A description of the materials of the proposed wireless facility
specified by generic type and specific treatment (e.g., anodized
aluminum, stained wood, painted fiberglass, etc.). These shall be
provided for the antennas, mounts, equipment shelters, cables as
well as cable runs, and security barrier, if any.
(2)
If requested by the permit granting authority, colors of the
proposed wireless facility represented by a color board showing
actual colors proposed. Colors shall be provided for the antennas,
(3)
C.
§ 300-11.7 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-11.7
1:352
§ 300-11.8. (Reserved)
§ 300-11.9. Reconstruction of existing wireless communications
facilities.
mounts, equipment shelters, cables as well as cable runs, and
security barrier, if any.
Dimensions of the personal wireless communications facility
specified for all three directions: height, width and breadth. These
shall be provided for the antennas, mounts, equipment shelters and
security barrier, if any.
(4)
Appearance shown by at least two photographic superimpositions
of the wireless communications facility within the subject property.
The photographic superimpositions shall be provided for the
antennas, mounts, equipment shelters, cables as well as cable runs
for the total height, width and breadth. Additional photographs
with superimpositions depicting the visibility of the proposed
facility from any sites selected by the SPGA shall be submitted by
the applicant during the hearing process as directed by the SPGA.
(5)
Landscape plan including existing trees and shrubs and those
proposed to be added, identified by size of specimen at installation
and species.
(6)
Within 21 days of filing an application for a ground-mount facility,
the applicant shall conduct a balloon or crane test at the proposed
site to illustrate the height of the proposed facility. This
requirement may be waived by the SPGA where the SPGA deems it
to be inappropriate. The date, time and location of such test shall
be advertised in the West Springfield Record a minimum of five
days prior to the test. Notice of said test shall also be sent to all
parties in interest as defined by MGL c. 40A, § 11.
(7)
If lighting of the site is proposed, the applicant shall submit a
lighting plan indicating foot-candle levels at grade, within the
property to be developed and 25 feet beyond the property lines.
The printout shall indicate the locations and types of luminaires
proposed.
(8)
The permit granting authority may waive any filing requirement it
deems to be unnecessary to the review of the particular application.
D.
In order to properly review and evaluate an application submitted to
the Planning Board under the provisions of this section of the Zoning
Ordinance, at the expense of the applicant, the Planning Board may
hire or contract with the services of engineers or other persons with
required technical expertise. Such hiring shall be done in consultation
with the applicant and for reasonable fees.
E.
§ 300-11.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-11.9
1:353
§ 300-11.10. Administration.
Reconstruction of a preexisting nonconforming communications facility
within the Commercial Communications Overlay District shall be
allowed through the site plan review process, provided that the
reconstruction does not result in either an increase in height of the
facility or a material change in the character of the facility by way of its
bulk, color or design.
A.
Reconstruction of a preexisting nonconforming communications facility
within the Residential Communications Overlay District shall be
allowed by special permit issued by the Planning Board, provided that
the reconstruction does not result in either an increase in height of the
facility or a material change in the character of the facility by way of its
bulk, color, design or area of coverage.
B.
Upon request by the Building Commissioner, antennas and mounts
associated with the wireless communications facilities shall be removed
by the wireless facility operator within six months of cessation of use.
A.
Upon request by the Building Commissioner, the owner of a wireless
communications facility shall file a written statement that the operation
of an existing facility complies with, or is exempt from, applicable
regulations administered by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA),
Federal Communications Commission (FCC), Massachusetts
Aeronautics Commission and the Massachusetts Department of Public
Health. The owner may also periodically be required by the Building
Commissioner to demonstrate compliance with applicable structural
standards.
B.
Prior to the issuance of a building permit for the construction of a
ground-mount facility, the SPGA shall require an applicant to maintain
during the existence of the facility a bond sufficient in the opinion of the
SPGA to pay for the costs for the removal of a ground-mount facility in
the event the Town must remove the facility after cessation of use.
C.
§ 300-11.9 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-11.10
1:354
ARTICLE XII
Special Permits
§ 300-12.0. Purpose.
Special permits are intended to provide detailed review of certain uses and
structures which may have substantial impact upon traffic, utility systems,
and the character of West Springfield.
§ 300-12.1. Authority.
The Planning Board and the Board of Appeals are hereby declared special
permit granting authorities, and are authorized to hear and decide upon
applications for special permits in accordance with MGL Chapter 40A and
the provisions of this ordinance. The special permit granting authority
(hereinafter "SPGA") shall hear and approve, approve with modifications
or conditions, or disapprove all applications for special permits. No special
permit shall be authorized unless specific provision for such special permit
is made in this ordinance.
§ 300-12.2. Definitions.
The following words or terms shall have the following meanings within the
context of this article of the ordinance:
COMMENCED — A point in time where the physical construction of a
building has begun. Site work related to grading shall not be included in
this definition.
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — The point in time at which appraised
value of completed structural improvements equals or exceeds 75% of the
market value of the completed structure.
§ 300-12.3. Specific findings required for special permit.
The SPGA may grant a special permit authorized by this ordinance if the
SPGA finds that the following standards have been reasonably fulfilled. In
making its decision, the SPGA must make written findings on the following
mandatory standards requiring that a proposed use, building and/or
structure will:
Be compatible in type and scale with adjacent land uses and with the
character of the neighborhood in which it is located.
A.
B. Be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this ordinance.
C. Constitute no significant hazard to abutters, pedestrians, or vehicles.
Constitute no nuisance by reason of excessive air, water or noise
pollution.
D.
E. Be in conformity with all applicable Zoning Ordinance requirements.
§ 300-12.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-12.4
1:355
§ 300-12.4. Special permit criteria.
The SPGA may include in its written findings, where applicable,
consideration of any or all of the following criteria to be satisfied by the
proposed use, building or structure:
§ 300-12.5. (Reserved)
§ 300-12.6. Conditions attached to special permits.
Access to the site from existing or proposed roads, and to proposed
structures thereon, with particular reference to pedestrian and
automotive safety and convenience, traffic flow and control, and access
in case of fire or emergency.
A.
The adequacy and configuration of off-street parking and loading areas,
including their nuisance and economic impact on adjoining properties
and on properties generally in the district.
B.
C. The availability and capacity of public services, facilities, and utilities.
D. Visual and noise screening and buffering.
Harmony of signs and exterior lighting, if any, with surrounding
properties.
E.
F. Required yards and open space.
The amount and type of wastes to be generated by the proposed use
and the adequacy of proposed disposal systems.
G.
The impact of the proposed use on the land, surface water and
subsurface water, and their ability to sustain such use without
degradation.
H.
The location of the site and proposed buildings or structures thereon,
with respect to floodplains and floodways of rivers or streams.
I.
The absence of any other characteristic of the proposed use that will
be hazardous, harmful, offensive or will otherwise adversely affect the
environment or the value of the neighborhood or the community.
J.
Provisions for energy conservation, for the use of renewable energy
sources, and for protection of solar access.
K.
Upon consideration of the standards and/or criteria listed in § 300-12.3
or 300-12.4, the SPGA may attach such conditions or modifications
to a special permit, in addition to those required elsewhere in this
ordinance, that it finds necessary to further the purposes of this
ordinance.
A.
Violation of any of these conditions or modifications shall be a violation
of this ordinance. Such conditions or modifications may include, but are
not limited to, specifications for:
B.
§ 300-12.4 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-12.6
1:356
§ 300-12.7. Repetitive petitions.
No petition or application for a special permit under this article which has
been unfavorably acted upon by the SPGA shall be considered on its merits
by said SPGA within two years after the date of such unfavorable action,
except with the consent of all members of the special permit granting
authority.
§ 300-12.8. Revocation of special permits.
§ 300-12.9. Administration.
(1) Increased setbacks and yards;
(2) Increased landscaping, screens or buffers;
(3) Operational controls;
(4) Sureties, deed restrictions, restrictive covenants;
(5) Locations of parking and signs; or
Any other conditions necessary to fulfill the purposes of this
ordinance.
(6)
A special permit may be revoked or altered by the SPGA if it is
determined, after a public hearing, that information was intentionally
misrepresented in order to obtain a special permit or that there has
been an abuse and/or misuse of the special permit. Application for
revocation or alteration of the special permit may be made by the
Building Inspector, a party in interest or the SPGA. Such applications
shall be filed with the Town Clerk. A public hearing shall be held by the
SPGA within 65 days of the filing of the application with the Town Clerk.
A.
The SPGA shall act within 90 days following the close of the public
hearing. Failure by the SPGA to take final action within 90 days of the
public hearing shall be deemed to be a denial of said application for
revocation or alteration of the special permit. Revocation or alteration
of special permits shall require a four-fifths vote by the Planning Board,
a two-thirds vote of the full Council or a unanimous vote of the members
of the Board of Appeals.
B.
The SPGA shall adopt and from time to time amend rules relative to the
issuance of such permits, and shall file a copy of said rules in the office
of the Town Clerk. Such rules shall prescribe a size, form, contents,
style and number of copies of plans and specifications, filing fees and
the procedure for submission and approval of such permits.
A.
The Planning Board, acting as a SPGA, is authorized to appoint one
associate member for the purpose of acting on a special permit
application. In the case of absence, inability to act, or conflict of interest
on the part of any member of the Planning Board or in the event of
B.
§ 300-12.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-12.9
1:357
a vacancy, the Planning Board Chairman shall designate the associate
member to sit on the Board for the purpose of acting on a special
permit. Said associate member shall be appointed in the month of May
upon a four-fifths affirmative vote of the Planning Board and serve a
one-year term. There shall be no limit to the number of one-year terms
an associate member may serve.
A special permit secured under the provisions of this ordinance by
vote of the SPGA shall expire if the work or change involved is not
commenced within one year of the date on which the special permit
is authorized, or if the work or change is not substantially completed
within two years. Upon written application by the holder of the special
permit prior to its expiration, the SPGA may extend the approval of the
special permit for a period not to exceed six months.
C.
§ 300-12.9 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-12.9
1:358
ARTICLE XIII
Site Plan Review104
§ 300-13.0. Purpose.
The purpose of site plan review is to further the purpose of this ordinance by
providing for the review of development plans for uses and structures which
may have significant impacts on the health, safety, welfare, community
values, traffic, local economy, environmental quality or municipal and public
services and utilities.
§ 300-13.1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EXTERIOR ALTERATION — An increase in volume or a change in the
footprint of a structure.
§ 300-13.2. Projects requiring site plan review.
With the exception of land or structures used for agricultural or religious
purposes or for educational purposes on land owned or leased by the
commonwealth or any of its agencies, subdivisions or bodies politic or by a
religious sect or denomination, or by a nonprofit educational corporation,
no building permit or DPW curb cut permit shall be issued for any of the
following uses: 1) the construction, exterior alteration or change in use
of any commercial, industrial structure; or 2) the construction, exterior
alteration or change in use of any residential structure, excluding singleand
two-family structures; or 3) the construction, exterior alteration or
change in use of any other use specified in the Use Table105 which is
not included in 1) or 2) above; or 4) enlargement of parking areas or
alterations to curb cuts for any of the uses specified in 1) through 3) above,
inclusive; unless a site plan has been endorsed by the Planning Board, after
consultation with other boards and departments, including but not limited
to the following: Building Inspector, Board of Health, Department of Public
Works, Conservation Commission, Fire Department, and Police Department.
The Planning Board may waive any and all requirements of site plan review
for exterior alterations of less than 25% of the ground floor area of an
existing structure.
§ 300-13.3. Application; fees.
Each application for site plan review shall be submitted to the Planning
Board by the current owner of record accompanied by 10 copies of the
site plan.
A.
104. Editor's Note: See also the site plan administration provisions in Art. XIV of this chapter.
105. Editor's Note: The Table of Use Regulations is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 300-13.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-13.3
1:359
§ 300-13.4. Required site plan contents.
The Planning Board shall be authorized to adopt a schedule of fees to
carry out the duties of this article and Article XIV of the ordinance.
Each application shall include a fee in accordance with the fee schedule
to cover costs associated with the public hearing and review of the site
plans.
B.
All site plans, except those for three- and four-family structures, shall
be prepared by a registered architect, landscape architect, or
professional engineer. Site plans related to three- and four-family
structures shall be prepared in accordance with the State Building
Code. All site plans shall be on standard 24-inch by 36-inch sheets and
shall be at a sufficient scale, but no greater than one inch equals 40
feet, to show:
Name of project, locus map, property boundaries, date and scale of
plan, abutters' names, zoning districts and size of property;
(1)
Existing and proposed rights-of-way and easements within and
abutting the property;
(2)
Existing and proposed structures, including dimensions and
elevations;
(3)
Location of existing and proposed utilities, including but not limited
to water, sewer, storm drainage, gas, electric, cable TV and electric
lines;
(4)
Existing and proposed topography, including location and volume
of cuts and fills greater than 100 cubic yards;
(5)
Location of wetland resource areas subject to MGL c. 131, § 40
(Wetlands Protection Act);
(6)
Existing and proposed landscaping, including public shade trees as
defined in MGL Chapter 87, Shade Trees;
(7)
(8) Soil erosion prevention;
(9) Existing and proposed lighting;
(10)Existing and proposed signage;
(11)Existing and proposed parking;
(12)Location of loading/service areas, waste disposal area;
Appurtenant structures, including but not limited to electrical
transformers, pumping stations, and air-conditioning units.
(13)
A.
The Planning Board may waive any information requirement it judges
to be unnecessary to the review of a particular plan.
B.
§ 300-13.3 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-13.5
1:360
§ 300-13.5. Procedures.
§ 300-13.6. Site plan review criteria.
The Planning Board shall distribute a copy of the application to all
relevant Town boards, departments and commissions within two
working days of receipt of the complete application.
A.
Relevant Town entities shall review the application and must submit
their written comments and recommendations to the Planning Board
within 10 days of receipt of the application. Failure to respond within
10 days shall be deemed approval of the application as submitted.
B.
The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing upon submission of a
completed application. Notice of public hearing shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation not less than five days prior to the day
of the hearing. Notice shall also be filed with the Clerk's office, posted
in the Municipal Office Building and mailed to all abutters as defined in
MGL c. 40A.
C.
The Board shall issue a decision within 30 days of submission of the
complete application. Copies of the decisions shall be sent to the
applicant and filed with the Town Clerk's and Building Inspector's
offices.
D.
If the proposed development requires a public hearing as required
under MGL c. 131, § 40 or MGL Chapter 87, the required information
must be submitted to the appropriate reviewing agency at the time of
application submission as required by this article and Article XIV in
order to facilitate concurrent review.
E.
The following criteria shall be considered by the aforementioned boards
in the review and evaluation of a site plan, consistent with a reasonable
use of the site for the purposes permitted or permissible by the
regulations of the district in which it is located:
The development shall be integrated into the existing terrain and
surrounding landscape, and shall be designed to protect abutting
properties and community amenities. Building sites shall, to the
extent feasible:
Minimize use of wetlands, slopes greater than 15%, floodplains
and hilltops;
(a)
Minimize obstruction of scenic views from publicly accessible
locations;
(b)
Preserve unique natural or historical features by incorporating
said features into the project design;
(c)
Minimize tree, vegetation and soil removal and grade changes
by integrating the proposed development into the existing
terrain;
(d)
(1)
A.
§ 300-13.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-13.6
1:361
Screen objectionable features such as heat pumps, air
conditioners, dumpsters and similar equipment from
neighboring properties and roadways through the use of
landscaping and earthen berms; and
(e)
Maintain existing public shade trees by locating proposed
utilities and accessways between existing public shade trees.
(f)
The development shall be served with adequate water supply and
waste disposal systems. The development shall not place excessive
demands on Town services and infrastructure. For structures to
be served by on-site waste disposal systems, the applicant shall
submit a septic system design prepared by a certified engineer and
approved by the Board of Health in accordance with Title V.
(2)
Vehicle and pedestrian traffic.
The plan shall maximize the convenience and safety of
vehicular and pedestrian movement within the site and in
relation to adjacent ways. For projects requiring the
construction of a new multifamily, business or industrial
structure of 10,000 square feet or more of gross floor area,
or the expansion or change in use of any multifamily, business
or industrial structure of 10,000 square feet or more in gross
floor area, or for uses with a trip generation rate over 700
vehicles/day (based on Institute of Transportation Engineers
rates found in Trip Generation), the applicant shall be required
to submit a detailed traffic study conducted by an independent
transportation engineer selected by the Planning Board
containing:
The projected number of motor vehicle trips to enter or
leave the site, estimated for daily and peak-hour traffic
levels.
[1]
The projected traffic flow pattern, including vehicular
movements at all major intersection likely to be affected
by the proposed use of the site.
[2]
Traffic flow patterns at the site, including entrances and
egresses, loading and unloading areas, and curb cuts on
site and within 100 feet of the site.
[3]
A detailed assessment of the traffic safety impacts of the
proposed project or use on the carrying capacity of any
adjacent highway or road, including the projected number
of motor vehicle trips to enter or depart from the site
estimated for daily hour and peak-hour traffic levels, road
capacities, and impacts on intersections. Existing daily
and peak-hour traffic levels and road capacities shall also
be given.
[4]
(a)
(3)
§ 300-13.6 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-13.6
1:362
A plan to minimize traffic and safety impacts through such
means as physical design and layout concepts, staggered
employee work schedules, promoting use of public transit
or carpooling, or other appropriate means.
[5]
An internal traffic and pedestrian circulation plan
designed to minimize conflicts and safety problems.
[6]
Adequate pedestrian and bicycle access provided by
supplying access to adjacent properties and between
individual businesses within a development.
[7]
Specific mitigating measures which alleviate impacts to
the adjacent roadway network.
[8]
A five-year forecast roadway capacity analysis with a
discussion of the primary differences between
development of the project (a "Build" alternative) and the
alternative of not carrying out the project ("No build'
alternative).
[9]
The applicant shall be responsible for all costs associated with
the traffic analysis. The applicant shall also be responsible for
posting a monetary performance bond in a form and amount,
approved by the Planning Board, sufficient to guarantee all
transportation improvements as required by the Board.
(b)
The site plan shall show adequate measures to prevent pollution
of surface water or groundwater, to minimize erosion and
sedimentation, and to prevent changes in groundwater levels,
increased run-off and potential for flooding. Drainage shall be
designed so that off-site run-off shall not be increased, groundwater
recharge is maximized, and neighboring properties will not be
adversely affected. Increased runoff from impervious surfaces shall
be recharged on site by being diverted to vegetated surfaces for
infiltration or through the use of detention ponds. No drainage
shall be allowed to enter a public or private right-of-way used or
maintained for pedestrian or vehicular access during construction
and after completion of development. Erosion of soil and
sedimentation of streams, water bodies and ways shall be
minimized by using the following erosion control practices:
Exposed or disturbed areas due to stripping of vegetation, soil
removal, and regrading shall be permanently stabilized within
three months of occupancy of a structure.
(a)
During construction, temporary vegetation and/or mulching
shall be used to protect exposed areas from erosion. Until a
disturbed area is permanently stabilized, sediment in runoff
water shall be trapped by using staked hay bales or
sedimentation traps in accordance with Soil Conservation
Service106 standards.
(b)
(4)
§ 300-13.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-13.6
1:363
§ 300-13.7. (Reserved)
§ 300-13.8. Landscaping requirements.
Permanent erosion control and vegetative measures shall be
in accordance with the erosion, sedimentation and vegetative
practices recommended by the Soil Conservation Service.107
(c)
All slopes exceeding 15% resulting from site grading shall be
either covered with four inches of topsoil and planted with a
vegetative cover sufficient to prevent erosion or be stabilized
by a retaining wall.
(d)
Dust control shall be used during grading operations if the
grading is to occur within 200 feet of a residential use or place
of business. Dust control methods may consist of grading fine
soils on calm days only or dampening the ground with water.
(e)
Electric, telephone, cable TV, and other such utilities and services
shall be placed underground where physically and environmentally
feasible.
(5)
Exposed storage areas, machinery, service areas, truck loading
areas, utility building and structures, dumpsters and other
unsightly uses shall be set back and screened to protect abutting
properties from objectionable features.
(6)
The site plan shall comply with all zoning requirements for the
district in which it is located.
(7)
Lighting of the site shall be adequate at ground level for the
protection and safety of the public in regard to pedestrian and
vehicular circulation. The glare from the installation of outdoor
lights and illuminated signs shall be contained on the property
and shall be shielded from abutting properties. Lighting structures
shall be integrated with the site and surrounding uses.
(8)
(9) All signs shall conform to the regulations outlined in this ordinance.
(10)Parking shall conform to all requirements of this ordinance.
(11)Landscaping shall conform to all requirements of this ordinance.
Before approval of a site plan, the reviewing board may request the
applicant to make modifications in the proposed design of the project
to ensure that the above criteria are met.
B.
The landscaping plan shall illustrate the existing and proposed
landscape development of the property, including the location, layout,
A.
106. Editor's Note: Now the Natural Resources Conservation Service.
107. Editor's Note: Now the Natural Resources Conservation Service.
§ 300-13.6 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-13.8
1:364
type and size of buffers and landscaped areas, plant material, fencing,
screening devices or other material proposed.
The minimum requirements for landscaped buffer areas are as follows
in Table 13-1.
Table 13-1
Landscape Buffer Requirements
Requirement by
Lot Area
Depth of Buffer Along
Street Lines
(feet)
(see Note 2)
Depth of Buffer
Along Abutting
Properties
(feet)
(see Notes 1 and 2)
Up to and
including 43,560
square feet
10 5
43,561 square feet
to 130,680 square
feet
12 8
130,680 square
feet to 217,800
square feet
15 12
5 acres or more 20 15
NOTES:
Note 1: Site development abutting nonresidential property shall
provide and maintain a buffer at least four feet in height. Site
development abutting residential property shall provide and maintain
a buffer at least six feet in height or at a height and density deemed
necessary by the Planning Board to protect the abutting residential
use. All buffers shall be planted but may use a combination of fencing
and vegetation to achieve screening acceptable by the Town.
Note 2: The depth of the buffer required by this section of the
ordinance shall supersede any building setback required by this
ordinance.
B.
In addition to other requirements of this section, 2/3 of that lot area not
devoted to structure, parking, circulation, access, service, storage or
other functions related to the principal or accessory use of the lot shall
be landscaped or left in a natural state. Areas maintained in a natural
condition shall be kept free of trash, rubbish or other debris.
C.
At all street or driveway intersections, trees or shrubs shall be planted
so that they do not present a pedestrian or vehicular traffic visibility
hazard.
D.
§ 300-13.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-13.8
1:365
§ 300-13.9. Final action.
The Planning Board's final action shall consist of either:
All landscaped areas shall be properly maintained. Shrubs or trees
which die shall be replaced within one growing season.
E.
Exposed storage areas, machinery, service areas, truck loading areas,
utility buildings, electrical transformers, air-conditioning units,
dumpsters and other similar structures shall be screened with
plantings, earthen berms or fences complemented with plantings.
F.
All trees which are planted as part of the landscaping shall be a
minimum of two inches' diameter at breast height at the time of
planting.
G.
All shrubs which are planted as part of the landscaping shall be a
minimum of two feet in height at the time of planting.
H.
A determination that the proposed project will constitute a suitable
development and is in compliance with the criteria set forth in the
ordinance;
A.
Approval subject to any conditions, modifications, and restrictions as
the Planning Board may deem necessary; or
B.
C. A written denial of the application, stating the reasons for such denial.
§ 300-13.8 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-13.9
1:366
ARTICLE XIV
Site Plan Administration108
§ 300-14.0. Enforcement.
§ 300-14.1. Appeals.
A person aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Board may file an appeal
with the West Springfield Board of Appeals in accordance with MGL c. 40A,
§§ 8 and 15
The Building Inspector shall not issue a permanent certificate of
occupancy permit until all work is completed as approved by the
appropriate agencies and in conformity with the approved site plan.
A.
Site plan approval issued under this article and Article XIII shall lapse
at the end of two years after approval if work has not been completed,
except where an extension of time for good cause has been granted by
the Planning Board.
B.
The Planning Board may require the posting of a bond to ensure
compliance with the plan and the conditions and may suspend any
permit or license when work is not performed as required.
C.
The Planning Board may periodically amend or add rules and
regulations relating to procedures or administration of this article and
Article XIII.
D.
108. Editor's Note: See also the site plan review provisions in Art. XIII of this chapter.
§ 300-14.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-14.1
1:367

ARTICLE XV
Administration
§ 300-15.0. Enforcement.
This ordinance shall be enforced by the Inspector of Buildings, and no
permit shall be granted for the construction, alteration, relocation or use
of any building, structure or premises in violation of any provision of this
ordinance. Whenever any permit or license is refused because of some
provision of this ordinance, the reason therefor shall be clearly stated in
writing and kept on file.
§ 300-15.1. Violations.
If the Inspector of Buildings shall be informed or have reason to believe
that any provision of this ordinance has been, is being or may be violated,
he shall forthwith make or cause to be made an investigation of the fact
and inspect the premises where such violation may exist. He shall report
his findings in writing within 14 days to the Mayor and the Planning Board,
and if he shall find any such violation, he shall give notice thereof in writing
to the owner or to his duly authorized agent and to the occupant of the
premises and shall order that any use of any premises contrary to the
provisions of this ordinance shall immediately cease.
§ 300-15.2. Legal proceedings.
If, after such notice, the premises continued to be used in a manner contrary
to the provisions of this ordinance, or if any such owner or occupant shall
fail to obey any lawful order of the Inspector of Buildings in respect to any
violation or use contrary to the provisions of this ordinance, the Inspector
of Buildings shall institute appropriate legal proceedings, either criminal or
noncriminal, to enforce the provisions of this ordinance. In addition, with
the approval of the Mayor, the Inspector of Buildings may revoke the permit
of occupancy or take any and all actions necessary to enforce the provisions
of this ordinance.
§ 300-15.3. Criminal disposition penalties.
Complaints brought to Superior Court or Housing Court shall carry a
penalty of $300 for each violation. Each day on which a violation exists shall
be deemed to be a separate offense.
§ 300-15.4. Noncriminal disposition penalties.
Pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21D, when enforcing the provisions of this
ordinance by noncriminal complaint, the Inspector of Buildings shall issue
fines of $25 for the first offense; $50 for the second offense; $100 for the
third offense; and $200 for the fourth offense and each subsequent offense.
Each day on which a violation exists shall be deemed to be a separate
offense.
§ 300-15.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-15.5
1:369
§ 300-15.5. Supersession of other provisions or private restrictions.
When this ordinance imposes a greater restriction on the use of buildings,
structures or premises or on height of buildings, or requires larger yards,
courts or other open spaces than are imposed or required by any existing
provisions of ordinances, or by any regulations or permits, or by any
restrictions, easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this
ordinance shall control.
§ 300-15.6. Occupancy permits.
No building hereafter erected, altered or relocated shall be used and no
change shall be made of the use of any building or of any parcel of land
unless an occupancy permit signed by the Inspector of Buildings has been
granted to the owner or occupant of such land or building. Such permit
shall not be granted unless the proposed use of the land or building and all
accessory uses comply in all respects with this ordinance and no use shall
be made of such land or building except the use or uses authorized by such
occupancy permit.
§ 300-15.7. Board of Appeals. [Amended 12-4-2017]
A Board of Appeals consisting of five members and three alternate members
is hereby established. The members and alternate members of said Board
shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to confirmation by the Town
Council as set forth in the Charter. All members of said Board shall be
residents of the Town and shall serve without compensation.
§ 300-15.8. Powers of Board of Appeals.
The Board of Appeals shall have all the powers vested in it by this ordinance
and by the laws of the commonwealth. It shall have the authority to grant
variances for use.
§ 300-15.9. Appeals.
Appeals of a decision of the Building Commissioner shall be filed in
accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 40A, § 8.
A.
Appeals of a decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals or of a special
permit granting authority shall be filed in accordance with the
provisions of MGL c. 40A, § 17.
B.
§ 300-15.5 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-15.9
1:370
ARTICLE XVI
Amendments; Interpretation
§ 300-16.0. Amendments.
This ordinance may from time to time be changed by amendment, addition
or repeal by the Town Council in the manner provided by law, and all
petitions therefor shall be filed with the Town Clerk, who shall forthwith
transmit true copies thereof to the Mayor, the Town Council and the
Planning Board.
§ 300-16.1. Continuance of former ordinances and repeal.
The provisions of this ordinance, so far as they are the same as those
of existing ordinances, shall be construed as continuations thereof. All
ordinances or parts of ordinances theretofore adopted, which are
inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance, are hereby repealed.
§ 300-16.2. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If
any such provision, or the application of such provision to any person
or circumstances, shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such
invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not be construed to affect the validity
or constitutionality of any of the remaining provisions thereof or the
application of such provisions to persons or circumstances other than those
as to which it is held invalid or unconstitutional. It is hereby declared to be
the intent of the Town that said provisions would have been adopted in the
event that such invalid or unconstitutional provision had not been included
therein.
§ 300-16.3. Table of Contents and Index.
The administrative content of these areas of the Zoning Ordinance may be
revised from time to time by administrative action of the Planning Board.
§ 300-16.4. Ownership of submitted materials.
The Town of West Springfield shall become the sole owner of all materials
submitted to the Town in connection with the administration of this Zoning
Ordinance except as provided for herein.
§ 300-16.5. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon adoption by the Town, the approval of
the Attorney General and publication as provided by law.
§ 300-16.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-16.5
1:371
Chapter 400
TRAFFIC ORDERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxicabs — See Ch. 235. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 249.
§ 300-16.5 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 300-16.5
1:372
ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 400-1. Terms defined.
For the purpose of these rules and orders, the words and phrases used
herein shall have the following meanings except in those instances where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Use of the masculine shall
include the feminine and the neutral.
BUS STOP — An area in the roadway set aside for the boarding of or
alighting from and the parking of buses.
CROSSWALK — That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the
prolongation or connection of curb lines and property lines at intersections,
or at any portion of a roadway clearly indicated for pedestrian crossing by
lines on the road surface or by any other markings or signs.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Vehicles of the Fire Department (Fire Patrol),
police vehicles, ambulances and emergency vehicles of federal, state and
municipal departments or public service corporations when the latter are
responding to an emergency in relation to the Police or Fire Department.
FIRE LANE — Any designated lane and identified as such by the head of the
Fire Department pursuant to Code of Massachusetts Regulations 527 CMR
10.03.109
GREEN — Those parcels of land abutting Town ways dedicated to public
use and including those parcels of land sometimes referred to as the "Town
Green" and/or "Town Common," or a traffic island.
HANDICAPPED PARKING — Parking spaces designated as such in
compliance with Code of Massachusetts Regulations 521 CMR 23.00.
HIGHWAY — The entire width between property lines of every way open to
the use of the public for purposes of travel.
INTERSECTIONS — The area embraced within the extensions of the lateral
curblines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of intersecting ways as
defined in MGL c. 90, § 1, including divided ways. The rules and regulations
herein contained governing and restricting the movement of vehicles at and
near intersecting ways apply at any place along any way at which drivers
are to be controlled by traffic control signals, whether or not such place is
an intersection as herein defined.
LANE — A longitudinal division of a roadway into a strip of sufficient width
to accommodate the passage of a single line of vehicles.
MANUAL ON UNIFORM TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES — Refers to the
Massachusetts amendments to the Federal Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices and the Standard Municipal Traffic Code as adopted by the
Massachusetts Department of Transportation.
109. Editor's Note: See now the Massachusetts Comprehensive Fire Safety Code, 527 CMR 1.00.
§ 400-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-1
1:373
MOTOR VEHICLE — All vehicles constructed and designed for propulsion
by power other than muscular power, including such vehicles when pulled
or towed by another motor vehicle, except railroad and railway cars.
OFFICER — Any West Springfield police officer, any State Police officer
assigned to the Registry of Motor Vehicles, and any special officer, provided
he has his badge of office displayed over his left breast and upon his outer
garment.
OFFICIAL CURB MARKING — That portion of a curbing, the painting of
which has been authorized by the Town Council and which has the written
approval of the Massachusetts Department of Transportation.
OFFICIAL STREET MARKING — Any painted line, legend, marking or
marker of any description painted or placed upon any way which purports
to direct or regulate traffic and which has been authorized by the Board
of Selectmen and which has the written approval of the Massachusetts
Department of Transportation.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNS — All signs, markings and devices, other than
signals, not inconsistent with these rules and orders, and which conform
to the standards prescribed by the Massachusetts Department of
Transportation and placed or erected by authority of a public body or
official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of guiding, directing, warning or
regulating traffic.
PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise
than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading, or in obedience to an officer or traffic signs or signals, or while
making emergency repairs or, if disabled, while arrangements are being
made to move such vehicle.
PEDESTRIAN — Any person afoot or riding on conveyance by human
muscular power, except bicycles or tricycles, as defined in MGL c. 90, § 18A.
RAILROAD CROSSING — Any intersection of ways with a railroad right-ofway.
ROADWAY — That portion of a street or highway between the regularly
established curblines or that part, exclusive of shoulders, improved and
intended to be used for vehicular traffic.
ROTARY TRAFFIC — The counter-clockwise operation of a vehicle around
an object or structure.
SAFETY ZONE — Any area or space set aside within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians and which has been indicated by signs, lines or
markings, having the written approval of the Massachusetts Department of
Transportation, where necessary.
SERVICE ZONE — An area in the roadway set aside for the accommodation
of commercial and transient vehicular traffic.
STREET — See "highway."
TOWN COMMON — See "green."
§ 400-1 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 400-1
1:374
TRAFFIC CONTROL AREA — Any area along any way, other than an
intersecting way, at which drivers are to be controlled by traffic control
signals.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL — Any device using colored lights which
conforms to the standards as prescribed by the Massachusetts Department
of Transportation, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated,
by which traffic may be alternately directed to stop and proceed.
TRAFFIC ISLAND — Any area or space set aside within a roadway, which is
not intended for use by vehicular traffic.
TREE BELT — That portion of a public way containing a public sidewalk, if
any, and commonly planted with trees, shrubs, grass and other vegetation;
i.e., that portion of the way between the curbing and property line, or
between the equivalent edge of the pavement and the property line where
no curbing exists.
§ 400-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-1
1:375

ARTICLE II
Authority and Duties of Police
§ 400-2. Officers to direct traffic.
It shall be the duty of officers designated by the Chief of Police to enforce
the provisions of these rules and orders. Such officers are hereby authorized
to direct all traffic either in person or by means of visible or audible signals
in conformance with the provisions of these rules and orders, provided that
in the event of a fire or other emergency to expedite traffic or safeguard
pedestrians, officers of the Police or Fire Department may direct traffic, as
conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of these rules and
orders.
§ 400-3. Temporary closing of streets.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized by the Town Council to close
temporarily any street or highway in an impending or existing emergency,
or for any lawful assemblage, demonstration or procession, provided there
is reasonable justification for the closing of such street.
§ 400-4. Temporary parking prohibitions.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized by the Town Council to prohibit,
temporarily, parking on any street or highway or part thereof in an
impending or existing emergency, or for a lawful assemblage,
demonstration or procession, provided there is reasonable justification for
such prohibition. Vehicles parked in places where parking is prohibited
temporarily may be moved by or under the direction of an officer.
§ 400-5. Exemptions.
The provisions of these rules and orders shall not apply to operators actually
engaged in work upon a street or highway closed to travel or under
construction or repair, to officers when engaged in the performance of
public duties nor to drivers of emergency vehicles while operating in an
emergency and in performance of public duties when the nature of their
work necessitates a departure from any part of these rules and orders.
These exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any vehicle from
the consequences of a reckless disregard for the safety of others.
§ 400-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-5
1:377

ARTICLE III
Traffic Signs, Signals, Markings and Zones
§ 400-6. Traffic signs and signals.
§ 400-7. Display of unauthorized signs, signals and markings
prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain or to display upon
or in view of any street any unofficial sign, signal, marking or device which
purports to be or is in imitation of or resembles an official traffic sign,
signal, marking or device, or which attempts to direct the movement of
traffic or which hides from view any official sign or signal. The Chief of
Police is hereby empowered to remove every such prohibited sign, signal,
marking or device or cause it to be removed, without notice.
§ 400-8. Interference prohibited.
Any person who willfully defaces, injures, moves, obstructs or interferes
with any street sign or official traffic sign, signal or marking shall be liable
to a penalty of $200 for each and every offense.
§ 400-9. Obedience required.
No driver of any vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official traffic
control signal, sign, marking, marker or legend, unless otherwise directed
by a police officer.
The Town Council is authorized to establish such signs and signals as
it deems required. It shall be its duty to place and maintain or cause
to be placed and maintained all official traffic signs, signals, markings
and safety zones. All signs, signals, markings and safety zones shall
conform to the standards prescribed by the Massachusetts Department
of Transportation, to the extent necessary.
A.
Sections 400-3 and 400-4 of Article II and 400-11 through 400-14,
inclusive, of Article IV, relating to parking, shall be effective only during
such time as a sufficient number of official signs are erected and
maintained in each block designating the provisions of such sections
and located so as to be easily visible to approaching drivers.
B.
Sections relating to one-way streets shall be effective only during such
time as a sufficient number of official signs are erected and maintained
at each of the exits for each one-way street, so that at least one sign will
be clearly visible for a distance of at least 75 feet to drivers approaching
such an exit.
C.
§ 400-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-9
1:379

ARTICLE IV
Parking
§ 400-10. General prohibitions.
No person shall park a vehicle in any of the following places, and vehicles
found parked in violation of the provisions of this section may be moved by
or under the direction of an officer and at the expense of the owner:
A. Within an intersection.
B. Upon any sidewalk.
C. Upon any crosswalk.
Upon a roadway where parking is permitted unless both wheels on the
right side of the vehicle are within 12 inches of the curb or edge of
the roadway, except upon those streets which are designated as oneway
streets. On such one-way streets, vehicles shall be parked in the
allowable direction and with both wheels within 12 inches of the curb.
This shall not apply to streets or parts of streets where angle parking is
required by these regulations.
D.
Upon any roadway where the parking of a vehicle will not leave a clear
and unobstructed lane at least 10 feet wide for passing traffic.
E.
Upon any street or highway within 10 feet of a fire hydrant or bus stop
sign.
F.
G. Upon or in front of any private road or driveway.
Upon any street or highway within 20 feet of an intersecting way,
except alleys.
H.
I. Upon a traffic island or crossover.
Further parking prohibited. No vehicle shall stop or stand at any curb
adjacent to the entrances of a church, hospital, railroad station, bus
terminal or station, theater, public building or any place of public
assemblage where official signs are erected, except for the purpose of
receiving or discharging passengers.
J.
Left side to curb. No vehicle shall stop with its left side to the curb
except on the one-way streets listed under § 400-26, unless otherwise
posted.
K.
Within 15 feet of the wall of a fire station. No person shall park a vehicle
within 15 feet of a wall of a fire station or directly across the street from
such fire station, provided signs are erected alerting the driver of such
restriction.
L.
M. Alongside or opposite any street.
§ 400-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-10
1:381
§ 400-11. Parking prohibited on certain streets.
Upon the following streets or highways or parts thereof, parking is hereby
prohibited:
Name of Street Side Location
Agawam Avenue Southerly from a point at the
intersection with the state highway
southwesterly 60 feet along the
southerly line of Agawam Avenue
Alderbrook Lane Northwesterly corner of cul-de-sac
at west end of street, 25 feet on
either side of catch basin, a total
distance of 50 feet
Althea Street From the intersection of the westerly
sideline of Riverdale Street with the
northerly side line of Althea Street
as relocated, westerly and northerly
along the northerly and easterly side
line of Althea Street as relocated, a
distance of 484 feet, more or less
Amostown Road North From the easterly sideline of Piper
Road, easterly 50 feet
Angeline Street
[Added 6-5-2017]
South Entire length
Armstrong Street Northwest Entire length
Ashley Avenue North and
south
From the east sideline of Riverdale
Street in a generally easterly
direction 590 feet and the easterly
side, from the end of the existing "No
Parking" restriction (Sta. 18 + 50)
northerly 900 feet (Sta. 9 + 50)
Baldwin Street Northwest From a point 200 feet northerly of
the northerly line of Cold Spring
Avenue northerly to River Street
Baldwin Street Northwest From the northerly line of Cold
Spring Avenue to a point 200 feet
northwesterly thereof
Excavation. No person shall park a vehicle alongside or opposite any
street excavation or obstruction when such stopping, standing or
parking would obstruct traffic.
N.
Upon any tree belt of any public way. No person shall park a vehicle
upon any tree belt of any public way wherein the pavement is at least
18 feet in width.
O.
§ 400-10 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 400-11
1:382
Name of Street Side Location
Baldwin Street Starting at the point of intersection
of the northerly lines of Cold Spring
Avenue and Baldwin Street,
northwesterly a distance of 30 feet
along the northeasterly side of
Baldwin Street
Belle Avenue North From the easterly line of Main Street
easterly 242 feet
Beverly Hills Lower
[Added
12-28-2009]
East Entire length from the northerly line
of Westfield Street to the southerly
line of Falmouth Road
Beverly Hills Upper
[Added
12-28-2009]
East From the southerly line of Bond
Street to the southerly line of
Falmouth Road
Birch Park Circle Evennumbered
Birch Park Circle
Bliss Street North Entire distance between Main Street
and Union Street
Bridge Street, in the
Mittineague Section
West From the Boston and Albany
Railroad crossing to the Agawam-
Mittineague Bridge
Brush Hill Avenue North From the intersection of the westerly
sideline of Riverdale Street with the
northerly sideline of Brush Hill
Avenue, westerly along the northerly
sideline of Brush Hill Avenue, a
distance of 210 feet
Brush Hill Avenue South From the intersection of the westerly
sideline of Riverdale Street with the
southerly sideline of Brush Hill
Avenue, westerly along the southerly
sideline of Brush Hill Avenue, a
distance of 145 feet
Capital Drive
[Repealed
2-22-2011]
Capital Drive
[Added 2-22-2011]
South Beginning at the intersection of
Ashley Avenue and continuing
easterly around the cul-de-sac to a
point on the north side 50 feet west
of the point of tangency
Cedar Avenue Both From Westfield Street to Kings
Highway
§ 400-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-11
1:383
Name of Street Side Location
Central Street Along the entire length of the
"Green" in front of the Municipal
Office Building
Central Street North From a point 150 feet westerly of
the westerly line of Elm Street to a
point an arc distance of 31.42 feet
westerly thereof
Central Street South From a point 150 feet westerly of
the westerly line of Elm Street to a
point an arc distance of 31.42 feet
westerly thereof
Chapin Street Southerly Entire length
Chestnut Street
[Amended
9-9-2009]
West From Westfield Street to Kings
Highway
Church Street, in
the Merrick Section
North From the easterly line of Union
Street to a point 260 feet easterly
thereof
Churchill Road
[Repealed
3-21-2011]
Churchill Road
[Amended
3-21-2011]
North From the southerly sideline of
Alderbrook Lane extended, southerly
and easterly to the westerly sideline
of Harwich Road
Churchill Road
[Amended
3-21-2011]
South Beginning at the southerly sideline
of Alderbrook Lane and extending to
a point 95 feet southerly and
easterly of the intersection of the
southerly sideline of Alderbrook
Lane
Cold Spring Avenue North From Baldwin Street to Norman
Street
Cold Spring Avenue Northeast Starting at the point of intersection
of the northerly lines of Baldwin
Street and Cold Spring Avenue a
distance of 30 feet along the
northwesterly side of Cold Spring
Avenue
§ 400-11 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 400-11
1:384
Name of Street Side Location
Cold Spring Avenue Southeast From the intersection of Baldwin
Street southwesterly to a point 192
feet westerly of the southwesterly
intersection of York Street and Cold
Spring Avenue
Colony Road East Entire length
Day Street Both 50 feet east from Union Street
Day Street Both 50 feet west from Union Street
Dorwin Drive From the intersection of the
southerly sideline of Dorwin Drive
with the westerly sideline of Dorwin
Drive, adjacent to Mittineague Park,
and thence northerly along the
westerly sideline, a distance of 125
feet
East Elm Street
[Amended
2-10-1981]
Both From the intersection with Elm
Street to a point 500 feet east
East Elm Street North From the end of the westerly sideline
of Riverdale Street crossing East
Elm Street where it intersects the
northerly sideline of East Elm Street,
westerly 250 feet
East Elm Street South From the end of the westerly sideline
of Riverdale Street crossing East
Elm Street where it intersects the
southerly sideline of East Elm Street,
westerly 150 feet
Elm Street Both From a point 400 feet westerly of
East Elm Street to a point 800 feet
southeast of East Elm Street
Elm Street Both From the northerly line of Westfield
Street to a point 60 feet northerly
thereof
Elm Street East From a point 214 feet north of the
northerly line of Park Street 20 feet
northerly
Elm Street East From the northerly line of Park
Street 75 feet northerly thereof
Elm Street East From the northerly line of Park
Street to a point 95 feet northerly
thereof
§ 400-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-11
1:385
Name of Street Side Location
Elm Street East From a point 310 feet northerly of
the intersection of the northerly
sideline of Park Street with the
easterly sideline of Elm Street
northerly 60 feet
Elm Street East From the southerly line of
Southworth Street 48 feet southerly
thereof
Elm Street East From the southerly line of Westfield
Street extended to a point 70 feet
southerly thereof
Elm Street West From a point 120 feet north of the
northerly line of Central Street
extended to the southerly line of
Southworth Street extended
Elm Street West From the intersection of Kings
Highway to a point 82 feet northerly
Elm Street [Added
2-21-2017]
West Beginning from a point 336 feet from
the northernmost point on the
36.95-foot curve at the intersection
of Monastery Avenue and Elm Street
for a distance of 198 feet northerly
along Elm Street
Elm Street West From the northerly line of Park
Street to a point 90 feet northerly
thereof
Elm Street West From the northerly line of Park
Street 96 feet northerly thereof
Elm Street West From the southerly line of Westfield
Street to a point 50 feet southerly
thereof
Elmdale Street
[Added
12-28-2009]
West From Southworth Street to Park
Street
Elmdale Street
[Repealed
12-28-2009]
Globe Street East From Bridge Street, northerly to
corner in Globe Street
Globe Street East From the northerly sideline of
Bridge Street, northerly 197 feet
§ 400-11 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 400-11
1:386
Name of Street Side Location
Globe Street South From corner of Globe Street easterly
to Railroad Street
Globe Street South From the westerly sideline of
Railroad Street westerly 675 feet
Hanover Street West From Park Street to Southworth
Street
Harwich Road
[Added
12-20-2010]
East From the westerly sideline of Van
Horn Street northerly and easterly
a distance of 906 feet to a point on
Harwich Road at the beginning of
the tangent to Westfield Street
Harwich Road
[Added
12-20-2010]
West Starting at a point on the westerly
sideline of Harwich Road, said point
being 639 feet southerly of the
southwesterly corner of the
intersection of Churchill Road with
Harwich Road, thence running along
the sideline of Harwich Road in a
southerly direction to the
northeasterly corner of Park Drive
Harwich Road
[Repealed
12-20-2010]
High Street North Entire length
Highland Avenue Both From Riverdale Street westerly to
the westerly sideline of Prospect
Avenue and the extension of the
westerly sideline of Prospect Avenue
with the sidelines of Highland
Avenue
Homestead Avenue North From the intersection of the westerly
side of Amostown Road with the
northerly sideline of Homestead
Avenue westerly 400 feet
Janet Street Both From a point 100 feet north of Kings
Highway to Kings Highway
Kings Highway North From the westerly line of Elm Street
75 westerly
Kings Highway North From a point 165 feet west of the
westerly line of Greenleaf Avenue 90
feet westerly along the northerly line
of Kings Highway
§ 400-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-11
1:387
Name of Street Side Location
Kings Highway North From a point 140 feet easterly of the
easterly sideline of Sheridan Avenue
easterly 300 feet
Kings Highway South From the westerly line of Elm Street
75 feet westerly
Kings Highway South From its intersection with the
westerly sideline of Elm Street to a
point 607 feet east of its intersection
with Boulevard
Kings Highway South From the intersection of the
southerly sideline of Kings Highway
with the northerly sideline of
Westfield Street easterly to the
intersection of the southerly sideline
of Kings Highway with the westerly
sideline of Cedar Street
Kings Highway South From the northerly line of Westfield
Street easterly to the extension
southerly of the westerly line of
Janet Street
Lathrop Street
[Added 11-7-2011]
East From northerly sideline of Park
Street 415 feet to the north
Lathrop Street
[Added 11-7-2011]
West From the southerly sideline of
Southworth Street 591 feet to the
south
Lathrop Street
[Repealed
12-28-2009]
Lathrop Street
[Added
12-28-2009;
repealed
11-7-2011]
Lee Lang Terrace West From the southerly sideline of Silver
Street southerly 60 feet
Lowell Avenue North From the easterly side of Lowell
Street and Lowell Avenue easterly
200 feet
Lowell Street West From a point 700 feet northerly of
the intersection of the westerly line
of Lowell Street and the northerly
line of Memorial Avenue a distance
of 358 feet northerly
§ 400-11 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 400-11
1:388
Name of Street Side Location
Main Street Both From the southerly intersection of
Park Street to the northerly
intersection of Park Avenue
Main Street East From a point 104 feet northerly of
the northerly sideline of Colton
Avenue northerly 112 feet
Main Street East From a point 277 feet northerly of
the north corner of Colton Avenue
to a point 350 feet northerly of the
north corner of Colton Avenue
Main Street East From the southerly line of Park
Street to a point 115 feet southerly
thereof
Main Street East From a point 115 feet northerly of
the northerly sideline of James
Avenue, northerly 80 feet
Main Street East From the southerly sideline of Park
Avenue 265 feet southerly
Main Street West From the southerly sideline of
Burford Avenue southerly a distance
of 122 feet
Main Street West From a point 3 feet southerly of the
north corner of Burford Avenue to a
point 76 feet northerly of the north
corner of Burford Avenue
Main Street West From the southerly sideline of
Church Street southerly 85 feet
Main Street West From the southerly sideline of Park
Avenue 112 feet southerly
Maple Street
[Amended
9-9-2009]
South From the easterly line of Pine Street
to the westerly line of Chestnut
Street
Maple Terrace West From the intersection of the
northerly sideline of Westfield Street
with the westerly sideline of Maple
Terrace northerly 185 feet
Memorial Avenue Both From a point 110 feet southerly of
River Street to a point 410 feet
northerly of River Street
§ 400-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-11
1:389
Name of Street Side Location
Memorial Avenue North From the westerly edge of the state
highway layout at the Memorial
Bridge rotary to the easterly sideline
of Bresnahan Street
Memorial Avenue South From the westerly edge of the state
highway layout at the Memorial
Bridge rotary to the easterly line of
its intersection with Union Street
Memorial Avenue South Starting at a point on the southerly
sideline of Memorial Avenue 350 feet
easterly of the intersection of the
easterly sideline of Dyke Avenue
with the southerly sideline of
Memorial Avenue, thence easterly
110 feet
Monastery Avenue North From the intersection of the westerly
line of Elm Street with the northerly
line of Monastery Avenue an arc
distance of 36.95 feet westerly to a
point, thence westerly along the
northerly sideline a distance of
193.56 feet
Morton Street North From a point 558.38 feet westerly
of the intersection of the westerly
sideline of Amostown Road with the
northerly sideline of Morton Street
westerly to the easterly sideline of
Massachusetts Avenue
Mosher Street North From the westerly line of Elm Street
westerly to the end of the street
Nelson Street Both From a point 100 feet south of
Westfield Street to Westfield Street
New Bridge Street North Starting at a point 45 feet westerly
of the intersection of the westerly
street line of Cook Street with the
northerly street line of new Bridge
Street westerly 50 feet
New Bridge Street North From the westerly line of Summer
Street westerly 185 feet
New Bridge Street South From a point 76 feet easterly of the
easterly line of Barnard Street
easterly 36 feet
§ 400-11 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 400-11
1:390
Name of Street Side Location
Norman Street Northeast From Memorial Avenue to River
Street
North Boulevard
Street
Both From Westfield Street to a point 100
feet north of Westfield Street
North Boulevard
Street
West From the northerly line of Westfield
Street 105 feet northerly
Oak Street [Added
6-5-2017]
Both At a point 270 feet easterly of the
intersection with the easterly side
line of Cooper Street and running
thence northeasterly to the
intersection with Angeline Street
Park Avenue South From the westerly line of Main
Street to a point 60 feet westerly
thereof
Park Avenue South From the intersection of the westerly
sideline of Union Street with the
southerly sideline of Park Avenue
westerly 180 feet
Park Drive South Entire length
Park Street North From the westerly line of Elmdale
Street 100 feet westerly thereof
Park Street North From the westerly line of Riverdale
Street to a point 90 feet westerly
thereof
Park Street North 100 feet easterly from the
northeasterly intersection of South
Boulevard and Park Street
Park Street North of
traffic island
extending 100
feet easterly
along the
northerly state
highway line
From the intersection of the easterly
line of Main Street extended
northerly (N 33° 06' W 288.00) and
the northerly line of the state
highway layout (N 69° 40' 10" E
43.25) as shown on the 1952 State
Highway layout
Park Street South From the intersection of the easterly
line of Elm Street and the southerly
line of Park Street easterly 200 feet
Park Street South From the westerly line of Elm Street
extended 75 feet westerly and 90
feet easterly
§ 400-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-11
1:391
Name of Street Side Location
Park Street South From a point opposite the westerly
line of Hanover Street easterly 150
feet
Phelon Avenue Northeast From a point 100 feet northwesterly
of the intersection of Bliss Street a
distance of 200 feet
Phelon Avenue Northeast From a point 275 feet southeasterly
of the intersection of the southerly
line of Park Street and the
northeasterly line of Phelon Avenue
218 feet southeasterly
Phelon Avenue Southwest From a point 200 feet northwesterly
of the intersection of Bliss Street a
distance of 100 feet
Phelon Avenue Southwest Starting at a point 80 feet
northwesterly of the intersection of
the sidelines of the northwesterly
side of Bliss Street and the
southwesterly side of Phelon
Avenue, measured along the
southwesterly sideline, and
extending to a point 150 feet
northwesterly of this intersection
point
Phelon Avenue Southwest From a point 300 feet northwesterly
of the intersection of the northerly
line of Bliss Street and the
southwesterly line of Phelon Avenue
66 feet northwesterly
Pine Street
[Amended
9-9-2009]
West From the southerly line of Kings
Highway to a point 604 feet to the
south
Pine Street
[Amended
9-9-2009]
West From a point 604 feet south of the
southerly line of Kings Highway to
a point 1,160 feet south of the
southerly line of Kings Highway,
except a vehicle may stop to pick-up
and drop-off
Pine Street
[Amended
9-9-2009]
West From the northerly line of Westfield
Street to a point 366 feet to the
north
Piper Road East From the northerly sideline of
Amostown Road northerly 50 feet
§ 400-11 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 400-11
1:392
Name of Street Side Location
Piper Road West From the southerly sideline of
Amostown Road southerly 40 feet
Pleasant Street East From High Street northerly to
Westfield Street
Progress Avenue Both Entire length
Railroad Street East and west Between Bridge Street and New
Bridge Street
Railroad Street West From Bridge Street northerly to
Globe Street
River Street Both Entire length
Riverdale Street Both From the North End Bridge to a
point 300 feet northerly thereof
Riverdale Street West From a point 53 feet northerly of the
south gate of the Ashleyville
Cemetery, so-called, to a point 154
feet northerly of said cemetery gate
Riverdale Street West From a point 79 feet southerly of the
southerly line of Wayside Avenue
extended to a point 775 feet
northerly thereof
Second Street East From the southerly sideline of
Westfield Street southerly 67 feet
Silver Street Northwest From the westerly line of Westfield
Street 185 feet to the southwest
Silver Street Southeast From the westerly line of Westfield
Street to the westerly line of Lee
Lang Terrace
South Boulevard Both From the southerly sideline of
Mercury Court extended southerly
along the easterly sideline of South
Boulevard a distance of 628 feet
South Boulevard Both From the northeasterly intersection
of Park Street northwesterly 150 feet
South Boulevard Both From Westfield Street southerly 300
feet from Westfield Street
South Boulevard East From the intersection of Westfield
Street extended to the intersection
of High Street
South Boulevard Southwest From Plateau Avenue to Park Street
South Boulevard West From High Street to Westfield Street
§ 400-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-11
1:393
Name of Street Side Location
South Boulevard West From the southerly line of Westfield
Street to a point 100 feet southerly
thereof
Southworth Street South From a point 435 feet east of the
easterly line of Elm Street to Lathrop
Street; except a vehicle may stop to
pick up and drop off students only,
for no longer than 5 minutes
Spring Street Southeast From Main Street to Union Street
Summit Street Both From a point 250 feet southerly of
Westfield Street northerly to
Westfield Street
Summit Street West From the southwesterly intersection
of Upper Church Street southerly 50
feet
Union Street Both 50 feet north from Day Street
Union Street Both 50 feet south from Day Street
Union Street Both sides of
northbound
highway
From the southerly intersection of
Park Street to the northerly
intersection of Park Avenue
Union Street Both sides of
southbound
highway
From the southerly intersection of
Park Street to the northerly
intersection of Park Avenue
Union Street East From the southerly line of Park
Avenue to a point 200 feet southerly
thereof
Union Street East From the intersection of the easterly
sideline of Union Street with the
southerly sideline of Bliss Street
southerly 50 feet
Union Street East Starting at a point on the easterly
sideline of Union Street a distance of
345 feet southerly of the intersection
of the easterly sideline of Union
Street with the southerly sideline of
Park Avenue, thence southerly along
the easterly sideline a distance of 50
feet
§ 400-11 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 400-11
1:394
Name of Street Side Location
Union Street East Starting at a point 50 feet southerly
of the intersection of the southerly
sideline of Worcester Street with the
easterly sideline of Union Street and
running thence northerly 50 feet to
the point of intersection of the
southerly sideline of Worcester
Street with the easterly sideline of
Union Street
Union Street West From the northwesterly intersection
of Bridge Street northerly 260 feet
Union Street West From the northerly line of Cold
Spring Avenue to a point 50 feet
northerly thereof
Union Street West From the southerly line of Cold
Spring Avenue to a point 50 feet
southerly thereof
Union Street West From a point opposite the northerly
line of Fairview Avenue and running
southerly 80 feet
Union Street West Starting at a point on the westerly
sideline of Union Street a distance of
361 feet southerly of the intersection
of the westerly sideline of Union
Street with the southerly sideline of
Park Avenue, thence southerly along
the westerly sideline a distance of 50
feet
Union Street West From the intersection of the westerly
sideline of Union Street with the
southerly sideline of Bliss Street
southerly 30 feet
Upper Church
Street
South From the westerly intersection of
Summit Street westerly 200 feet
Upper Church
Street
South From a point 200 feet westerly of
Westfield Street easterly to Westfield
Street
Van Deene Avenue Both From Park Street to Westfield Street
West Street East From the northerly line of Upper
Church Street to the southerly line
of Westfield Street
§ 400-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-11
1:395
Name of Street Side Location
West School Street North From a point 95 feet from the
westerly line of Main Street to a
point 200 feet westerly thereof
West School Street North From Union Street easterly 75 feet
Western Avenue Northeast From the northeasterly corner of
Bliss Street and Western Avenue,
thence northwesterly 755 feet
Western Avenue Northeast From the southerly line of Park
Street to the northerly line of Bliss
Street
Westfield Street Both From the westerly line of Boulevard
to a point 80 feet westerly thereof
Westfield Street Both From the easterly line of Gaskill
Avenue and the easterly line of
Gaskill Avenue extended, easterly to
a point 200 feet easterly of the
easterly line of Hathorn Avenue and
the easterly line of Hathorn Avenue
extended
Westfield Street Both From the dry-bridge to the westerly
line of Gaskill Avenue and the
westerly line of Gaskill Avenue
extended
Westfield Street Both From a point 120 feet east of Nelson
Street to a point at the west sideline
of Cedar Street
Westfield Street Both From a point 250 feet west of South
Boulevard Street to a point 250 feet
east of North Boulevard Street
Westfield Street Both From a point 200 feet west of Upper
Church Street to a point 200 feet
east of Summit Street
Westfield Street North From the intersection of the
southerly sideline of Kings Highway
with the northerly sideline of
Westfield Street easterly to the
intersection of the westerly sideline
of Thomas Drive with the northerly
sideline of Westfield Street
Westfield Street North From the westerly line of Pine Street
to the westerly line of West Street
extended
§ 400-11 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 400-11
1:396
Name of Street Side Location
Westfield Street North From the westerly sideline of Van
Deene Avenue extended westerly to
the easterly sideline of Boulevard
Westfield Street North From the intersection of the
northerly sideline of Westfield Street
with the easterly sideline of Maple
Terrace easterly 30 feet
Westfield Street North From the westerly line of Elm Street
to a point 40 feet westerly thereof
Westfield Street South From the westerly line of Elm Street
to a point 150 westerly thereof
Westfield Street South From the intersection of South
Boulevard Street easterly to a point
135 feet easterly of the easterly line
of Van Deene Avenue
Westfield Street South From the end of the State Highway
east of Nelson Street layout easterly
to a point opposite the intersection
of the westerly sideline of Thomas
Drive with the northerly sideline of
Westfield Street
Windsor Street Southwest From a point 885 feet from the
northerly line of Memorial Avenue
765 feet northwesterly thereof
Witch Path North From the intersection of Elm Street
to a point 33 feet northerly
Wolcott Avenue
[Amended
9-9-2009]
East and west From the northerly line of Westfield
Street extended northerly 130 feet
Worthen Street North From the westerly line of Elm Street
westerly to the end of the street
§ 400-12. Parking prohibited any time (May 15 through September
15). [Amended 12-20-2010; 3-21-2011]
Upon the following streets or highways or parts thereof, parking is
prohibited at any time between May 15 and September 15 in any calendar
year:
(Reserved)
§ 400-13. Parking time limited in designated places.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit indicated in the
following described streets or parts thereof:
§ 400-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-13
1:397
Name of
Street Side Location
Time
Limit Hours/Days
Allston
Avenue
Both From the intersection
of Allston Avenue and
Cold Spring Avenue to
the intersection of
Allston Avenue and
River Street
1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Baldwin
Street
Starting at a point in
the northeasterly
sideline of Baldwin
Street, a distance of
30 feet northwesterly
of the northerly
sideline of Cold
Spring Avenue,
thence northwesterly
to the southeasterly
sideline of Sears Way
1 hr. All/All
Bliss Street Both Entire length 1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Central
Street
North From the westerly
line of Elm Street to a
point 150 feet
westerly thereof
30
mins.
8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Central
Street
North From a point 170 feet
westerly of the
westerly line of Elm
Street to the easterly
line of Van Deene
Avenue
30
mins.
8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Central
Street
South From the westerly
line of Elm Street to a
point 150 feet
westerly thereof
30
mins.
8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Central
Street
South From a point 170 feet
westerly of the
westerly line of Elm
Street to the easterly
line of Van Deene
Avenue
30
mins.
8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
§ 400-13 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 400-13
1:398
Name of
Street Side Location
Time
Limit Hours/Days
Central
Street
South From the westerly
line of Elm Street to a
point 150 feet
westerly thereof
30
mins.
8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Central
Street
South From a point 170 feet
westerly of the
westerly line of Elm
Street to the easterly
line of Van Deene
Avenue
30
mins.
8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Church
Street
Both Entire length 1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Day Street Both Entire length 1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Elm Street
[Added
6-18-2018]
East From the northerly
line of Garden Street
to the southerly line
of Warren Street
1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Elm Street East From a point 75 feet
north of the northerly
line of Park Street
235 feet northerly
1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Elm Street East From a point 370 feet
northerly of the
northerly line of Park
Street to a point 48
feet southerly of the
southerly line of
Southworth Street
1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Elm Street
[Repealed
6-18-2018]
§ 400-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-13
1:399
Name of
Street Side Location
Time
Limit Hours/Days
Elm Street
[Added
6-18-2018]
East From the northerly
line of Southworth
Street northerly a
distance of 110 feet
1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Elm Street
[Added
6-18-2018]
East From a point 110 feet
north of the northerly
line of Southworth
Street northerly a
distance of 60 feet
15
mins.
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
Elm Street
[Added
6-18-2018]
East From a point 110 feet
north of the northerly
line of Southworth
Street northerly a
distance of 60 feet
15
mins.
12:00 noon to
6:00 p.m./Sundays
Elm Street East From a point 20 feet
south of the extension
westerly of the
southerly line of
Southworth Street
southerly to a point
60 feet north of the
northerly line of
Westfield Street
1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Elm Street East From a point 20 feet
northerly of the
northerly intersection
of Southworth Street
extended to a point 20
feet southerly of the
south side of
Armstrong Street
extended
1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Elm Street East From a point 70 feet
southerly of the
southerly line of
Westfield Street
extended to a point 95
feet northerly of the
northerly line of Park
Street
1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
§ 400-13 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 400-13
1:400
Name of
Street Side Location
Time
Limit Hours/Days
Elm Street West From a point 20 feet
south of the southerly
line of Armstrong
Street southerly to a
point 60 feet north of
the northerly line of
Westfield Street
1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Elm Street West From the northerly
line of Central Street
to a point 90 feet
northerly of the
northerly line of Park
Street
1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Elm Street West From a point 235 feet
northerly of the
northerly line of
Monastery Avenue 90
feet northerly thereof
1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Elm Street West From a point 95 feet
north of the northerly
line of Park Street to
a point 120 feet
northerly of the
northerly line of
Central Street
extended
1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Elm Street West From a point 20 feet
northerly of the
northerly intersection
of Southworth Street
extended to a point 20
feet south of the
southerly line of
Warren Street
extended
1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Elm Street West From a point 50 feet
southerly of the
southerly line of
Westfield Street
extended to the
northerly line of
Central Street
15
mins.
8:00 a.m. and
6:30 p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
§ 400-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-13
1:401
Name of
Street Side Location
Time
Limit Hours/Days
Fairview
Avenue
Both Entire length 1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Garden
Street
Both From the intersection
of Elm Street to the
intersection of
Lathrop Street
1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Heywood
Avenue
Both From the intersection
of River Street and
Heywood Avenue 400
feet southeasterly of
the southeasterly
intersection of Cold
Spring Avenue and
Heywood Avenue
1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Irving
Street
Both Entire length 1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Kings
Highway
South From the easterly
sideline of Boulevard
to the easterly side of
the building formerly
known as
"McDonough School"
a distance of 728 feet
1 hr. 8:30 a.m. and
6:00 p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Main
Street
Starting at a point on
the easterly sideline
of Main Street 76 feet
northerly of the
intersection of the
northerly sideline of
Chapin Street with
the easterly sideline
of Main Street, thence
northerly a distance
of 50 feet
15
mins.
8:00 a.m. and
6:30 p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
§ 400-13 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 400-13
1:402
Name of
Street Side Location
Time
Limit Hours/Days
Main
Street
East From the intersection
of the northerly
sideline of Allen
Street with the
easterly sideline of
Main Street, thence
northerly for a
distance of 40 feet
15
mins.
8:00 a.m. and
6:30 p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Main
Street
East Starting at a point
185 feet northerly of
the northerly sideline
of New Bridge Street
northerly 65 feet
15
mins.
8:00 a.m. and
6:30 p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Main
Street
East From Park Avenue
265 feet to 465 feet
southerly
Main
Street
SouthwestFrom the southerly
corner of Main Street
and Merrick Street to
the northerly corner
of Russell Street and
Main Street
1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Main
Street
West From Bliss Street 348
feet northerly
1 hr. All/All
Memorial
Avenue
North From the easterly line
of Baldwin Street
easterly 50 feet
15
mins.
8:00 a.m. to 6:30
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Memorial
Avenue
North From the westerly
line of Baldwin Street
westerly to a point 50
feet from the easterly
side of Exposition
Terrace
2 hrs. 8:00 a.m. to 6:30
p.m./Any day
except Sunday
and public
holidays
Memorial
Avenue
North From the westerly
line of Bosworth
Street westerly 50
feet
15
mins.
8:00 a.m. and
6:30 p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
§ 400-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-13
1:403
Name of
Street Side Location
Time
Limit Hours/Days
Memorial
Avenue
North From a point 50 feet
westerly of the
westerly line of
Bosworth Street to a
point 50 feet easterly
of the easterly side of
Baldwin Street
2 hrs. 8:00 a.m. to 6:30
p.m./Any day
except Sunday
and public
holidays
Memorial
Avenue
North From the westerly
sideline of Bresnahan
Street to the easterly
line of Union Street
1 hr. All/All
Memorial
Avenue
North From the easterly line
of Exposition Terrace
easterly 50 feet
15
mins.
8:00 a.m. and
6:30 p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Memorial
Avenue
North From the westerly
line of Exposition
Terrace westerly 50
feet
15
mins.
8:00 a.m. and
6:30 p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Memorial
Avenue
North From a point 50 feet
westerly of the
westerly side of
Exposition Terrace to
the easterly side of
Heywood Avenue
2 hrs. 8:00 a.m. to 6:30
p.m./Any day
except Sunday
and public
holidays
Memorial
Avenue
North From the westerly
line of Lowell Street
to the easterly line of
Bosworth Street
2 hrs. 8:00 a.m. to 6:30
p.m./Any day
except Sunday
and public
holidays
Park Street North Between Hanover
Street and Elmdale
Street
1 hr. 8:30 a.m. and
6:00 p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
§ 400-13 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 400-13
1:404
Name of
Street Side Location
Time
Limit Hours/Days
Phelon
Avenue
West Starting at a concrete
bound marking the
northerly end of the
curve connecting the
northerly sideline of
Bliss Street with the
westerly sideline of
Phelon Avenue,
thence northerly a
distance of 125 feet
1 hr. All/All
Roanoke
Avenue
Both From the intersection
of Cold Spring Avenue
and Roanoke Avenue
to the intersection of
Roanoke Avenue and
River Street
1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Southworth
Street
North From a point 350 feet
west of the westerly
line of Lathrop Street
to the easterly line of
Elm Street
1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Spring
Street
Northeast Entire length 1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Union
Street
Beginning at a point
in the westerly
sideline of Union
Street 40 feet
northerly along the
westerly sideline of
Union Street, from
the intersection of the
northerly sideline of
George Street,
extending northerly
50 feet
30
mins.
8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Union
Street
Both Between New Bridge
Street and Memorial
Avenue
1 hr. 8:30 a.m. and
6:00 p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
§ 400-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-13
1:405
Name of
Street Side Location
Time
Limit Hours/Days
Union
Street
East From the southerly
line of Bliss Street to
the northerly line of
Fairview Avenue
1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Union
Street
East From the southerly
line of Church Street
to the northerly line
of Hill Street
1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Union
Street
East Starting at a point in
the easterly sideline a
distance of 274 feet
northerly of the
intersection of the
northerly sideline of
George Street with
the easterly sideline
of Union Street,
thence northerly 45
feet to a point which
is approximately 58
feet southerly of the
southerly sideline of
Hill Street
1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Westfield
Street
South From the west side of
Pleasant Street
westerly 85 feet
15
mins.
8:00 a.m. and
6:30 p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
Worcester
Street
Both Entire length 1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
except Sundays
and public
holidays
§ 400-14. Parking prohibited during certain hours on certain
streets.
No person shall park a vehicle in the following described streets or parts
thereof:
§ 400-13 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 400-14
1:406
Name of
Street Side Location Hours/Days
Amostown
Road
West From the southerly
sideline of Homestead
Avenue southerly 790
feet
9:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.
Baldwin
Street
West From the northerly line
of Memorial Avenue to a
point 125 feet northerly
thereof
8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Any day, except
Saturdays, Sundays
and public holidays
Chestnut
Street
[Repealed
9-9-2009]
City View
Avenue
East From Westfield Street
northerly 650 feet
8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Any day, except
Saturdays, Sundays
and public holidays
City View
Avenue
East From a point beginning
100 feet northerly of the
intersection of the
northerly sideline of
Westfield Street with the
easterly sideline of City
View Avenue, thence
northerly 100 feet
8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
City View
Avenue
West From Westfield Street to
Burke Avenue
8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Any day, except
Saturdays, Sundays
and public holidays
Elm Street West From a point 320 feet
southerly of the
southerly sideline of
Grandview Avenue
southerly 190 feet
8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Any day, except
Saturdays, Sundays
and public holidays
Harwich
Road
[Repealed
12-20-2010]
Harwich
Road
[Added
12-20-2010;
repealed
3-21-2011]
§ 400-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-14
1:407
Name of
Street Side Location Hours/Days
Homestead
Avenue
South From the westerly
sideline of Amostown
Road westerly 440 feet
9:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.
Kings
Highway
South From the westerly end to
the easterly end of the
building formerly known
as "McDonough School,"
a distance of 132 feet
8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Any day, except
Saturdays, Sundays
and public holidays
Lathrop
Street
[Repealed
12-28-2009]
Main
Street
East From the northerly line
of Belle Avenue to a
point 128 feet northerly
thereof
8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Any day, except
Saturdays, Sundays
and public holidays
Main
Street
East From the southerly line
of the main sidewalk
leading to the St.
Frances Xavier Cabrini
Church to a point 144
feet southerly to the end
of the church property.
This section shall not be
effective during any
church services.
8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Any day, except
Saturdays, Sundays
and public holidays
Main
Street
West From the southerly line
of Hill Street south a
distance of 50 feet. This
section shall not be
effective during any
church services of the St.
Frances Xavier Cabrini
Church.
8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Any day, except
Saturdays, Sundays
and public holidays
Maple
Street
[Repealed
9-9-2009]
Massasoit
Avenue
[Added
6-25-2018]
North From Orange Street to
Frederick Street
9:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
§ 400-14 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 400-14
1:408
Name of
Street Side Location Hours/Days
Massasoit
Avenue
[Added
6-25-2018]
South From Orange Street to
Frederick Street
8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
Mercury
Court
North and
west
Entire length 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Any day, except
Saturdays, Sundays
and public holidays
Morgan
Road
South From the westerly end of
the building at
1700-1702 Riverdale
Street to the easterly
end of the building, a
distance of 135 feet
8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Any day, except
Saturdays, Sundays
and public holidays
Norman
Street
Both From the intersection
with Memorial Avenue
westerly for 800 feet
7:00 a.m. to 2:00
p.m./Saturday
Park
Avenue
North Entire length 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
Park
Avenue
South From the westerly line of
Progress Avenue to a
point 128 feet westerly
thereof
8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Any day, except
Saturdays, Sundays
and public holidays
Park
Avenue
South Between Union Street
and Main Street
7:00 a.m. and 3:00
p.m./Monday through
Friday
Park Drive Entire length of the
northerly sideline,
426.05 feet
9:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.
Park Street North From the easterly end of
Elm Street to a point 369
feet easterly thereof
8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Any day, except
Saturdays, Sundays
and public holidays
Pine Street
[Repealed
9-9-2009]
Riverdale
Street
West From the northerly line
of the John Ashley School
lot to a point 150 feet
southerly thereof
8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Any day, except
Saturdays, Sundays
and public holidays
§ 400-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-14
1:409
Name of
Street Side Location Hours/Days
Southworth
Street
North From the westerly line of
Lathrop Street to a point
350 feet westerly thereof
8:00 a.m. to 8:45 a.m.
and 2:30 p.m. to 3:15
p.m./School days only
Southworth
Street
South From the easterly line of
Elm Street to a point 435
easterly thereof
8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Any day, except
Saturdays, Sundays
and public holidays
Union
Street
East From the southerly line
of Fairview Avenue to the
northerly line of Church
Street
8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Any day, except
Saturdays, Sundays
and public holidays
Upper
Church
Street
North From Westfield Street
westerly to Second
Street
9:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.
Westfield
Street
North From a point 80 feet
westerly of the westerly
sideline of Boulevard to
the easterly sideline of
Pine Street, and from the
westerly sideline of
Silver Street, extended
westerly to the most
westerly end of the
traffic island at the
intersection of Westfield
Street with Kings
Highway
4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.
Westfield
Street
South From a point 80 feet
westerly of the westerly
sideline of South
Boulevard westerly
approximately 4,400 feet
to the westerly end of
the section of Westfield
Street maintained by the
Town
7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
Wolcott
Avenue
[Added
9-9-2009]
West From a point of 130 feet
north of the northerly
sideline of Westfield
Street extended
northerly 500 feet
9:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m.
and 5:00 p.m. to 9:00
p.m./Sundays
§ 400-14 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 400-14
1:410
Name of
Street Side Location Hours/Days
Woodmont
Street
Starting at the
intersection of the
northerly sideline of
Westfield Street with the
easterly sideline of
Woodmont Street, then
northerly along the
easterly sideline of
Woodmont Street a
distance of 308.110 feet
to the intersection of the
southerly sideline of
Granger Place with the
easterly sideline of
Woodmont Street
6:00 a.m. to 1:00
p.m./Sundays
§ 400-15. Parking on certain streets without lights.
Vehicles may be parked without lights during the period from one-half hour
after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise on the following streets or parts
thereof:
Name of Street Location
Park Avenue From Union Street to Main Street
Park Street From Riverdale Street to Elm Street
Upper Church Street In the Mittineague Section, from Westfield
Street to Second Street
§ 400-16. Angle parking.
§ 400-17. Service zones.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any streets in any service zone for
a period of time longer than 15 minutes except while actually engaged in
loading or unloading, provided that such loading and unloading does not
exceed a period of time longer than one-half hour.
The Town Council shall determine upon what streets angle parking will
be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets or cause the same to
be marked or signed.
A.
Upon the streets or parts of streets which have been marked or signed
for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked with one wheel within 12
inches of the curb and at the angle to the curb indicated by such marks
or official signs. The vehicle shall be parked so that all four wheels of
the vehicle shall be placed wholly with the painted lines provided.
B.
§ 400-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-18
1:411
§ 400-18. Overnight parking prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, other than one acting in
an emergency, to park said vehicle on any street for a period of time longer
than one hour between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day.
§ 400-19. Advertising vehicle for sale.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park upon a street or highway any
vehicle displayed for sale.
§ 400-20. Taxi stands.110
No person shall park a taxicab upon any street within a business district at
any place other than a taxicab stand or stands designated for the use of his
taxicab or taxicabs except while engaged. No vehicle, not being a taxicab,
shall park within any space designated as a taxi stand.
§ 400-21. Parked vehicle displaying advertisement.
No person shall park a vehicle on any street or highway for the sole purpose
of displaying advertising or political signs.
§ 400-22. Unattached trailers.
No person shall park or stand any trailer or semi-trailer on any part of any
street, way, highway, road or parkway under the control of the Town of
West Springfield unless such trailer or semi-trailer is attached to a motor
vehicle capable of towing it, except during the actual loading or unloading
of materials.
§ 400-23. Commercial vehicles and trailers.
No driver shall park or stand any commercial vehicle or trailer having a
gross vehicle weight of 20,000 pounds or more for more than one hour
between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day, or at any time on
Sunday, except for loading and unloading.
§ 400-24. Impeding snow or ice removal.
No person shall stand or park or allow, permit or suffer any vehicle
registered in his name to stand or park upon any way, tree belt or median
strip in such manner as to impede the removal or plowing of snow or ice.
§ 400-25. Emergency parking ban.
Upon a vote by the Town Council and approved by the Mayor, it shall be
unlawful for an operator or owner of any vehicle to park such vehicle on any
public or private street during an emergency declared by the Mayor or his/
110. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 235, Taxicabs.
§ 400-18 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 400-25
1:412
her designee. Public notice of the imposition of such emergency ban shall be
given prior to its imposition. The ban shall remain in effect until terminated
by the Mayor or his/her designee.
§ 400-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-25
1:413

ARTICLE V
One-Way Streets
§ 400-26. One-way streets designated.
Upon the following streets or parts of streets, vehicular traffic shall move
only in the direction indicated below:
Name of Street Direction of Travel Location
Beauview Terrace Northeasterly That part southeast of the
Green
Beauview Terrace Southwesterly That part northwest of the
Green
Bresnahan Street Southerly Entire length
Bridge Street, in the
Merrick Section,
commonly called
"Old Bridge Street"
Easterly From Union Street to Main
Street
Bridge Street, in the
Merrick Section,
commonly called
"Old Bridge Street"
Westerly From Union Street to
Memorial Avenue
Central Street Northeasterly That part southeast of the
Green
Central Street Southwesterly That part northwest of the
Green
Elm Street, that part
east of the Green
Northerly From Park Street to Worthen
Street
Elm Street, that part
east of the Green
Northerly From Worthen Street to
Avondale Avenue
Elm Street, that part
west of the Green
Southerly From Avondale Avenue to
Worthen Street
Elm Street, that part
west of the Green
Southerly From Worthen Street to Park
Street
Globe Street Southeasterly From Railroad Street to
Bridge Street
Hanover Street Northerly From Park Street to
Southworth Street
Hemlock Street Northerly From Hampden Street to
Westfield Street
Lathrop Street Southbound From Southworth Street to
Park Street
§ 400-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-26
1:415
Name of Street Direction of Travel Location
Main Street Northwesterly From Memorial Avenue to
Bresnahan Street
Main Street Southerly From Park Street to Park
Avenue
New Bridge Street Easterly From Memorial Avenue to
Union Street
Park Avenue Easterly From the westerly end of the
Town Common to the North
End Bridge
Park Street Westerly From the North End Bridge to
the westerly end of the Town
Common
Railroad Street Northerly From Bridge Street to Globe
Street
Rogers Avenue Northerly The easterly entrance from
Westfield Street for the length
of the traffic island
Rogers Avenue Southerly From the beginning of the
traffic island to Westfield
Street
South Boulevard,
that part east of the
Green
Northwesterly From High Street to Westfield
Street
South Boulevard,
that part west of the
Green
Southeasterly From Westfield Street to High
Street
Spring Street Southwesterly From Main Street to Union
Street
Van Deene Avenue Northerly for the
length of the traffic
island
The northerly entrance from
Park Street
Van Deene Avenue Southerly From the beginning of the
traffic island to Park Street
Wilder Terrace, that
part east of the
Green
Northerly From Johnson Street to
Westfield Street
Wilder Terrace, that
part west of the
Green
Southerly From Westfield Street to
Johnson Street
Witch Path Easterly From Elm Street to Riverdale
Street111
§ 400-26 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 400-26
1:416
111. Editor's Note: Former Art. V(A), Restricted Use on Certain Streets, prohibiting commercial
vehicles on a part of Kings Highway, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed 3-21-2011.
§ 400-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-26
1:417

ARTICLE VI
Operation of Vehicles
§ 400-27. Driving within marked lanes.
When any roadway has been divided into lanes, a driver of a vehicle shall
drive so as to be entirely within a single lane and shall not move from the
lane in which he is driving until he has first ascertained if such movement
can be made with safety.
§ 400-28. Driving in right lane.
Upon all roadways, the driver of a vehicle shall drive in the lane nearest the
right side of the roadway when said lane is available for travel, except when
overtaking another vehicle or when preparing for a left turn.
§ 400-29. Overtaking vehicles.
The driver of a vehicle shall not overtake and pass a vehicle proceeding
in the same direction unless there is sufficient clear space ahead on the
right side of the roadway to permit the overtaking to be completed without
impeding the safe operation of any vehicle ahead.
§ 400-30. Driver to give way to overtaking vehicle.
The driver of a vehicle, when about to be overtaken and passed by another
vehicle approaching from the rear, shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle, on suitable and audible signal being given by the driver
of the overtaking vehicle, and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle
until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
§ 400-31. Obstructing traffic.
§ 400-32. Following too closely.
The driver of a vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is
reasonable and prudent, having due regard to the speed of such vehicle and
the traffic upon and condition of the street or highway.
No person shall drive in such a manner as to obstruct unnecessarily
the normal movement of traffic upon any street or highway. Officers are
hereby authorized to require any driver who fails to comply with this
section to drive to the side of the roadway and wait until such traffic as
has been delayed has passed.
A.
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless
there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or
crosswalk and on the right half of the roadway to accommodate the
vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other
vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal
indication to proceed.
B.
§ 400-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-33
1:419
§ 400-33. Distance between slow-moving vehicles.
Upon roadways less than 27 feet wide and upon which vehicular traffic
is permitted to operate in both directions, the driver of any slow-moving
vehicle when traveling outside of a business or residential district shall not
follow another slow-moving vehicle within 200 feet, but this shall not be
construed to prevent such slow-moving vehicle from overtaking and passing
another slow-moving vehicle. This section shall not apply to funerals or
other lawful processions.
§ 400-34. Care in starting, stopping, turning or backing.
The driver of any vehicle, before starting, stopping or turning from a direct
line or backing, shall first see that such movement can be made in safety. If
the operation of another vehicle should be affected by a stopping or turning
movement, the driver of such vehicle shall be given a plainly visible signal,
as required by the following section.
§ 400-35. Stopping and turning signals.
Hand and arm signals, as required herein, shall be made in conformity with
the requirements of MGL c. 90, § 14B.
§ 400-36. Driving on sidewalks prohibited.
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon any sidewalk except at a
permanent or temporary driveway.
§ 400-37. Obedience to isolated stop signs.
Every driver of a vehicle, or other conveyance, approaching an
intersection of ways where there exists facing him an official sign,
bearing the word "stop" and authorized by this section, said sign
having, apart from this regulation, the written approval of the
Massachusetts Department of Transportation, and such approval being
in effect, shall, before proceeding through the intersection, bring such
vehicle, railway car or other conveyance to a complete stop at such
point as may be clearly marked by a sign or line, or if a point is not
so marked, then at a place between the "stop" sign and the nearer
line of the street intersection. In the case of a line of two or more
vehicles approaching such "stop" sign, the drivers of the second and
third vehicles in line in any group shall not be required to stop more
than once before proceeding through the intersection. This section
shall not apply when the traffic is otherwise directed by an officer or by
a lawful traffic-regulating sign, signal or device.
A.
In accordance with the foregoing, the erection and maintenance of an
official "stop" sign or signs are authorized so as to face as follows:
B.
§ 400-33 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 400-37
1:420
Name of Street Stop Sign(s) Facing At Intersection of
Allston Avenue East and west Cold Spring Avenue
Allston Avenue Northwest River Street
Amostown Road East Kings Highway
Amostown Road North and south Piper Road
Amostown Road South Pease Avenue
Ashley Avenue North Ashley Avenue (as
relocated)
Ashley Avenue Northeast Wayside Avenue
Ashley Street
[Added
2-21-2017]
Southeast Summit Street and First
Street
Baldwin Street North at Sears Way River Street
Baldwin Street Southeast Memorial Avenue
Birnie Avenue Northeast Piper Road and Birnie
Avenue
Birnie Avenue South Morgan Road
Bliss Street East and west Union Street
Bliss Street East and west Western Avenue
Bradford Drive West Craig Drive
Bridge Street West Main Street
Brush Hill Avenue West Piper Road
Cayenne Street Southeast Morgan Road
Churchill Street East Harwich Road
Cold Spring
Avenue
Northeast Baldwin Street
Cold Spring
Avenue [Added
12-18-2017]
Northeast and
southwest
Norman Street
Cold Spring
Avenue [Amended
3-16-1966]
Southwest Baldwin Street
Colony Road South Memorial Avenue
Cornflower Drive
[Amended
12-19-2011]
East and west Rogers Avenue
Craig Drive North and south Myron Street
§ 400-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-37
1:421
Name of Street Stop Sign(s) Facing At Intersection of
Day Street Northeast and
southwest
Union Street
Dewey Street East Amostown Road
Edgewood Road East Sawmill Road
Fausey Drive North Circle Drive
Fausey Drive South Amostown Road
Fox Street East Route 5 (Riverdale Street)
Garden Street East Route 5 (Riverdale Street)
Hampden Street
[Added
12-18-2017]
East and west Pleasant Street
Healy Street South Ashley Street
Heywood Avenue Northwest Cold Spring Avenue
Heywood Avenue Northwest River Street
Heywood Avenue Southeast Cold Spring Avenue
Homestead Avenue West Massachusetts Avenue
Interstate Drive South Prospect Avenue
Janet Street South Forris Street
Jeffrey Lane South Jeffrey Lane at Jeffrey
Lane
Johnson Street East and west Wilder Terrace
Lathrop Street South Southworth Street
Maple Street East Boulevard
Maple Street East and west Chestnut Street
New Bridge Street East and west Main Street
New Bridge Street East and west Union Street
Norman Street
[Repealed
12-18-2017]
Norman Street Northwest and
southeast
Cold Spring Avenue
Norman Street Southeast Memorial Avenue
Old Barn Road West Havenhurst Road
Old Bridge Street Southwest Memorial Avenue
Park Drive East Harwich Road
Pine Street South Westfield Street
§ 400-37 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 400-37
1:422
§ 400-38. Operation around roadway divisions.
Upon such roadways as are divided by a parkway grass plot, reservation,
viaduct, subway or by any structure or area, drivers shall keep to the right
Name of Street Stop Sign(s) Facing At Intersection of
Piper Cross Road Northeast Morgan Road
Piper Cross Road Southwest Piper Road
Piper Road South Kings Highway
Pleasant Street
[Added
12-18-2017]
North and south Hampden Street
Pleasant Street North and south High Street
Prospect Avenue North Highland Avenue
Roanoke Avenue Northwest River Street
Roanoke Avenue Southeast Cold Spring Avenue
Rogers Avenue North Dewey Street
Sears Way South Baldwin Street and River
Street
Second Street North and south Upper Church Street
Second Street South Front Street
Southworth Street East Route 5 (Riverdale Street)
Southworth Street East and west Lathrop Street
Summit Street East and west Second Street
Sweetfern Drive North and south Woodbrook Terrace
Terry Road North Harwich Road
Upper Church East and west Second Street
Van Deene Avenue North Westfield Street
Verdugo Street East Morton Street
Verdugo Street East and west Lancaster Avenue
Virginia Avenue
[Added
12-18-2017]
East and west Ely Avenue
Warren Street East Route 5 (Riverdale Street)
West School Street Southwest Union Street
Wilder Terrace South Ashley Street
Woodmont Street North and south Verdugo Street
§ 400-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-38
1:423
of such a division except when otherwise directed by an officer, signs,
signals or markings.
§ 400-39. Obedience to traffic control signals.
General.
Colors and arrow indications in traffic control signals shall have the
commands ascribed to them in this section, and no other meanings,
and every driver of a vehicle or other conveyance shall comply
therewith, except when otherwise directed by an officer or by a
lawful traffic regulating sign (other than a "stop" sign"), signal or
device.
(1)
In no case shall a driver enter or proceed through an intersection
without due regard to the safety of other persons within the
intersection, regardless of what indications may be given by traffic
control signals.
(2)
A.
Green. While the green lens is illuminated, drivers facing the signal
may proceed through the intersection, but shall yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians and vehicles lawfully within a crosswalk or the intersection
at the time such signal was exhibited. Drivers of vehicles making a right
or left turn shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians crossing with the
flow of traffic.
B.
Right, left and vertical green arrows. When a right green arrow is
illuminated, drivers facing said signal may turn right. When a left green
arrow is illuminated, drivers facing said signal may turn left. When a
vertical green arrow is illuminated, drivers facing said signal may go
straight ahead. When a green arrow is exhibited together with a red or
yellow lens, drivers may enter the intersection to make the movement
permitted by the arrow, but shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles and
pedestrians proceeding from another direction on a green indication.
C.
Yellow. While the yellow lens is illuminated, waiting drivers shall not
proceed and any driver approaching the intersection, or a marked stop
line, shall stop at such point unless so close to the intersection that a
stop cannot be made in safety; provided, however, that if a green arrow
is illuminated at the same time, drivers may enter the intersection to
make the movement permitted by such arrow.
D.
Red.
Traffic facing a steady circular red signal alone shall stop at a
clearly marked stop line or, if none, before entering the crosswalk
on the near side before entering the intersection and shall remain
standing until an indication to proceed is shown except as allowed
by MGL c. 89, § 8.
(1)
E.
§ 400-38 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 400-39
1:424
§ 400-40. Loaded vehicles.
No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street or highway nor shall
any owner of any vehicle knowingly permit such vehicle to be driven or
moved on any street or highway unless such vehicle is so constructed or so
loaded as to prevent its contents from spilling, dropping, sifting, leaking or
otherwise escaping therefrom. Vehicles loaded with any material which may
be blown by the wind shall be suitably covered to prevent the contents from
being blown upon the streets or highways.
No driver of the vehicle facing a circular red signal indication
shall make a right turn where official traffic signs are installed and
maintained prohibiting such turn at the following intersections.
(2)
The direction of travel and names of the streets from which right
turn on red will be prohibited are listed below:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Baldwin Street Southbound Memorial Avenue
Bresnahan Street Southbound Memorial Avenue
Chestnut Street Southbound Westfield Street
Kings Highway Eastbound Elm Street
Memorial Avenue Eastbound Entrance of Century
Shopping Center
Memorial Avenue Westbound Baldwin Street
North Boulevard
Street
Southbound Westfield Street
Park Street Westbound Elm Street
Second Street Northbound Westfield Street
Westfield Street Eastbound Second Street
Witch Path Westbound Elm Street
(3)
Red and yellow. While the red and yellow lenses are illuminated
together, drivers shall not enter the intersection; and during such time
the intersection shall be reserved for the exclusive use of pedestrians.
F.
Flashing red. A flashing red lens shall indicate those intersections at
which a driver is required by law to stop before entering.
G.
Flashing yellow. A flashing yellow lens shall indicate the presence of a
hazard and drivers may proceed only with caution.
H.
Flashing green. A flashing green lens shall indicate an intersection or
pedestrian crosswalk in use and subject to use by entering or crossing
traffic. Drivers may proceed only with caution and shall be prepared to
comply with a change in the signal to a red and/or yellow indication.
I.
§ 400-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-41
1:425
§ 400-41. Turning movements.
Where official traffic control devices are erected directing specific traffic to
use a designated lane or designated lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway, or to prohibit
a turn or to make a required turn at an intersection of roadways, drivers of
vehicles shall obey the direction of every such device. In accordance with
the foregoing, the streets listed are incorporated in this section.
Left lane must turn left.
Name of Street Turn Restriction
East Elm Street Westbound traffic onto southbound Elm
Street
Elm Street Eastbound traffic onto East Elm Street
Elm Street Northbound to Kings Highway westbound
Kings Highway Eastbound to Elm Street northbound
Kings Highway Westbound traffic into commercial driveway
at Westfield Street and onto eastbound
Westfield Street
Memorial Avenue Northbound traffic onto River Street
Park Avenue Eastbound traffic at Van Deene Avenue
Park Street Westbound traffic at Western Avenue
River Street Eastbound traffic onto northbound Memorial
Avenue
South Boulevard Northbound traffic onto Westfield Street
Westfield Street Eastbound traffic onto Janet Street and
Kings Highway
A.
Right lane must turn right.
Name of Street Turn Restriction
Elm Street Northbound traffic onto East Elm Street
Elm Street Southbound to Kings Highway westbound
River Street Eastbound traffic onto southbound Memorial
Avenue
Westfield Street Eastbound traffic onto South Boulevard
B.
Left turn yield on green.
Name of Street Turn Restriction
Elm Street Northbound to Kings Highway westbound
Park Avenue Eastbound traffic at Van Deene Avenue
C.
§ 400-41 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 400-41
1:426
Name of Street Turn Restriction
Park Street Westbound traffic at Western Avenue
§ 400-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-41
1:427

ARTICLE VII
Responsibilities; Penalties and Repeals
§ 400-42. Violations and penalties.
A fine of $2 shall be imposed for a violation of § 400-10A, B, C, D, E,
F, G, H, J, K, L, M, N and O; § 400-11; § 400-13; § 400-14; § 400-17;
§ 400-18; § 400-19; § 400-20; § 400-21; § 400-23.
A.
B. A fine of $5 shall be imposed for a violation of § 400-10G; § 400-22.
C. A fine of $10 shall be imposed for a violation of § 400-24; § 400-25.
Except as otherwise provided by these rules or by any law or rule or
regulation of any commission, department, or other body authorized by
law to impose penalties for violations of rules, regulations and orders
governing the use and operation of motor vehicles, any person violating
any provision of the foregoing rules and regulations shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $20.
D.
Schedule of fines for offenses, MGL c. 90, §§ 20C and 20D, as amended:
Failure to obey this notice within 21 days after the date of violation will
result in the appearance in court on a criminal complaint. All parking
violation notices properly returned shall be deemed noncriminal. Court
hearing may be obtained upon the written request of the registered
owner.
Fine Code No. Violation Code
$150 each 01a Handicapped parking
$50 each 01 Impeding snow or ice removal
$50 each 02 Snow emergency declaration.
$15 each 03 Within 10 feet of a hydrant
$15 each 04 Unattached trailers
$75 each 05 Commercial vehicle exceeding 8,000
pounds'. gross vehicle weight over 1
hour between 1:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m. on any day, or at any time on
Sunday, except loading or unloading
$15 each 07 Within intersection
$15 each 08 Upon sidewalk
$15 each 09 Upon crosswalk
$15 each 10 On rural roadway
$15 each 11 Over 12 inches from curb
$15 each 12 Allowing less than 10-foot lane
$15 each 13 Within 20 feet of an intersection
E.
§ 400-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-42
1:429
§ 400-43. Owner prima facie responsible for violations.
If any vehicle is found upon any street or highway in violation of any
provisions of these rules and orders and the identity of the driver cannot
be determined, the owner or the person in whose name such vehicle is
registered shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation.
§ 400-44. Severability; repeal of conflicting regulations.
Fine Code No. Violation Code
$15 each 14 Night parking
$15 each 15 Within 10 feet of bus stop sign post
$15 each 16 Upon or in front of any private road
or driveway
$15 each 17 Prohibited zone
$15 each 18 Left side to curb
$15 each 19 Displaying vehicle for sale
$15 each 21 Parked vehicle displaying
advertising
$15 each 22 Overtime (no meter involved)
$15 each 24 Improper angle parking
$15 each 25 In service zone
$15 each 26 Within 15 feet of fire station signs
showing prohibition
$15 each 27 Alongside or opposite street
excavation so as to obstruct
$15 each 28 Tree belt parking offense
MGL c. 90, § 20D provides penalty for unlawfully removing, tampering
with, changing, mutilating or destroying this notice.
These rules are adopted with the intent that each of them shall have
force and effect separately and independently of every other except
insofar as by express reference or necessary implication any rule or any
part of a rule is made dependent upon another rule or part thereof.
A.
The provisions of these rules, so far as they are the same in effect
as those of any existing rules, orders or regulations heretofore made
by the Town Council of West Springfield relative to or in connection
with official signs, lights, markings, signal systems or devices, shall be
construed as a continuation thereof, but all other existing rules, orders
and regulations so made for the regulation of vehicles are hereby
expressly repealed. This repeal, however, shall not affect any
punishment or penalty imposed or any complaint or prosecution
B.
§ 400-42 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 400-44
1:430
pending at the time of the passage hereof for an offense committed
under any of the rules, orders or regulations hereby repealed.
§ 400-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-44
1:431

ARTICLE VIII
Tow-Away Zone Regulations
§ 400-45. Statutory authority.
In accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 22D, the Town Council
of the Town of West Springfield hereby enacts the following regulations
authorizing the removal to a convenient place of vehicles parked or standing
in such manner or in such areas as are hereinafter described on any way
under the control of the Town of West Springfield. Vehicles specifically
exempt under MGL c. 40, § 22D shall not, however, be subject to such
removal.
§ 400-46. Authority of police.
The moving or towing of any vehicle under the provisions of this article shall
be by and at the direction of the Chief of Police or such other officer(s) of
the rank of Sergeant or higher as he may from time to time designate.
§ 400-47. Fees.
The Town Council hereby imposes upon the owner of any vehicle moved
or towed to a convenient place, under the provisions of this article, the
following fees:
§ 400-48. Liability for damage.
The contractor shall be liable to the owner for any damage arising out of
negligence caused to a vehicle in the course of removal and/or storage.
§ 400-49. General prohibition towing zones.
No person shall stand or park or allow, permit or suffer any vehicle
registered in his name to stand or park in any of the following places.
Vehicles found in violation of the provisions of this section, except those
specifically exempt by law, shall be removed to a convenient place under the
direction of an officer of the Police Department and the owner of the vehicle
so removed or towed away shall be liable for the cost of such removal and/
or storage, if any, as set forth in § 400-47 of this article. The owner of any
vehicle removed or towed under the provision of this section shall also be
subject to the penalties provided in MGL c. 90, § 20A.
Removal or towing fee: not to exceed that which is provided in or as
authorized by statute.
A.
Storage fees: not to exceed that which is provided in or as authorized
by statute.
B.
Upon any way in such manner as to impede the removal or plowing
of snow or ice, except vehicles parked in accordance with approved
regulations governing all-night parking.
A.
§ 400-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-49
1:433
§ 400-50. Specific towing zones.
No person shall stand or park or allow, permit or suffer any vehicle
registered in his name to stand or park on any of the ways or parts of ways
hereinafter described and during the periods of time set forth. Vehicles
found in violation of the provisions of this section, except those specifically
exempted by law, shall be removed to a convenient place under the direction
of an officer of the Police Department and the owner of the vehicle so
removed or towed away shall be liable to the cost of such removal and/or
storage, if any, as set forth in § 400-47 of this article. The owner of any
vehicle removed or towed under the provisions of this section shall also be
subject to the penalties provided in MGL c. 90, § 20A.
Name of Street Side Location
Amostown Road West From the southerly sideline of
Homestead Avenue southerly 790 feet
Homestead Avenue North From the westerly sideline of
Amostown Road westerly 400 feet
Homestead Avenue South From the westerly sideline of
Amostown Road westerly 440 feet
Morton Street North From the westerly sideline of
Amostown Road westerly for a
distance of 743 feet
Morton Street South From the westerly sideline of
Amostown Road westerly for a
distance of 802 feet
Park Drive Both Entire length
§ 400-51. Official traffic signs.
The provisions of § 400-50 shall be effective only during such time as a
sufficient number of official traffic signs bearing the legend "TOW-AWAY
ZONE" are installed, erected, maintained and located so as to be visible to
B. Upon any sidewalk.
C. Upon any crosswalk.
D. Upon any way within 20 feet of an intersecting way except alleys.
E. Upon a way within 10 feet of a fire hydrant.
On a roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb
of the way.
F.
G. In front of a public or private driveway.
Upon any way where the parking of a vehicle will not leave a clear and
unobstructed lane at least 10 feet wide for passing traffic.
H.
§ 400-49 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 400-51
1:434
approaching drivers, said signs to be appended above or incorporated into
the legend of parking prohibition signs.
§ 400-52. Record of towed vehicles.
The Police Department shall keep a record of all vehicles towed or removed
under the provisions of this article. Such record shall be retained for one
year and shall contain the following information:
A. The registration of the vehicle.
B. The location from which it was towed, and time and date of tow order.
C. The location to which it was removed.
D. The fee charged for towing.
E. Name of towing contractor, if any.
F. Name and rank of officer who authorized the towing.
§ 400-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-52
1:435

ARTICLE IX
Pedestrian Control Regulations
§ 400-53. Crossing ways or roadways.
Pedestrians shall obey the direction of police officers directing traffic; and
whenever there is an officer directing traffic, a traffic control signal or
a marked pedestrian crosswalk within 300 feet of a pedestrian, no such
pedestrian shall cross a way or roadway except within the limits of a marked
crosswalk and as hereinafter provided in these regulations. For the purpose
of these regulations, a marked crosswalk shall only be construed to be that
area of a roadway reserved for pedestrian crossing located between two
solid white reflectorized twelve-inch pavement markings in rural areas or
markings not less than six inches wide in urban areas, said markings or
lines being no less than six feet apart.
§ 400-54. Actuation of signals.
§ 400-55. Obedience to traffic control signals.
Traffic control signal color indications and legends shall have the commands
ascribed to them in this section and no other meanings, and every
pedestrian shall comply therewith, except when otherwise directed by an
officer.
At a traffic control signal location where pedestrian indications are
provided but which are shown only upon actuation by means of a
pedestrian push button, no pedestrian shall cross a roadway unless or
until the pedestrian control signal push button has been actuated and
then cross only on the proper pedestrian signal indication. At traffic
control signal locations where no pedestrian indication is provided,
pedestrians shall cross only on the green indication. If necessary, the
green indication shall be actuated by the pedestrian by means of a push
button.
A.
At a traffic control signal location, pedestrians shall yield the rightof-
way to vehicles of a funeral or other procession or authorized
emergency vehicle while in performance of emergency duties
regardless of the signal indication given, and they shall not attempt
to cross the roadway until such vehicles or procession has passed, at
which time pedestrians shall then cross the roadway only as provided
in these regulations.
B.
Red and yellow or the word "Walk." Whenever the red and yellow
lenses are illuminated together or the single word "Walk" is illuminated,
pedestrians facing such indication may proceed across the roadway and
in the direction of such signal only.
A.
Red alone or the words "Don't Walk." Whenever the words "Don't
Walk" or any indication other than red and yellow shown together are
illuminated in a traffic control signal where pedestrian indications are
B.
§ 400-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-55
1:437
§ 400-56. Crossings and use of roadways.
provided, pedestrians approaching or facing such indication shall wait
on the sidewalk, edge of roadway or in the pedestrian refuge area
of a traffic island and shall not enter upon or across a roadway until
the proper indication is illuminated in the traffic control signal, but
any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the walk
indication shall proceed or return to the nearest sidewalk or safety
island on the yellow indication, the red indication or when the words
"Don't Walk" are illuminated by rapid intermittent flashes.
Green alone. At traffic control signal locations where no pedestrian
indication is given or provided, pedestrians facing the signal may
proceed across the roadway within any marked crosswalk in the
direction of the green indication.
C.
Yellow alone, red alone or flashing "Don't Walk." Pedestrians
approaching or facing a yellow, red, flashing "Don't Walk" illuminated
indication shall not start to cross a roadway.
D.
Flashing red, yellow or green. At any traffic control signal location
where a flashing red, flashing yellow or flashing green indication is
being given facing a crosswalk, pedestrians shall actuate, where
provided, the pedestrian signal indication and cross the roadway only
on the red-yellow or "Walk" indication when such indication is in
operation. If no pedestrian signal is provided, pedestrians shall cross
within crosswalks with due care.
E.
No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a sidewalk or safety island and walk
or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible
for the driver to yield the right-of-way.
A.
Pedestrians shall at all times attempt to cross a roadway using the right
half of crosswalks.
B.
Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian
to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway whenever the sidewalk is
open to pedestrian use.
C.
Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the
roadway on its unfinished shoulder facing traffic which may approach
from the opposite direction.
D.
Persons alighting from the roadway side of any vehicle parked at the
curb or edge of roadway shall proceed immediately to the sidewalk or
edge of roadway adjacent to vehicle, and shall cross the roadway only
as authorized by these regulations.
E.
It shall be unlawful for any person to actuate a pedestrian control signal
or to enter a marked crosswalk unless a crossing of the roadway is
intended.
F.
§ 400-55 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 400-57
1:438
§ 400-57. Crossing at nonsignalized locations.
Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the
roadway. At a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overpass has been
provided, pedestrians shall cross the roadway only by the proper use of the
tunnel or overpass.
§ 400-58. Operators to exercise due care.
The provisions of these regulations shall in no way abrogate the provisions
of MGL c. 90, §§ 14 and 14A, which provide: "Precautions for Safety of Other
Travelers" and for the "Protection of Blind Persons Crossing or Attempting
to Cross Ways." Furthermore, notwithstanding the provisions of these
regulations, every operator of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid
colliding with any pedestrian upon the roadway and shall give warning by
sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precautions
which may become necessary for safe operation.
§ 400-59. Soliciting rides or business.
No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride,
employment or business from the operator or occupant of any vehicle
without the written permission of the board or officer having control of such
roadway or highway.
§ 400-60. Enforcement.
These pedestrian control regulations shall be enforced by all officers of the
Town of West Springfield.
§ 400-61. Exemptions.
The provisions of these rules and regulations governing the use of ways by
pedestrians shall not apply to pedestrians actually engaged in work upon a
roadway closed to travel or under construction or repair, to municipal, state,
federal or public service corporation employees while in the performance of
their duties, to officers engaged in the performance of their public duties or
to pedestrians acting in an emergency when such emergency necessitates
departure from any part of these rules and regulations.
§ 400-62. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of this article which deal with the
proper use of the ways by pedestrians shall be punished as provided in MGL
c. 90, § 18A.
§ 400-63. Effect of regulations; severability.
All existing rules and regulations governing the operation of vehicles
or the use of ways by pedestrians which are inconsistent herewith are
A.
§ 400-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-63
1:439
hereby expressly repealed. This repeal shall not, however, affect any
complaint or prosecution pending at the time of passage hereof for
any offense committed under any of the rules and regulations hereby
repealed.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of these rules
and regulations is for any reason unconstitutional, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portion of these rules and
regulations. The Town Council of the Town of West Springfield hereby
declares that it would have passed these rules and regulations and each
section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of
the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses
or phrases is declared unconstitutional.
B.
§ 400-63 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § 400-63
1:440
Chapter A500
GENERAL LAWS AND SPECIAL ACTS
§ A500-1. General Law acceptances.
The following General Laws of the commonwealth have been accepted by
the Town of West Springfield:
Chapter Section Subject Year Accepted
31 47 Civil service to official and labor
service
1954
31 48 Civil service to police 1954
31 49A Civil service to Accountant and
Superintendent of Streets
1940
32 20(6)(a) Retirement Board members'
compensation
1995
32 20A Indemnify Retirement Board
members
1999
32 22(1)(b 1/
2)
Removal of retirement cap of
$30,000
1991
32 25-31h Contributory retirement 1936
32 56-60 Veterans' retirement (by
Selectmen July 10, 1937)
1937
32 85E Police and fire retirement 1947
32 90A Town Employee Retirement Acts
of 1959, C 595
2001
32 90G 3/4 Continuation of retirement
benefits for employees age 70
and over
1991
32 90J Retirement system payment of
physical and mental
examinations for members age
70 and over
1991
32B 4 Group life insurance and $2,000
accidental death and
dismemberment insurance for
retired employees in lieu of
$1,000 group life insurance
1988
32B Group insurance (Town-wide
vote)
1957
32B 7A Town payment of 75% of
insurance for employees
1977
§ 400-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A500-1
1:441
Chapter Section Subject Year Accepted
32B 8A Use of insurance dividends or
refunds to reduce employees'
share of premium costs
1966
32B 9D 1/2 Allowing Town to pay surviving
spouse of insured or retired
employee more than 50% of cost
of health insurance
1996
32B 10 Extending group insurance to
elderly retired persons
1963
32B 18 Requirements of retirees transfer
to a Medicare extension plan/
Medicare supplemental
insurance
2005
32B 20 Other Post-Employment Benefits
Liability Trust Fund
2010
39 23D Board/Commission/Committee
members shall not be disqualified
from voting at an adjudicatory
hearing based on a members
absence from 1 session of said
hearing
2015
40 3, lines
40-43
Rental income from school 2000
40 4G Advertising contracts prior to
award
1985
40 6B Uniform replacement 1956
40 6C Appropriating money for removal
of snow and ice from private
ways open to the public
1966
40 6F Repairs to certain private ways
for purposes of public
convenience
1966
40 6J Stormy weather work clothes and
rubber boots for employees
1969
40 8A Establishing Development and
Industrial Commission
1962
40 8C Establishing Conservation
Commission
1962
40 8D Establishing Historical
Commission
1973
§ A500-1 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § A500-1
1:442
Chapter Section Subject Year Accepted
40 8G Allowing municipalities to enter
mutual aid agreements
2014
40 13A Workmen's Compensation
Insurance Fund
1982
40 13C Workers' Compensation Claim
Reserve Fund
1997
40A Zoning Enabling Act 1976
40B 7 Membership in Lower Pioneer
Valley Regional Planning
Commission
1961
40 21D Noncriminal disposition of
ordinance, rule or regulation
violations
1994
40 22D Vehicles parked in violation of
law: removal
2014
41 21 Selectmen acting as Board of
Public Works
1984
41 25A Assistant Assessors 1921
41 41B Salary direct deposit 2003
41 81A Establishing Planning Board 1941
41 91 Appointment of Constable 2003
41 100A Indemnification of Town
employees
1939
41 108L Quinn Bill 1993 (revoked
4-22-2010)
41 111 Vacations for certain employees 1948
41 111A Vacations for Police and Fire
Departments
1956
43D Expedited Permitting —
Economic Development Districts
2015
44 53C Deposit and expenditure of
moneys for off-duty police work
1973
44 53D Establishment of revolving fund 1988
44 53E Establishing user fees 1984
44 43F 1/2 Establishing Enterprise Fund 1993
44 64 Payment of bills incurred in
excess of appropriations
2010
44 65 Advance pay for vacations 1946
§ A500-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A500-1
1:443
Chapter Section Subject Year Accepted
44B 3-7 Community Preservation Act 2008
44B 3(e) Community Preservation Act -
exempted the first $100,000 of
value of each taxable parcel of
residential real estate from the
surcharge (Annual Town
Election, Question #5) - Imposes
1.0% surcharge on the total
taxable value of each tax parcel
of land used for commercial and
industrial purposes (Annual Town
Election, Question # 6)
2009
45 24 Penalty for violation of park and
recreation regulations
1977
48 38 Act in relation to payment of Fire
Department
1895
48 42-44 Establishing Fire Department 1947 (rescinded
3-5-1979)
48 42A Fire Department under direction
of Board of Selectmen
1979
48 58B Fire Department, 48-hour week 1956
48 58D 42-hour week for firefighters 1968
48 58E Firefighters' residence 1971
51 58 Publishing names of additional
voters (rejected)
1956
54 16A Appointment by Clerk to fill
vacancies
1957
54 34 Paper ballots used in special
election
1957
54 103A Absentee voting 1954
59 5, Clause
17C
Reimbursement for tax
exemptions
1983
59 5, Clause
17D
Tax exemptions 1986
59 5, Clause
17E
Certain Real Estate Exemptions
(note: this clause was added
when the Town Accepted Chapter
380, Acts of 2000 on September
17, 2002)
2002
59 5, Clause
37A
Tax exemptions for blind 1983
§ A500-1 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § A500-1
1:444
Chapter Section Subject Year Accepted
59 5, Clause
41B
Tax exemptions 1983
59 5, Clause
41C
Tax exemptions (Note: This
clause was added when the Town
accepted Chapter 380, Acts of
2000 on 9-17-2000.)
Increase of allowance from $750
to $1,000 by vote of Council
1-4-2007
1983
59 5, Clause
41D
Certain real estate exemptions
(Note: This clause was added
when the Town accepted Chapter
380, Acts of 2000 on 9-17-2002.)
2002
59 5K Elderly property tax abatement
for volunteer services
2000
59 5N Veteran exchange for volunteer
services - property tax
2013
59 57C Quarterly tax bills 1993
59 59A Authority to grant abatements of
outstanding taxes, interest, and
penalties, due to land
contaminated by hazardous
materials
1999
60 23B Establishing fees for issuance of
municipal lien certificates
(effective 8-1-2009)
2009
60A 1 Exempting an ex-prisoner of war
from paying motor vehicle excise
tax on 1 vehicle, noncommercial
use
1996
60A 1 Allowing Town to grant certain
veterans an exemption from an
excise tax on 1 motor vehicle on
and after 1-1-2010 (enacted by
Sec. 16 of Ch. 182 of the Acts of
2008)
2009
64G 3A Excise tax imposed upon transfer
of the occupancy of any room in
any hotel, lodging house or motel
1989
64L 2(a) Impose a local meal tax effective
10-1-2009
2009
§ A500-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A500-1
1:445
Chapter Section Subject Year Accepted
71 40 Equal pay for men and women
teachers
1961
71 71E Revolving fund for School
Department
1981
71 71F Tuition payments for students 1983
82 37 Establishing building lines 1956
85 11A Bicycle registration 1953
90 18A Use of ways by pedestrians 1980
90 20A 1/2 Parking Clerk and fines 1981
90 20C Uniform procedure for parking of
motor vehicles
1969
90 22B Abandoned vehicles 2002
91 29 Town liable for damages, etc. 1940
93 29-33 Billboard regulations 1936
121B 4 Organize and establish a
Redevelopment Authority
2002
131 105A,
105B,
105C and
114A
Steel traps 1934
136 4B Operating bowling alleys on
Lord's Day
1947
136 7 and 8 Sales on Lord's Day 1943
136 21-25 Certain sports on Lord's Day 1929
138 12B Nudity on premises where sale of
alcoholic beverages takes place
1982
139 1-3 Rebuilding burned and damaged
buildings
1956
140 132-136 Smoke nuisance 1952
147 13A Reserve police force 1936
147 16B For police, 1 day off in 6 1945
147 32-47 Licensed boxing matches 1927
148 26G Fire sprinklers 2000
148 261 Sprinklers for multiple dwelling
units
2000
149 30 8-hour day; 48-hour week 1938
§ A500-1 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § A500-1
1:446
Chapter Section Subject Year Accepted
180 17A Union dues deducted from
payroll
1955
258 13 Indemnification of Town officers 1981
§ A500-2. Special Acts pertaining to Town.
The following Special Acts of the commonwealth pertain to the Town of West
Springfield:
Acts of Chapter Subject
1867 242 Shade trees standing in highways
1869 366 Impounding of cattle
1869 389 Authorizing County Commissioners to construct
2 dikes in West Springfield
1871 382 Relative to betterments
1874 180 In relation to judicial districts and district courts
of East Hampden and Police Court of Springfield
1875 138 Incorporating West Springfield Aqueduct
Company
1877 43 Relative to upkeep of dikes in West Springfield
1878 20 Establishing free bridge across Connecticut
River between Springfield and West Springfield
1878 44 Relative to main drains and sewers in West
Springfield
1878 238 West Springfield to borrow money for certain
purposes
1880 52 Selectmen of West Springfield to provide for
upkeep of dam and channel of Agawam River
1882 154 Authorizing towns and cities to lay out public
parks within their limits
1883 64 Relative to Massachusetts Central Railroad
Company
1883 130 Relieving West Springfield and Agawam from
certain forfeitures
1884 30 Relative to deed from proprietors of locks and
canals of Connecticut River
1884 36 Authorizing West Springfield Aqueduct
Company to issue bonds
1884 124 Changing name of Mittineague Congregational
Society
§ A500-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A500-2
1:447
Acts of Chapter Subject
1885 228 Authorizing Poughkeepsie-Hartford and Boston
Railroad to extend
1885 50, § 22-23 Sidewalks
1886 264 Precinct voting in towns
1887 76 Amending Charter of Springfield Street Railway
Company
1887 200 Act amending Chapter 228 of the Acts of 1885
1889 386 Authorizing Hartford and Connecticut Railroad
to extend road
1890 86 Act uniting Springfield and West Springfield
1890 240 Authorizing cities and towns to lay out public
parks within their limits
1891 90 Protection of Town against further
encroachments of Connecticut River
1891 145 Extending time for construction of New York
and Massachusetts Railroad
1893 87 Revoking Act accepting distribution of ballots at
expense of public
1893 206 Providing water for West Springfield
1893 417 Codifying and consolidating election laws
1893 417 Election of Assessors
1894 132 Precinct voting
1894 218 Election of Board of Health
1894 324 Reservation of space in public ways
1895 154 Authorizing Springfield Gas Company to hold
real estate in West Springfield and furnish gas
to Town
1895 186 Relative to watering streets in Town
1896 232 Act uniting Springfield and West Springfield
1897 87 Establishing sinking fund
1897 493 Authorizing Hudson and Berkshire Railroad to
extend into Massachusetts
1898 96 Authorizing Springfield Gas Company to hold
real estate and furnish gas to Longmeadow
1898 186 West Springfield to refund portion of its debt
1898 482 Holyoke to supply water outside limits of city
1899 344 8-hour day for city and town employees
§ A500-2 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § A500-2
1:448
Acts of Chapter Subject
1900 190 Furnishing soldiers' relief by cities and towns
1900 458 Providing for construction of new bridge over
Connecticut River between Springfield and West
Springfield
1901 320 Civil service to police
1901 421 Construction of new bridge over Connecticut
River between Springfield and West Springfield
1901 49 Sewer assessments
1902 19 Fire Department under civil service
1902 484 Bridge across Connecticut River between
Springfield and West Springfield
1903 264 Establishing Mt. Tom Reservation
1903 454 Joint caucuses and primaries
1904 327 Pensions for permanent members of Police and
Fire Departments
1904 398 Providing for construction of bridge over
Connecticut River between Chicopee and West
Springfield
1904 33 Relative to pound and field drivers
1905 333 Authorizing West Springfield to make an
additional water loan
1906 169 Authorizing West Springfield to manufacture or
purchase electricity for use of its Water Supply
Department
1906 230 Authorizing County Commissioners to borrow
money for construction of bridge between
Chicopee and West Springfield
1906 297 Authorizing Town of West Springfield to make
bridge loan
1906 317 Authorizing City of Springfield to increase water
supply
1907 191 Establishing Board of Survey in Town
1908 209 Protecting forest land or sprout land from fire
1908 600 Authorizing West Springfield to make additional
water loan
1910 624 Appointing of Town Accountant
1911 468 Extending provisions of civil service to Chiefs of
Police in certain cities and towns
§ A500-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A500-2
1:449
Acts of Chapter Subject
1911 471 Codifying and amending laws relating to stateaided
vocational education
1911 104 Inspection of buildings
1912 102 Incorporation of Park Street Cemetery
Association
1912 447 Relative to retirement of certain veterans in
service of cities and towns
1912 503 Pensioning of laborers
1912 607 Relative to waterworks system of Springfield
1913 494 Establishing Planning Board
1913 571 Relative to maintenance of bridge across
Connecticut River between Chicopee and West
Springfield
1913 655 Revising and codifying building inspection laws
1913 706 Relative to auditing of municipal accounts
1913 807 Compensation to laborers, workmen and
mechanics for injuries
1914 122 Relative to care of cemeteries
1914 217 Vacation for laborers
1914 688 Saturday half-holiday for laborers, workmen and
mechanics; also day work
1914 790 Party enrollment
1915 252 Providing for construction of bridge over
Connecticut River between Springfield and West
Springfield
1916 104 New Year's Day legal holiday
1916 179 Members of 1 political party not to vote in
primary of another
1916 93 Authorizing licensing of motor vehicles carry in
passengers for hire
1916 350 Extending provisions of civil service laws to
members of Fire Department
1916 359 Authorizing abandonment of old dike along
Agawam River in West Springfield
1916 376 Authorizing the alienation for public purposes of
portions of Town burial ground in West
Springfield
1917 156 Relative to disposition of income of Agawam
Congregational Fund
§ A500-2 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § A500-2
1:450
Acts of Chapter Subject
1917 325 Providing for construction of state agricultural
and industrial building at Eastern States
Exposition grounds
1917 350 Extending provisions of civil service laws to
members of Fire Department
1919 132 2-platoon system for Fire Department
1919 311 Establishing and maintaining vocational schools
1920 228 Act authorizing West Springfield to make an
additional water loan
1920 240 Permitting under public regulations certain
sports and games on Lord's Day
1920 261 Exempting from taxation certain property
owned by other states in West Springfield
1921 103 Relative to plumbing regulations
1922 311 Representative Town Meeting
1922 473 Authorizing West Springfield to borrow money
for school purposes
1923 391 Relative to collecting water rates
1924 13 North End Bridge
1926 113 Planning Board to act as Board of Survey
1926 371 Railroad securities
1928 406 Permitting certain sports and games on Lord's
Day
1929 27 Protecting Connecticut Valley from flood
damage
1930 351 Appropriating money for uniforms for Police and
Fire Departments
1934 275 Steel Trap Law
1935 7 Town Physician appointment
1936 211 Providing for improved method of municipal
planning
1936 318 Contributory retirement pensions
1936 403 Workmen's Compensation Law
1937 207 Additional source of water supply for West
Springfield
1938 10 Additional water in Southwick
1938 133 Preventing multiplicity of proposals for same
change in zoning ordinances
§ A500-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A500-2
1:451
Acts of Chapter Subject
1939 7 Establishing Park and Playground Commission
1939 52 Relating to sewers
1939 183 Civil service to Superintendent of Streets and
Town Accountant
1939 513 Town to assume liability for damages incurred
for work done by Massachusetts Department of
Public Works
1941 284 Chairman of Board of Public Welfare to be Town
Meeting member ex officio
1941 408 Taking and holding water by West Springfield
within Southwick
1941 638 Reducing working hours of firemen
1945 499 Advance vacation pay to officers, etc.
1945 723 Advice and assistance to veterans of World War
II
1946 13 Housing Authority Law (federal)
1946 207 Operating bowling alleys on Sunday
1946 490 Authorizing carrying of passengers for hire over
route between Boston and Hancock
1946 559 Increasing pensions of certain former employees
1946 561 Regarding 2 1/2-story house (accepted by
Selectmen)
1946 76 Pensions for police and firemen
1946 592 Variance on housing regarding Board of Appeals
(accepted by Selectmen)
1947 265 Closing Town offices on Saturday
1947 269 Reconversion Act of 1944, Public Law 269: Title
accepting funds from F.W.A. to assist in plan
preparation of public works
1948 292 Representative Town Meetings in West
Springfield
1948 552 Act to increase annuities to dependents of
certain public employees killed or dying from
injuries received or hazards, etc., in
performance of duty
1948 588 Increasing pensions payable to certain former
public employees, etc., to beneficiaries, etc.
1949 74 Town to borrow money for school purposes
§ A500-2 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § A500-2
1:452
Acts of Chapter Subject
1949 348 Exempting certain states from taxes which own
property in West Springfield
1950 360 Conveying certain land from the commonwealth
to Town of West Springfield
1950 783 Increases in retirement allowances to persons
retired after January 1, 1946, with minimum
allowance
1950 820 Increase in annual amounts of certain pensions
retirement allowances, annuities to former
employees, etc.
1951 3 5-day week for police in West Springfield
1951 781 Act to increase pension for certain former
employees
1951 789 Deductions from wages or salaries
1952 624 Increasing pensions to former employees
1953 317 Changing name of Park and Playground
Commission
1953 434 Rent control
1954 171 Robert R. Lewis to become member of
retirement system
1954 496 Rent control
1955 223 Time off for police officers
1955 281 Commonwealth to convey land to West
Springfield
1955 670 Increasing pensions, retirement, etc., to former
employees
1956 352 Act relative to representative Town Meeting in
West Springfield
1956 374 Providing pensions for widows of firefighters
and police officers under noncontributory
retirement law
1956 401 Indemnification of civil defense volunteers for
operation of publicly owned vehicles
1956 694 Department of Agriculture to maintain, repair
and remodel state agricultural and industrial
buildings in West Springfield and Brockton
1956 733 Annuities to dependents of policemen and
firefighters killed in performance of duty
§ A500-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A500-2
1:453
Acts of Chapter Subject
1957 223 Establishing Conservation Commission to
promote the development of natural resources
1957 427 Increasing police and firefighters' pensions
1957 750, § 1 Superannuation retirement, options for payment
pensions for laborers
1958 107 Conveying land to Frank Zendek
1959 493 Increase in amounts of pensions and retirement
allowances payable to certain former public
employees
1959 595 Town to pay half the premium costs for group
life insurance, group general or blanket
hospital, surgical and medical insurance for
retired employees (MGL c. 32B, § 90A)
1960 239, § 2 Increasing noncontributory pensions of certain
laborers
1960 397 Town of West Springfield to sell and convey
certain parkland to James D. and Katharine T.
Allan
1961 120 Authorizing West Springfield to augment its
sewage collecting and disposal system
1961 322 Towing of vehicles from city and Town ways
where such vehicles are parked or standing in
violation of the law
1962 45 Tree Warden under civil service
1962 646 Increasing the amounts of pensions and
retirement allowances payable to certain former
public employees
1962 647 Group hospital, surgical and medical insurance
extended to elderly persons retired from the
service of the Town and to their dependents,
with 50% of the premium cost and a portion of
the administrative expense to be paid by the
Town
1963 478 Increasing the amounts of pensions and
retirement allowances for certain former public
employees
1963 822 Accelerated highway program
1964 18 Tenure for Irving P. Donahue, Veterans' Agent
1964 486 Increasing the amount of pensions and
retirement allowances payable to certain public
employees
§ A500-2 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § A500-2
1:454
Acts of Chapter Subject
1964 493 Town of West Springfield to construct, operate
and maintain a golf course on certain parkland
in said Town
1965 374 Providing for use of local governmental
employees' group insurance dividends or refund
to reduce the (MGL c. 32B, § 8A) employees'
share of premium costs
1965 858 Town Engineer to exercise powers and duties of
Superintendent of Streets and placing office of
Town Engineer under civil service [Repealed
5-2-1987 ATM by Art. 20]
1966 117 Noncontributory pensions for former firefighters
and police increased
1966 401 Certain elected and appointed officers under
workmen's compensation insurance
1969 406 Rental or lease of clothing
1970 32, § 90A Increasing allowance of former employees
retired for accidental disability [ATM
4-29-1995 by Art. 13]
1971 486 Beano
1972 220 Mutual police aid programs
1972 618 Providing for modifications in the election of
Town Meeting members in the Town of West
Springfield
1975 48 Term of office of Town Moderator: 3 years
1975 808 Further regulating the Zoning Enabling Act
1977 211 Penalty for violation of rules governing use of
land for parks, playgrounds, etc.
1977 352 Position of Police Records Clerk Matron exempt
from civil service
1979 165 Secretary to Police Chief exempt from civil
service
1979 547 Authorizing the appointment of Mark D. Lussier
as a firefighter in West Springfield
1980 210 Executive Director of Council on Aging exempt
from civil service
1981 339, § 1, 2,
and 3
Establishing user fees
1981 743 Real estate tax exemptions
1982 647 Dog license fees to Town
§ A500-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A500-2
1:455
Acts of Chapter Subject
1983 94 Dog license
1985 640 Revocation of licenses upon delinquent pay men
of taxes
1987 697, § 31 Retirement: persons permanently incapacitated
[Accepted 5-4-1991 ATM by Art. 6]
1987 697, § 33 Retirement: injury/pension 72% [Accepted
5-4-1991 ATM by Art. 5]
1990 291 Enhanced 911 service [Accepted 5-4-1991
ATM by Art. 33]
1990 473 An act further regulating the compensation of
Town Clerks who serve as Registrars of Voters
[5-4-1991 ATM by Art. 2]
1991 418 Seniority system in Fire Department
[10-23-1991 STM by Art. 4]
1993 6 "S" classification exempt from civil service
[10-21-1992 STM by Art. 15]
1996 71 Retirement benefits for veterans [10-30-1996
STM by Art. 10]
1997 17 Retirees' cost of living increase [5-2-1998 ATM
by Art. 12]
1998 194, § 288 Retirees' option change upon death of
beneficiary [11-18-1998 STM by Art. 9]
1998 456, § 3 Retirees' cost-of-living increase [Accepted
5-1-1999 ATM by Art. 14]
1999 170 Additional compensation for Town Clerk,
Treasurer, and Collector
1999 127, s. 51 Retirees 3% increase
2000 184, s. 51,
cl. 41
Senior exemption options
2000 322 Providing for a seasonal police force in the Town
of West Springfield (Repealed by enactment of
Acts of 2008, Ch. 142)
2000 380 Real estate exemptions (9-24-2000 Council;
Amends MGL c. 59 by adding cl. 17E, cl. 41C)
2001 45 Springfield Civic and Convention Center
2002 116 Retirement incentive program for certain
employees
2002 203 Granting retirement benefits to widow and
children of Steven F. Greene
§ A500-2 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § A500-2
1:456
Acts of Chapter Subject
2003 46, cl. 13 Extending Tax Amnesty Program to encourage
payment of certain taxes [6-29-2006 by Town
Council]
2003 73 Tax Amnesty Program (Note: amends MGL c. 56,
§ 5 by adding cl. 17E and 41C) [6-29-2006 by
Town Council]
2005 160 An Act Authorizing the Division of Capital Asset
Management and Maintenance to convey
certain land to the Town of West Springfield
[5-16-2006 by Town Council]
2005 157, s. 1 Disability retirement benefits for veterans
[5-4-2006 by Town Council]
2008 142 An Act Relative to the Special Police Officers in
the City known as the Town of West Springfield
(law effective June 20, 2008); by request of
Council vote 2-5-2007 (Note: This repeals
Chapter 322 of the Acts of 2000.)
2008 182, s. 16 Council accepted provisions of MGL c. 60A, § 1,
paragraph 8, enacted by Sec. 16 of Ch. 182,
Acts of 2008, allowing the Town to grant certain
veterans an exemption from an excise tax on 1
motor vehicle on and after January 1, 2010.
2009 27, s. 60 Council accepted MGL c. 64L, § 2(a), enacted by
Sec. 60 of Ch. 27 of the Acts of 2009, allowing
the Town to impose a local meals excise tax to
be effective 10-1-2009
2010 57 Authorizing Town to continue employment of
Police Chief Thomas E. Burke
2011 52, s. 13 Making Appropriations for the FY 2011 to
provide for supplementing certain existing
appropriations and for certain other activities
and projects (property damage or destroyed by
tornado activity on June 1, 2011)
2012 406 An act exempting the position of Chief of Police
of the Town of West Springfield from the
provisions of the Civil Service Law
2016 268 An Act Establishing a 4-Year Term for the Office
of Mayor in the City known as the Town of West
Springfield [Passed by the Voters Nov. 2016]
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ A500-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:457
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of Codified Ordinances to 2018 Code
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. IV.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Provisions in Codified Ordinances Location in 2018 Code
Ch. 1, General Provisions
§ 1-101 See Ch. 1, Art. IV
§ 1-102 Ch. 1, Art. I, § 1-1
§§ 1-103 and 1-104 See Ch. 1, Art. IV
§ 1-105 Ch. 1, Art. I, § 1-2
§§ 1-106 and 1-107 See Ch. 1, Art. IV
Ch. 2, Governmental Operations
§ 2-101 Ch. 42
§§ 2-102 and 2-103 Ch. 73, Art. I
§ 2-104 Ch. 73, Art. II
Ch. 3, Town Council Ch. 69
Ch. 4, Offices, Officials and Multiple Member
Bodies
Ch. 7
Ch. 5, Administrative Departments Ch. 16
Ch. 6, Financial Regulations
§ 6-100 Ch. 16, § 16-15
§§ 6-101 - 6-104 Ch. 25
§ 6-105 Ch. 141
§ 6-200 Ch. 141, Art. II
§ 6-300 Ch. 25, § 25-4
§ 6-400 Ch. 54
§ 6-502 Ch. 63, Art. I
§ 6-600 Ch. 63, Art. II
§ 6-700 Ch. 230, Art. I
§ 6-800 Ch. 25, Art. III
Ch. 7, Preservation of Public Peace and Order
§§ 7-100, 7-101, 7-102, 7-200, 7-201 Ch. 1, Art. II
§ 7-300 Ch. 192
§ 7-400 Ch. 105, Art. I
§ 7-500 Ch. 110, Art. I
§ DT-1 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § DT-1
1:458
Provisions in Codified Ordinances Location in 2018 Code
§ 7-600 Ch. 110, Art. II
§ 7-700 Ch. 122, Art. I
§ 7-800 Ch. 128
§ 7-900 Ch. 146
§ 7-1000 Ch. 150, Art. I
§ 7-1001 Ch. 150, Art. II
§ 7-1100 Ch. 150, Art. III
§ 7-1200 Ch. 218, Art. II
§ 7-1300 Ch. 1, Art. III
§ 7-1400 Ch. 218, Art. III
§ 7-1500 Ch. 257, Art. I
§ 7-1600 Ch. 204, Art. I
§ 7-1700 Ch. 134, Art. I
§ 7-1701 Ch. 134, Art. II
§ 7-1800 Ch. 122, Art. II
§ 7-1900 Ch. 183
Ch. 8, Regulations Affecting Motor Vehicles Ch. 249
Ch. 9, Public Works
§§ 9-200 - 9-202 Ch. 218, Art. IV
§§ 9-300 - 9-301 Ch. 240
§ 9-400 Ch. 213, Art. I
§ 9-500 Ch. 218, Art. V
§ 9-600 Ch. 218, Art. I
§ 9-700 Ch. 257, Art. II
§ 9-800 Ch. 213, Art. II
§ 9-900 Ch. 218, Art. VI
Ch. 10, Licensing
§ 10-100 Ch. 175, Art. I
§ 10-200 Ch. 168
§ 10-201 Ch. 209
§ 10-202 Ch. 225
§ 10-203 Ch. 235
§ 10-204 Ch. 117
§ 10-205 Ch. 175, Art. II
§ 10-206 Ch. 105, Art. II
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:459
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2-6-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 300
2-21-2017 Traffic Orders Amendment Ch. 400
2-21-2017 Traffic Orders Amendment Ch. 400
6-5-2017 Traffic Orders Amendment Ch. 400
9-5-2017 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
12-4-2017 Departments Amendment Ch. 16
12-4-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 300
12-18-2017 Firearms and Weapons
Amendment
Ch. 146
12-18-2017 Traffic Orders Amendment Ch. 400
12-18-2017 Traffic Orders Amendment Ch. 400
12-18-2017 Traffic Orders Amendment Ch. 400
3-19-2018 Streets and Sidewalks: Street
Furniture Amendment
Ch. 218, Art. III
4-23-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 300
5-7-2018 Junk Dealers Amendment Ch. 168
5-7-2018 Finances Amendment Ch. 25
5-21-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 300
6-4-2018 Prohibition on Marijuana
Establishments
Vetoed
6-18-2018 Traffic Orders Amendment Ch. 400
6-25-2018 Traffic Orders Amendment Ch. 400
7-9-2018 Drugs and Drug Products:
Marijuana Establishments
Ch. 134, Art. II
8-20-2018 Adoption of Codification of
General Ordinances
Ch. 1, Art. IV
8-20-2018 Adoption of Codified Zoning
Ordinance
See Ch. 300
8-20-2018 Adoption of Codified Traffic Rules
and Order
See Ch. 400
§ DT-1 WEST SPRINGFIELD CODE § DL-1
1:460

RULES AND REGULATIONS
GOVERNING THE
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
TOWN
OF
WEST SPRINGFIELD
MASSACHUSETTS
PRINTED JULY 21, 2003
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION I PURPOSE
SECTION II GENERAL
2.0 Subdivision Compliance II-1
2.1 Coordination with municipal departments and other agencies II-1
2.2 Effect of prior recording of subdivision plan II-1
2.3 Effective date II-2
2.4 More than one building for dwelling purposes per lot II-2
2.5 Compliance with Zoning II-2
2.6 Entry on land II.2
2.7 Waiver from regulations II-3
2.8 Issuance of Building Permits II-4
2.9 Issuance of Certificated of Occupancy II-4
SECTION III DEFINITIONS
SECTION IV PROCEDURES FOR SUBMISSION AND ENDORSEMENT
OF NON-SUBDIVISION PLANS
4.0 General IV-1
4.1 Filing procedures IV-2
4.2 Contents IV3
4.4 Spatial reference IV-3
4.5 Endorsement IV-3
SECTION V PROCEDURES FOR THE SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL
OF PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLANS
5.0 Pre-application meeting V-1
5.1 Preliminary plan V-1
5.2 Filing procedures V-1
5.3 Contents V-2
5.5 Spatial reference V-3
5.6 Board review V-4
SECTION VI PROCEDURES FOR SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL OF
DEFINITIVE SUBDIVISION PLANS
6.0 General VI-1
6.1 Filing procedures VI-1
6.2 Contents VI-2
6.5 Spatial reference VI-5
6.6 Public areas VI-6
6.7 Sewer extension permits VI-6
6.8 Suitability of the land for development VI-7
6.9 Site visit VI-8
7.0 Public hearing VI-8
7.1 Approval, modification, disapproval VI-9
7.2 Endorsement VI-10
7.3 Performance guarantee VI-11
7.4 Recording of plan VI-13
7.5 Completion time schedule VI-13
7.6 Increase of performance guarantee VI-14
7.7 Release of performance guarantee VI-14
7.8 Deviations from approved plan VI-16
7.9 Street acceptance VI-17
SECTION VIII PROCEDURES FOR SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL OF
PLANS FOR MORE THAN ONE BUILDING FOR
DWELLING PURPOSED PER LOT
8.0 General VIII-1
8.1 Filing procedures VIII-1
8.2 Contents VIII-2
8.5 Spatial reference VIII-5
8.6 Sewer extension permits VIII-6
8.7 Suitability of the land for development VIII-6
8.8 Site visit VIII-7
8.9 Public hearing VIII-8
9.0 Approval, modification, disapproval VIII-8
9.1 Endorsement VIII-9
9.2 Performance guarantee VIII-10
9.3 Recording of plan VIII-11
9.4 Completion time schedule VIII-12
9.5 Increase of performance guarantee VIII-12
9.6 Release of performance guarantee VIII-13
9.7 Deviations from approved plan VIII-15
9.8 Street acceptance VIII-16
SECTION X DESIGN STANDARDS
10.0 Basic requirements X-1
10.1 Relations to Town plans X-1
10.3 Lot size and configuration X-1
10.4 Access through another municipality X-2
10.5 Streets and ways X-2
10.6 Adequate access from public way X-10
10.7 Easements and restrictions X-11
10.8 Open space X-12
10.9 General utilities X-13
11.0 Sewerage X-13
11.1 Storm drainage X-14
11.3 Water supply X-17
11.4 Solar energy X-18
11.5 Sidewalks and bicycle paths X-20
11.6 Erosion control X-20
11.7 Proposed development of contiguous land X-21
SECTION XII CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
12.0 Basic requirements XII-1
12.1 Street and roadway construction XII-1
12.2 Gravel foundation XII-2
12.3 Roadway surfacing XII-4
12.4 Installation of utilities XII-5
12.5 Berms and curbing XII-13
12.6 Sidewalks and bicycle paths XII-14
12.7 Groundwater drainage XII-15
12.8 Retaining walls XII-16
12.9 Bounds and lot corners XII-16
13.0 Trees and plantings XII-16
13.1 Guard rails XII-20
13.2 Excavation within existing streets XII-20
13.3 Inspection of improvements XII-21
13.4 As-built plans XII-22
13.5 Final cleaning XII-23
13.6 Street acceptance plans XII-23
SECTION XIV ADMINISTRATION
14.0 Authority XIV-1
14.1 Validity and severability XIV-1
14.2 Invalidation by state law or court decision XIV-1
14.3 Amendments XIV-1
14.4 Table of contents and index XIV-1
14.5 Appendices XIV-2
14.6 Misrepresentation XIV-2
14.7 Ownership of submitted materials XIV-2
14.8 Issuance of Building Permits and Occupancy Permits XIV-2
APPENDIX A
Form A – Application for endorsement of a plan believed not to require approval
under Subdivision Control
Form B – Application for approval of a Preliminary Subdivision Plan
Form C – Application for approval of a Definitive Subdivision Plan
Form CC – Application for approval of an Amended Definitive Subdivision Plan
Form D – Application for approval of plans for more than on building for
dwelling purposed per lot
Form E – Designer’s Certificate
Form F – Statement of Interest
Form G – Inspection of subdivision improvements
Form H – Covenant
Form I – Subordination Agreement
APPENDIX B
Typical Diagrams
APPENDIX C
Application Fees
APPENDIX D
Development Impact Statement
APPENDIX E
Application for Permit for Sewer System Extension or Connection
APPENDIX F
CADD Plan Submission Guidelines
I-1
SECTION I PURPOSE
Pursuant to M.G.L., Chapter 41, Section 81-M, these Rules and
Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land in the Town of West
Springfield have been enacted for the purpose of protecting the
health, safety, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of
West Springfield by regulating the laying out and construction of
ways in subdivisions providing access to the several lots
therein, but which have not become public ways, and ensuring
sanitary conditions in subdivisions and in proper cases parks and
open areas. The powers of the Planning Board and the Board of
Appeals under the Subdivision Control Laws shall be exercised
with due regard for:
• the provision of adequate access to all lots in a subdivision
by ways that will be safe and convenient for travel and that
the design of the new ways will not make the adjacent private,
town or public ways less safe and inconvenient for travel or
use;
• lessening congestion in such ways and in the adjacent public
and private ways;
• reducing danger to life and limb in the adjacent public and
private ways;
• securing safety in case of fire, flood, panic and other
emergencies;
• ensuring compliance with the Zoning Ordinance, the General
Ordinance and Rules and Regulations of the Town of West
Springfield and its various departments and the rules and
regulations of the West Springfield Conservation Commission;
• securing adequate provisions for water, sewerage, drainage,
underground utility services, street lighting, fire, police,
and other similar municipal equipment and services to and
within a subdivision;
• ensuring that existing public facilities and services are
available and will have sufficient capacity to serve the
proposed subdivision;
• coordinating the ways in a subdivision with each other and
with ways in neighboring subdivisions, and with public and
private ways in the Town of West Springfield and neighboring
communities;
I-1
• protection of wetlands, watersheds, wildlife, and
environmentally sensitive areas;
• protecting the character and the social and economic stability
of the Town and to encourage the orderly and beneficial
development of the community through appropriate growth
management techniques; and
• coordinating development of the community in conformity with
the Master Plan and other accepted planning documents for the
Town of West Springfield.
II-1
SECTION II GENERAL
2.0 SUBDIVISION COMPLIANCE
No person shall make a subdivision within the meaning of
the Subdivision Control Law of any land within the Town of
West Springfield, or proceed with the improvement or sale
of lots within a subdivision, or the construction of ways,
or installation of municipal services therein, unless and
until a Definitive Plan of such subdivision has been
submitted and approved by the Planning Board and recorded
at the Hampden County Registry of Deeds or Land
Registration Office of Hampden County as hereinafter
provided.
2.1 COORDINATION WITH MUNICIPAL DEPARTMENTS AND OTHER AGENCIES
Compliance with the applicable rules, regulations and
requirements of the Office of the Mayor, Town Council,
Board of Health, , Department of Public Works, Fire
Department, Police Department, Recreation Commission and
Conservation Commission shall be required before a plan is
approved by the Board, and certification of performance
relative to the proper construction and installation of
the respective utilities shall be required before a
performance guarantee can be reduced or released.
2.2 EFFECT OF PRIOR RECORDING OF SUBDIVISION PLAN
The recording of a plan of land within the Town of West
Springfield in the Hampden County Registry of Deeds prior
to the effective date of the Subdivision Control Law in
the Town, May 23, 1955, showing the division thereof into
existing or proposed lots, sites or other divisions and
ways furnishing access thereto, shall not exempt such land
from the application and operation of these Rules and
Regulations except as specifically exempt by Section
81-FF, of the Subdivision Control Law, M.G.L. Chapter 41.
The improvement of a way, shown on a plan recorded prior
to January 1, 2002 and not lawfully begun before the
effective date of these Rules and Regulations, shall be
constructed in accordance with these regulations.
II-2
2.3 EFFECTIVE DATE
These Rules and Regulations shall not be in effect until
recorded with the Town Clerk. A copy of these Rules
certified by the Clerk shall be transmitted forthwith to
the Registrar of Deeds and the Recorder of the Land Court.
Amendments to these Rules and Regulations shall not apply
to any subdivision lawfully begun or any complete
subdivision application lawfully submitted prior the first
publication of notice of a public hearing as required by
MGL, Chapter 41, Section 81-Q, but shall apply to any
amendment to an approved development or to any application
for approval submitted after the first publication notice
of said public hearing. These rules and regulations shall
apply to any plan duly recorded but not lawfully begun
within two years of the recording of said subdivision
plan. These rules and regulations shall also apply to any
prior plan disapproved by the Planning Board where no
amendment thereto has been submitted within sixty (60)
days of said disapproval.
2.4 MORE THAN ONE BUILDING FOR DWELLING PURPOSES PER LOT
Not more than one building designed or available for use
for dwelling purposes shall be erected or placed or
converted to use as such on any lot in the Town of West
Springfield, except as exempt under M.G.L. Ch. 183A,
without the consent of the Planning Board, and that such
consent may be conditional upon the providing of adequate
ways furnishing access to each site for such building, in
the same manner as otherwise required for lots within a
subdivision. The procedures for approval are detailed
within these Rules and Regulations.
2.5 COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING
All plans submitted for Planning Board action shall
conform to all applicable requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance of the Town of West Springfield.
2.6 ENTRY ON LAND
Members of the Planning Board and its agents shall have
the right of entry onto private lands to inspect and
evaluate land and development conditions to further the
purposes of the Rules and Regulations Governing the
Subdivision of Land and to ensure compliance with said
II-3
Rules and Regulations and decisions rendered therefrom.
Said individuals may also acquire information,
measurements, photographs, observations and/or materials
or may require submittal of any data or information deemed
necessary to carry out the purpose of these Rules and
Regulations.
2.7 WAIVER FROM THE REGULATIONS
2.71 As provided for by Section 81-R, Chapter 41 of the
General Laws, where the Planning Board finds that
extraordinary hardships or practical difficulties
may result from strict compliance with these
regulations and/or the purposes of these regulations
may be served to a greater extent by an alternative
proposal, it may waive strict compliance with these
regulations provided that the public interest is
secured and that a waiver of the regulations shall
not have the effect of nullifying the intent and
purpose of these regulations; and further providing
that the Planning Board shall not approve a waiver
unless it finds that:
• The granting of the waiver will not be detrimental
to the public safety, health, or welfare or
injurious to abutting property.
• The conditions upon which the request is based are
unique to the property for which the relief is
sought and are not applicable generally to the
area in which the property is located.
• Because of the particular physical surroundings,
shape, or topographical conditions of the specific
property involved, a particular non-monetary
hardship to the owner would result, as
distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the
strict letter of the regulations is carried out.
• The relief sough will not in any manner vary the
provisions of the Master Plan, Zoning Ordinance or
other municipal ordinances or regulations.
2.72 In approving waivers of these regulations, the
Planning Board may require such conditions as will,
in its judgment, secure substantially the purposes
of these regulations.
2.73 The applicant shall submit a petition for waiver in
writing at the time the Preliminary Plan and/or the
II-4
Definitive Plan is submitted for the consideration
of the Planning Board. The petition shall state
fully the grounds for the application and all of the
facts relied upon by the applicant.
2.74 If the Planning Board approves the request for a
waiver, it shall endorse conditions of such waiver
(if any) on the Plan or set them forth in a separate
instrument attached to and referenced on the Plan,
which shall be deemed a part of the Plan.
2.8 ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS
No building permit for the construction of a residential
or commercial structure associated with the layout of a
lot created by the Board’s approval of a Definitive Plan
shall be issued until adequate access has been provided to
support access by pubic safety vehicles.
2.9 ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
No Certificate of Occupancy for the completed construction
of a residential or commercial structure associated with
the layout of a lot created by the Board’s approval of a
Definitive Subdivision Plan shall be issued unless the
Board holds a monetary performance guarantee in excess of
the value, plus 10%, of the subdivision improvements to be
completed or, as established by written report from the
Department of Public Works, that all subdivision
improvements have been completed and the Board has
released the development from subdivision control.
III-1
SECTION III DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of these Rules and Regulations, unless a
contrary intention clearly appears, the terms and words defined
in Section 81-L of chapter 41 of the General Laws shall have the
meaning given therein. If a term is not defined and is not a
commonly used term, then the definition in the State Building
Code will apply. In addition, the following terms and words
shall have the following meanings:
ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES: Facilities and infrastructure
determined to be capable of supporting and servicing the
physical area and designated intensity of the proposed
subdivision as determined by the Town based upon specific
levels of service.
APPLICANT: May be either the owner of the land stated in the
application for subdivision or all the owners where title is
held jointly, in common, or in tenancy by the entirety,
including corporations. An agent, representative, or his
assigns may act for an owner provided written evidence of
such fact is submitted. Evidence in the form of a list of
their officers and designated authority to sign legal
documents shall be required for a corporation.
BOARD: Planning Board of the Town of West Springfield.
BUILDING: Any structure built or used for the support, shelter,
or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or movable
property of any kind.
DEVELOPER: The owner or representative of land proposed to be
subdivided. Written consent shall be required from the legal
owner of the premises.
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT STATEMENT (DIS): A documented, written
analysis of a proposed subdivision that provides the Planning
Board and its agents with information necessary for plan
review. Prepared by the applicant, a DIS shall follow the
format presented in the Appendices of this document.
FRONTAGE: A lot boundary line across which there is a legal
access and which abuts:
1. a public way, a county road; or
2. a way which the Town Clerk certifies is maintained and
used as a public way; or
III-2
3. a way shown on a plan approved and endorsed in accordance
with the Subdivision control Law; or
4. a way physically in existence when the Subdivision
Control Law became effective, May 23, 1955, in the Town
of West Springfield, which in the opinion of the Planning
Board is presently suitable to provide for the needs of
vehicular traffic and for the installation of municipal
services to serve the land.
HARMONY: A relationship of agreement, consistency or
non-contradiction.
LOT: An area of land in common ownership, with definite
boundaries, used or available for use, as the site of one or
more buildings.
OWNER: The owner of record as shown by the records in the
Hampden County Registry of Deeds or Land Registration Office
of Hampden County.
PARCEL: An area of land in common ownership, with definite
boundaries, used or available for use, as the site of one or
more buildings.
PERSON: A "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a
partnership and an incorporated association of persons such
as a club.
PLAN, DEFINITIVE: A proposed plan of a subdivision submitted by
the applicant to be recorded in the Registry of Deeds or Land
Registration Office of Hampden County when approved by the
Planning Board.
PLAN, FINAL: A proposed plan showing more than one building to
be used for dwelling purposes per building lot, to be
approved by the Planning Board as a prerequisite to obtaining
building permits.
PLAN, PRELIMINARY: A plan of a subdivision submitted by the
applicant showing sufficient information to form a clear
basis for discussion and clarification of its general
contents and for the preparation of a Definitive Plan.
PLAN, NON-SUBDIVISION (ANR or FORM A): The division of a tract
of land into two or more lots shall not be deemed to
constitute a subdivision within the meaning of the
Subdivision Control Law under any of the following
conditions:
III-3
1. At the time when the subdivision is made, every lot
within the tract so divided has frontage on:
a. a public way, a county road or a way which the Clerk
of the Town of West Springfield certifies is
maintained and used as a public way;
b. a way shown on a plan previously approved and endorsed
in accordance with the Subdivision Control Law, or;
c. a way in existence when the Subdivision Control Law
became effective in the Town of West Springfield
having in the opinion of the Planning Board,
sufficient width, suitable grades and adequate
construction to provide for the needs of vehicular
traffic in relation to the proposed use of the land
abutting thereon or served thereby, and for the
installation of municipal services to serve such land
and the buildings erected or to be erected thereon.
Such frontage shall be of a least such distance as is
then required by the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of West
Springfield for erection of a building on such lot, and
if no distance is so required, such frontage shall be at
least twenty (20) feet.
2. Conveyances or other instruments adding to, taking away
from, or changing the size and shape of lots in such a
manner as not to leave any lot so affected without the
frontage above set forth.
3. The division of a tract of land on which two or more
buildings were standing when the Subdivision Control Law
went into effect in the Town of West Springfield in which
the land lies, into separate lots on each of which one of
such buildings remains standing.
STATE CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS, MASS. DPW CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
These specifications are published by the Massachusetts
Department of Public Works. They are entitled Standard
Specifications for Highways and Bridges, and including all
supplements, updates, revisions or future editions covering
substantially the same subject matter. All matters left open
or undetermined by these specifications shall be specified by
the Board on a case-by-case basis.
STREETS: Streets in the Town of West Springfield shall have the
following classifications:
1. Place: These streets shall be not over one thousand
(1000) feet in length, unless otherwise allowed by the
III-4
Board, with no allowance for future extension. A maximum
average daily traffic (ADT) of 100 vehicles per day shall
be allowed for a street to be classified as a place.
2. Lane: The major purpose of these streets shall be to
provide access to lots. They shall be streets not
subject to non-terminus traffic. The ADT for this type
of street shall be between 100 and 400 vehicles per day.
3. Sub-Collector: The ADT for this type of street shall be
between 400 and 1000 vehicles per day. This type of
street shall typically serve several Places or Lanes.
4. Collector: The ADT for this of street shall be between
1000 and 3000 vehicles per day.
5. Arterial: The ADT for this type of street shall be over
the 3000 vehicles per day.
The ADT of a street shall be determined by applying a
factor of ten (10) vehicles per day per lot served either
directly or indirectly by the street plus an allowance
for through traffic where applicable. The classification
of each street in a subdivision and an estimate of its
ADT should be included in or with the plans. The
Planning Board reserves the right to make the final
decision regarding the classification of a street and its
estimated ADT. Consideration must be given to future
traffic from undeveloped land which would be served by
the proposed street system.
6. Dead End Street/Cul-de-Sac: A public or private
vehicular right-of-way which affords the principal means
of access to abutting property and which joins another
thoroughfare at only one end. Any such thoroughfare,
which joins or intersects a dead end street/cul-de-sac,
shall have adequate access at both ends from a Town,
County, or State public way adjacent to the subdivision.
(See Section VIII of these Rules and Regulations
concerning dead end streets and adequate access from a
public way.)
STRUCTURE: A combination of materials, assembled at a fixed
location to give support or shelter, such as a building,
framework, retaining wall, tent, reviewing stand, platform,
bin, fence, sign, flagpole, mast for radio and television
antenna or the like. The word "structure" shall be
construed, where the context allows as though followed by the
words "or part or parts thereof".
III-5
SUBDIVISION: The division of a tract of land into two or more
lots and shall include resubdivision, and, when appropriate
to the context, shall relate to the process of subdivision or
the land or territory subdivided.
SUBDIVISION CONTROL LAW: Refers to Sections 81-K to 81-GG,
inclusive, of Chapter 41, of the General Laws of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, entitled, "Subdivision
Control" as amended.
IV-1
SECTION IV PROCEDURES FOR SUBMISSION AND
ENDORSEMENT OF NON-SUBDIVISION PLANS
4.0 GENERAL
Any person who wishes to cause to be recorded in the
Hampden County Registry of Deeds, or to be filed with the
Land Registry Office of Hampden County a plan of land in
the Town of West Springfield who believes that his plan
does not require approval under the Subdivision Control
Law, may submit his plan as hereinafter provided, to the
Planning Board for such determination.
4.1 FILING PROCEDURES
Any person who submits a Non-Subdivision Plan to the
Planning Board for endorsement shall file with the Board
the following:
4.11 One (1) Mylar drawing of his plan conforming to
Registry of Deeds standards and three (3) contact
prints thereof, dark line on white background, as
described in Section 4.2 below. The reproducible
drawing will be returned to the applicant after
Board action. It is strongly suggested that the
applicant submit a copy of the plan in digital
format in accordance with the standards outlined in
the Appendix;
4.12 One (1) original and two (2) copies of a completed
application Form A with appropriate evidence
detailing how the plan qualifies as not requiring
approval under the Subdivision Control Law;
4.13 A filing fee in accordance with the Fee Schedule
(see Appendix C) shall be paid by the applicant to
cover costs of handling and Town review;
4.14 One (1) original and one (1) copy of Form E -
Designer's Certificate;
4.15 One (1) original and one (1) copy of Form F -
Statement of Interest;
4.16 A receipt of submission from the Town Clerk's
office. Receipt by the Planning Board of all filing
requirements as outlined above at one of its
IV-2
regularly scheduled meetings shall constitute the
effective date of Submission of the Non-Subdivision
Plan.
4.2 CONTENTS
The non-subdivision plans shall be prepared by a Civil
Engineer and/or Land Surveyor registered in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts and shall be clearly and
legibly drawn with waterproof ink upon Mylar not larger
than twenty-four by thirty-six inches (24" X 36") and at a
scale of not more than one inch equals eighty feet (1" =
80'). If multiple sheets are used, they shall be
accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire proposal
and listing all attached sheets.
The non-subdivision plans shall contain the following:
4.21 Address of property, true North arrow, date, scale,
legend and title "Subdivision Approval Not
Required";
4.22 A Locus Map;
4.23 The names and addresses of the owners of record, the
names and addresses of the applicants, the name(s),
official seal(s), and signature(s) of the registered
Civil Engineer and/or Land Surveyor;
4.24 The names of all abutters as they appear in the most
recent tax list;
4.25 Location, names, lines and widths of all public and
private streets, ways and easements within and
abutting the land in question;
4.26 Zoning districts of all areas shown on the plan
including all overlay districts;
A building envelope complying with all zoning requirements
A building envelope complying to all zoning requirements.
4.27 The original boundaries of the entire tract(s) as
well as the new lines, boundaries, areas and
dimensions of all lots, parcels, sites or divisions,
designated numerically and in sequence, into which
the land is to be divided;
IV-3
4.28 The location of all existing structures lying within
the affected tract(s) of land;
4.29 Location of all monuments and pins properly
identified as to whether existing or proposed;
4.30 Provisions for adequate access to the existing and
proposed lots;
4.31 Suitable space to record the action of the Planning
Board and the signature of the members.
4.32 A written statement indicating that NO
REPRESENTATIONS ARE MADE BY THE WEST SPRINGFIELD
PLANNING BOARD REGARDING COMPLIANCE TO ZONING NOR
THE SUITABILITY OF THE LAND FOR DEVELOPMENT.
4.4 SPATIAL REFERENCE
The Town of West Springfield maintains a set of Tax Maps,
which are available free of charge online in the Adobe
Acrobat™ format. In addition to a regular set of tax maps,
a special set with property boundary reference numbers is
also available. Each property boundary intersection in
town has a unique reference number. All plans submitted
in accordance with the subdivision regulations, whether
paper or CADD format, must include at least three of these
points, along with the reference number as text
annotation. If three of these points do not fall within
the map area, it is acceptable to place points with a tie
(distance & bearing reference) to the location of a
boundary point.
Tax Maps and Property Boundary Reference Tax Maps are
available online at the following location: www.westspringfield.
ma.us/gis/maps.htm
4.5 ENDORSEMENT
4.51 If the Planning Board determines that the plan does
not require subdivision approval, it shall
forthwith, without a public hearing, and within
twenty-one (21) days of complete submission, endorse
on the plan "APPROVAL UNDER THE SUBDIVISION CONTROL
LAW NOT REQUIRED" or words of similar import with
the appropriate name(s) of Planning Board members
signed thereto. Said plan shall be returned to the
IV-4
applicant and the Board shall notify the Town Clerk
of its actions.
4.52 The Planning Board may add to such endorsement a
statement of the reason approval is not required.
The plan will be returned to the applicant, and the
Planning Board shall notify the Town Clerk of its
action.
4.53 If the Planning Board determines that in its opinion
the plan requires approval under the Subdivision
Control Law, it shall within twenty-one (21) days of
complete submission, give written notice of its
decision to the Town Clerk and applicant and return
the plan to the applicant.
4.54 If the Board fails to act upon an application and
plan submitted under this section within twenty-one
(21) days after its complete submission, it shall be
deemed to have been determined that approval under
the Subdivision Control Law is not required.
4.55 The person submitting the plan may appeal the
decision of the Board in accordance with Section
81-BB of M.G.L. Chapter 41.
4.56 Endorsement of the plan by the Planning Board does
not imply that the lots as shown on the plan are in
compliance with zoning or that the land is suitable
for development purposes.
V-1
SECTION V PROCEDURES FOR THE SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL OF
PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLANS
5.0 PRE-APPLICATION MEETING
Prior to the submission of a Preliminary Subdivision Plan
it is recommended that a developer meet with the Town
Planner to discuss the conceptual development proposal.
This meeting is intended to review the process for
subdivision approval. Information which would be helpful
during discussion can include, among others: Assessor's
maps showing property boundaries, local maps showing
surrounding uses and streets, existing infrastructure,
sketch plans of proposal, and generalized existing
environmental conditions (topography, soil, hydrology).
5.1 PRELIMINARY PLAN
It is recommended that a Preliminary Plan be submitted by
an applicant seeking subdivision approval by the Planning
Board in accordance with this section. This submission
will allow the Board of Health, Planning Board, and
applicant to review various aspects of the proposal prior
to submission of a Definitive Plan. At the time of filing
of the application and plans with the Planning Board, the
applicant shall, at the same time, file a copy of Form B
with the Town Clerk's office. Said filing shall be done
by certified mail return receipt or by hand delivery with
receipt. It is recommended that at the time of filing a
Preliminary Plan with the Planning Board, the applicant
concurrently file a Request For Determination of
Applicability with the West Springfield Conservation
Commission.
5.2 FILING PROCEDURES
Any applicant who submits a Preliminary Subdivision Plan
to the Planning Board for approval shall file with the
Board the following:
5.21 Two (2) Mylar drawings and fifteen (15) contact prints
thereof, dark line on white background, as described in
Section 5.3 below. One reproducible print shall be
returned to the applicant at the completion of the
review process. It is strongly suggested that the
V-2
applicant submit a copy of the Preliminary Plan in
digital format in accordance with the standards
outlined in the Appendix;
5.22 One original and fifteen (15) copies of Application
Form B;
5.23 A filing fee in accordance with the Fee Schedule (see
Appendix C) shall be paid by the applicant to cover
costs of handling and Town review;
5.24 One original and fifteen (15) copies of a Draft
Development Impact Statement;
5.25 One original and two (2) copies of Form E - Designer's
Certificate;
5.26 One original and two (2) copies of Form F - Statement
of Interest;
5.27 Receipts of receival of the application from Board of
Health and Town Clerk's office.
Receipt by the Planning Board of all filing requirements
as outlined above at one of its regularly scheduled
meetings shall constitute the effective date of submission
of the Preliminary Subdivision Plan.
5.3 CONTENTS
The Preliminary Plan shall be prepared by a Civil Engineer
and/or Land Surveyor registered in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts and shall be clearly and legibly drawn in
black waterproof ink on Mylar meeting all requirements of
the Registry of Deeds. The plan shall be at a scale of
one inch equals forty feet (1" = 40') unless otherwise
specified by the Planning Board. The sheet size shall not
exceed an outside dimension of twenty-four by thirty-six
(24" X 36") inches.
If multiple sheets are used, they shall be accompanied by
an index sheet showing the entire subdivision and listing
all attached sheets.
The Preliminary Subdivision Plan shall contain the
following:
V-3
5.31 The subdivision boundaries, true North arrow, date,
scale, legend and title, "Preliminary Subdivision
Plan";
5.32 The names and addresses of the owner(s) of record, and
applicant (s), name(s), official seal(s) and
signatures(s) of the designer, registered Civil
Engineer and/or Land Surveyor;
5.33 A Locus Map;
5.34 Names of all abutters as shown on the most recent tax
list;
5.35 Zoning districts of all areas shown on the plan
including all overlay districts;
5.36 The approximate location of existing infrastructure
adjacent to the development site including water,
sanitary sewer, storm water and fire hydrants in a
general manner.
5.37 Proposed infrastructure systems and drainage including
adjacent existing natural waterways in a general
manner;
5.38 The approximate boundary lines of proposed lots with
approximate areas and dimensions;
5.39 The location, names, lines and widths of all public and
private streets, ways and easements within and abutting
the land in question;
5.40 The topography of the land in a general manner;
5.41 Major features on the site which includes wetlands,
water bodies, stonewalls, fences, buildings, rock out
crops, and trees greater than 8" Diameter Breast High
in size in a general manner.
5.42 Provisions for adequate access to all the proposed
lots.
5.5 SPATIAL REFERENCE
The Town of West Springfield maintains a set of Tax Maps,
which are available free of charge online in the Adobe
Acrobat™ format. In addition to a regular set of tax maps,
a special set with property boundary reference numbers is
V-4
also available. Each property boundary intersection in
town has a unique reference number. All plans submitted
in accordance with the subdivision regulations, whether
paper or CADD format, must include at least three of these
points, along with the reference number as text
annotation. If three of these points do not fall within
the map area, it is acceptable to place points with a tie
(distance & bearing reference) to the location of a
boundary point.
Tax Maps and Property Boundary Reference Tax Maps are
available online at the following location: www.westspringfield.
ma.us/gis/maps.htm
5.6 BOARD REVIEW
5.61 Upon complete submission of the Preliminary Plan and
supporting documents, the Board shall schedule a public
meeting with the applicant. Within forty-five (45)
days of submission, or an extension of time mutually
agreed upon by the applicant and the Board which is
filed with the Town Clerk's office, the Board shall
notify the applicant and file with the Town Clerk's
office a copy of their approval, approval with
modification or disapproval with reasons for
disapproval. Failure of the Board to act upon a
Preliminary Plan within forty-five (45) days (or an
agreed upon extension with the applicant) after the
complete submission thereof, shall be deemed to
constitute approval of such plan.
5.62 Approval of a Preliminary Plan does not constitute
approval of a Definitive Plan. A Preliminary Plan
shall not be recorded at the Registry of Deeds or the
Land Registration Office of Hampden County.
5.63 A Definitive Subdivision Plan must be submitted to the
Board within seven (7) months from the date of
submission of a Preliminary Plan which was approved or
approved with modifications or all previous actions of
the Board are null and void. The Definitive Plans must
substantially conform to the approved Preliminary Plans
and all conditions of approval.
VI-1
SECTION VI PROCEDURES FOR SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL OF
DEFINITIVE SUBDIVISION PLANS
6.0 GENERAL
6.01 A Definitive Subdivision Plan must be submitted to the
Planning Board and Board of Health for approval.
6.02 A Definitive Plan shall be governed by the Subdivision
Rules and Regulations in effect at the time of
submission of such plan, or in effect at the time of
submission of a Preliminary Plan provided that the
Definitive Plan evolved therefrom shall have been
submitted to the Planning Board within seven (7) months
from the date of submission of Preliminary Plan.
6.03 A Definitive Plan shall also be governed by the Zoning
Ordinance in effect at the time of submission of such
plan or a Preliminary Plan from which the Definitive
Plan is evolved in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 40A, Section 6 of the General Laws as amended.
6.1 FILING PROCEDURES
Any person who submits a Definitive Subdivision Plan to
the Planning Board for approval shall file with the Board
the following:
6.11 Two (2) Mylar drawings of the Definitive Plan
conforming to Registry of Deeds standards and fifteen
(15) contact prints thereof, dark line on white
background, as described in Section 6.2 below. One
reproducible set shall be returned to the applicant
after Board action. It is strongly suggested that the
applicant submit a copy of Definitive Subdivision plans
in digital format in accordance with the standards
outlined in the Appendix.;
6.12 One (1) original and fifteen (15) copies of a completed
Form C - Application for Definitive Subdivision
Approval;
6.13 One (1) original and fifteen (15) copies of the
Development Impact Statement;
6.14 A filing fee in accordance with the Fee Schedule (see
Appendix C) shall be paid by the applicant to cover
costs of handling, town reviews and public hearings.
VI-2
Any additional expenses for plans, surveys, inspections
or outside review shall be borne by the applicant;
6.15 One (1) original and two (2) copies of Form E -
Designers Certificate;
6.16 One (1) original and two (2) copies of Form F -
Statement of Interest;
6.17 A certified list of abutters obtained from the Town
Assessor's Office within 30 days of the filing of the
application;
6.18 A receipt of submission of the application from the
Town Clerk's office;
6.19 At the time of filing of a definitive subdivision plan,
it is recommended that the applicant file a Request For
Determination of Applicability or Notice of Intent with
the Conservation Commission.
Receipt by the Planning Board of all filing requirements as
outlined above at one of its regularly scheduled meetings
shall constitute the effective date of submission of the
Definitive Subdivision Plan.
6.2 CONTENTS
The Definitive Plan shall be prepared by a Registered
Professional Engineer and shall be clearly and legibly
drawn in black waterproof ink on Mylar meeting all
requirements of the Registry of Deeds. The plan shall be
at a scale of one-inch equals forty feet (1" = 40'),
unless otherwise specified by the Planning Board. The
sheet size shall not exceed an outside dimension of
twenty-four by thirty-six (24" X 36") inches.
If multiple sheets are used, they shall be accompanied by
an index sheet showing the entire subdivision and listing
all attached sheets.
The Definitive Plan shall contain the following
information:
6.21 The subdivision name, boundaries, true North arrow,
date, scale, locus map, legend and title "Definitive
Subdivision Plan";
6.22 Legend denoting all signs and symbols used on the plan
and not otherwise explained;
VI-3
6.23 The location of all existing structures on the subject
property denoting future intentions;
6.24 All information required on the Preliminary Plan and
conditioned for approval of said plan from the Board;
6.25 The name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) of record,
mortgage holder(s) and applicant(s) certified by an
attorney; the name(s), official seal(s) and
signature(s) of the Registered Professional Engineer;
6.26 Zoning districts of all areas shown on the plan
including all overlay districts and all dimensional and
bulk requirements;
6.27 The location of all existing and proposed lines of
streets, ways, rights-of-way, lots, easements and any
public or common areas within the subdivision.
Proposed names of new streets shall be shown in pencil
until they have been tentatively approved by the
Planning Board. All wording for proposed easements and
public or common areas shall be submitted with the
application for Town Counsel review and approval;
6.28 Location, names and present widths of pavement and
rights-of-way of adjacent public and private streets
abutting and within one hundred feet (100') of the
Subdivision;
6.29 The location, dimensions and purpose of all existing
and proposed easements recorded in favor of the
municipality, abutting and within one hundred feet
(100') of the Subdivision;
6.30 Location of all permanent monuments, pins and
benchmarker, properly identified as to whether existing
or proposed. Concrete/granite bounds are required at
all intersections of street lines, angle points and
changes in curvature of street lines;
6.31 Boundary lines and dimensions of all proposed lots,
with lot areas in square feet. All lots are to be
numbered numerically and in sequence;
6.32 A topographic grading plan of the entire subdivision at
two (2) foot contour intervals showing existing (broken
lines) and proposed (solid lines) topography with
proposed spot elevations at the intersection of all
proposed lot lines and other pertinent points to show
VI-4
the proposed finished grading of the entire subdivision
for roadway and house construction;
6.33 Location of natural waterways and water bodies within
and adjacent to the subdivision;
6.34 All lands subject to M.G.L. Chapter 131, Section 40
(The Wetlands Protection Act);
6.35 All existing and proposed 10, 100 and 500 year
floodplain boundaries;
6.36 Subsurface conditions as they relate to soil, geology
and hydrology, as reasonably ascertainable;
6.37 Location of all existing utilities abutting and within
one hundred (100) feet of the subdivision including but
not limited to water, sewer, storm drain, gas,
electric, cable, telephone, fire alarms and fire
hydrants, as reasonably ascertainable;
6.38 Location of the closest existing fire hydrant on the
roadway giving access to the proposed subdivision.
6.39 Significant site features which include among others:
stone walls, fences, rock outcrops, trees greater than
8" Diameter Breast High in size, historical and scenic
areas and slopes of 25% grade or greater;
6.40 A street layout plan consisting of plan and profile
views shall be drawn on separate sheets for each street
within the subdivision. The plan shall be drawn at a
horizontal scale of 1" = 40' and a vertical scale of 1"
= 4'. The plans shall show proposed exterior lines,
roadway lines, partial lot lines, curb lines,
intersection angles, points of tangency and radii of
curves. Also included on the street layout plan shall
be location, size, type of construction, elevation, and
invert of all pipes and conduits of the:
6.401 Water Supply System, including wells, pumps, valves,
stubs, gates, hydrants, and similar equipment;
6.402 Storm Drainage System, including manholes,
catchbasins, swales and appurtenant structures;
6.403 Sanitary Sewage System, including manholes, pumps,
and appurtenant equipment;
6.404 Electrical Supply Equipment, including transformers,
primary and secondary cables, lighting fixtures and
VI-5
other electrical equipment as approved by Western
Mass Electric Company;
6.405 Other Underground Utility Systems in the
Right-of-Way, including gas, telephone and cable
T.V. facilities;
6.41 A typical cross-section for the full width of the
proposed street shall be shown in accordance with the
"Typical Cross-Section" illustrated in Appendix B;
6.42 Construction details for catchbasins, manholes,
endwalls, etc.;
6.43 Erosion control and stabilization details for all
improvements including but not limited to roadways,
storm water managements systems and the residential or
commercial structures associated with the subdivision;
6.44 Suitable space to record:
6.441 the action of the Planning Board and the signatures
of the members of the Board;
6.442 action and signature of the Town Clerk;
6.443 conditions of approval;
6.444 approval of waivers; and
6.445 recording of covenant and/or other performance
agreements;
6.45 Additional pertinent information the Planning Board may
request.
6.5 SPATIAL REFERENCE
The Town of West Springfield maintains a set of Tax Maps,
which are available free of charge online in the Adobe
Acrobat™ format. In addition to a regular set of tax maps,
a special set with property boundary reference numbers is
also available. Each property boundary intersection in
town has a unique reference number. All plans submitted
in accordance with the subdivision regulations, whether
paper or CADD format, must include at least three of these
points, along with the reference number as text
annotation. If three of these points do not fall within
the map area, it is acceptable to place points with a tie
VI-6
(distance & bearing reference) to the location of a
boundary point.
Tax Maps and Property Boundary Reference Tax Maps are
available online at the following location: www.westspringfield.
ma.us/gis/maps.htm
6.6 PUBLIC AREAS
Under the provisions of M.G.L. Chapter 41 Section 81-U,
subdivisions greater than ten (10) lots or capable of
being subdivided into ten (10) lots conforming to zoning
requirements may be required to show a park of 10,000
square feet or 5% of the land being subdivided, whichever
is greater. The land for said park shall be suitable for
active and passive recreational purpose. No more than 5%
of said land shall contain wetlands and slopes greater
than 15% without the approval of the Board. Said land
shall be readily accessible from a public way or a way
within the subdivision. Said land shall not be developed
for a period of not less than three (3) years from the
date of recording of the subdivision without the approval
of the Board. Said land shall be maintained in a suitable
manner by the owner of the property or his assigns.
6.7 SEWER EXTENSION PERMITS
6.71 Under the provision of Section 43, of Chapter 21 of the
General Laws, an application must be submitted by the
Town to the Massachusetts Resources Commission,
Division of Water Pollution Control, for a permit to
allow construction of any sewer extensions of a public
sewerage system, including construction plans for
pumping stations, forced mains, siphons and other
appurtenances (see Appendix E).
6.72 It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
furnish the Planning Board and Department of Public
Works, at the time of submission of the Definitive
Plan, preferably with the Preliminary Plan if submitted
with the necessary data, specifications and
construction plans of the proposed sewer extension
project as required and said application form to be
subsequently completed for submittal to the Division of
Water Pollution Control.
VI-7
6.8 SUITABILITY OF THE LAND FOR DEVELOPMENT
6.81 Board of Health Review
6.811 At the time of filing of the Definitive Plan, the
applicant shall also file with the Board of Health
one (1) print of the Definitive Plan, together with
other necessary documentation and reports. The
Board of Health shall review for such issues
including but not limited to slope, depth of water
table, suitability of potable water and sewage
disposal facilities and of material used for fill.
The Board of Health shall report to the Planning
Board, in writing within forty-five (45) days, its
approval or disapproval of said plan. If the Board
of Health disapproves said plan, it shall make
specific findings as to which, if any, of the lots
shown on such plan cannot be used for building sites
without injury to the public health, and include
such specific findings and the reasons thereof in
such report, and, where possible, shall make
recommendations for the adjustment thereof. Any
approval of the plan by the Planning Board shall
only be given on condition that the land shall not
be built upon or served with any utilities such as
septic tanks, and drainage without prior consent of
the Board of Health. The Planning Board shall
endorse on the plan such conditions as set forth by
the Board of Health.
6.812 All subdivisions shall connect to the Town sanitary
sewerage system where physically capable and where
this system is available, and every lot not served
by the Town sanitary sewerage system shall have an
adequate and approved sewage disposal system,
satisfactory to the Board of Health, in accordance
with Title V prior to the issuance of a Building
Permit.
6.813 All subdivisions shall connect to the public water
supply system. All building lots not served by a
public system shall have an adequate supply of
potable water approved by the Board of Health. A
laboratory test of the water quality shall be
required and submitted to the Board of Health prior
to the issuance of a Building Permit. All
developments shall be serviced with adequate
pressure or volume from the public water supply for
fire protection services.
VI-8
6.814 Any approval of a Definitive Subdivision Plan by the
Planning Board which contain building lots not
served by the municipal water and sanitary sewerage
system shall only be given on condition that the
lots or land as to which such findings were made
shall not be built upon or served with any utilities
such as septic tanks and drainage without prior
written consent of the Board of Health to the
Planning Board. The Planning Board shall endorse on
the plans such conditions as set forth by the Board
of Health, specifying the lots or land to which said
conditions apply.
6.82 Review by other Town Agencies
The Planning Board shall, upon submission of a
Definitive Plan, transmit one copy of the plan,
application and development impact statement to:
Department of Public Works, Fire Department, Police
Department, Building Commissioner, Conservation
Commission and Recreation Department for their review.
Comments and recommendations shall be made to the
Planning Board within forty-five (45) days following
receipt of a copy of the plan and related DIS. Failure
to comment within the prescribed time limit shall be
deemed as approval of the proposed development.
6.9 SITE VISIT
Prior to the public hearing being held, a site visit may
be conducted by the Planning Board or its designee in
order to familiarize themselves with the lay of the land
and the layout of the proposed development. In order to
facilitate the site visit and the gathering of pertinent
information, the developer shall stake out the centerline
of all proposed roadways in a general manner. The staking
shall be clearly visible, a minimum of three (3) feet in
height with the top one (1) foot painted fluorescent
orange. The stakes shall be placed no greater than twenty
(20) feet apart from one another.
7.0 PUBLIC HEARING
Before approval, modification and approval, or disapproval
of a Definitive Plan is given, a public hearing shall be
held by the Planning Board. Notice of the time and place
of the hearing, and of the subject matter, sufficient for
identification, shall be given by the Planning Board at
the expense of the applicant by advertisement in a
VI-9
newspaper of general circulation in the Town of West
Springfield once in each of two successive weeks, the
first publication being not less than fourteen (14) days
before the day of such hearing. A copy of said notice
shall be mailed to the applicant and to all owners of land
abutting upon the subdivision as appearing on the most
recent tax list.
7.1 APPROVAL, MODIFICATION, DISAPPROVAL
7.11 Prior to action by the Planning Board on the Definitive
Plan, a joint meeting may be held with the developer,
Planning Department, the Department of Public Works,
Conservation Commission, Building Commissioner, Fire
Department, and Director of Health to facilitate a
complete review of the proposed improvements.
7.12 After the required hearing, but within ninety (90) days
if a preliminary subdivision plan was filed and the
definitive plan derived therefrom within seven (7)
months or one hundred and thirty-five (135) days if no
preliminary subdivision plan was filed, from the date
of submission, the Planning Board shall approve, modify
and approve, or disapprove the Definitive Subdivision
Plan. The action of the Planning Board with respect to
such plan shall be by vote, copies of which shall be
certified and filed with the Town Clerk and sent by
registered mail to the applicant.
7.13 If the Definitive Subdivision Plan does not comply with
the Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board or the
recommendations of the Board of Health, the Planning
Board shall modify and approve or shall disapprove such
plan. In the event of disapproval, the Planning Board
shall state in detail wherein the plan does not conform
to the Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board or
the recommendations of the Board of Health. The
Planning Board shall revoke its disapproval and approve
a plan which, as amended, conforms to such Rules and
Regulations or recommendations only if the amended
subdivision plan has been submitted within sixty (60)
days of the filing of disapproval of said plan.
Submission of an amended plan after sixty (60) days of
the filing of disapproval of said plans shall be deemed
a new definitive subdivision plan and shall conform to
the Subdivision Rules and Regulations and Zoning
Ordinance in force at the time of the new submission.
7.14 Final approval, if granted, shall be endorsed on the
original drawing of the Definitive Plan by the
VI-10
signatures of a majority of the Planning Board, but not
until the statutory twenty (20) day appeal period has
elapsed following the filing of the certificate of the
action of the Planning Board with the Town Clerk, and
said Clerk has notified the Planning Board that no
appeal has been filed, or if an appeal has been taken,
that a final decree has been entered by the court
sustaining the approval of the plan.
7.15 Final approval of a definitive subdivision plan shall
be conditional upon the completion of all improvements
within two (2) years from the date of endorsement of
the subdivision plan. The Board may grant an extension
of the two (2) year limit provided that a construction
phasing plan is submitted and approved by the Board
prior to final approval. Failure to complete all
improvements within two (2) years of approval or any
extension therefrom may result in rescission of
Planning Board approval of the definitive plan. Any
lot not released within two (2) years of endorsement or
approved extension may be required to be shown on a new
definitive subdivision plan.
7.2 ENDORSEMENT
7.21 An approved plan shall not be endorsed until the
expiration of twenty days without notice of appeal to
the superior court, or, if appeal has been taken, the
expiration of twenty days after the entry of a final
decree of the court sustaining the approval of such
plan and not until the applicant has:
7.211 posted the necessary performance guarantee with
certification of recording;
7.212 made the necessary corrections on the plan, if
conditional approval was given, to the satisfaction
of the Planning Board;
7.213 delivered two (2) originals (one for recording and
one for the Board's file) and two (2) prints of the
Definitive Plan if no corrections to it were
necessary. (Note: If corrections were required,
two (2) originals and ten (10) prints shall be
delivered); and
7.214 caused to be executed in a form acceptable to the
Town Attorney all deeds of easements as shown on the
plan and submission of such deeds and documents in
the form of certified copies to the Planning Board.
VI-11
Failure of the applicant to meet the above requirements
shall be full and sufficient reason to withhold
endorsement.
7.22 If the applicant fails to submit the required
performance guarantees, easements and other
documentation and the endorsement of the plan by the
Planning Board is delayed more than sixty (60) days
from the date of approval, the Planning Board, on its
own motion, may exercise its power to modify, amend, or
rescind its approval of the subdivision plan or to
require a change in the plan as a condition of said
plan retaining the status of an approved plan.
7.3 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE
7.31 Before endorsement of the Planning Board's approval of
the Definitive Plan, the applicant shall agree to
complete the required improvements as specified in
these Rules and Regulations for all lots in the
subdivision, and such construction and installation
shall be secured by one, or in part by one and in part
by another, of the following methods which may be
varied from time to time:
7.311 By a proper bond, deposit of money or negotiable
securities, sufficient in the opinion of the Board
to secure performance of the construction of ways
and the installation of municipal and private
services required for lots in the subdivision shown
on the approved plan. Such performance guarantee
shall be approved as to form and manner of execution
as shown on the bond agreement, and such money if
deposited shall be deposited in a local bank in the
name of the Town of West Springfield, and said
deposit book shall remain in the trust of the Town
Treasurer.
7.312 By a covenant, executed and duly recorded by the
owner of record, running with the land, whereby such
ways and services shall be provided to serve any lot
before such lot may be built upon or conveyed, other
than by mortgage deed; provided, that a mortgagee
who acquires title to the mortgaged premises by
foreclosure or otherwise and any succeeding owner of
such premises or part thereof may sell any such lot,
subject to that portion of the covenant which
provides that no lot shall be built upon until such
ways and services have been provided to serve such
VI-12
lot; and provided, further, that nothing herein
shall be deemed to prohibit a conveyance by a single
deed, subject to such covenant, of either the entire
parcel of land shown on the subdivision plan or of
all lots not previously released by the Planning
Board. A deed of any part of the subdivision in
violation hereof shall be voidable by the grantee
prior to the release of the covenant but not later
than three years from the date of such deed.
7.313 By delivery to the Planning Board of an agreement
executed after the recording of a first mortgage
covering the premises shown on the plan or a portion
thereof given as security for advances to be made to
the applicant by the lender, which agreement shall
be executed by the applicant and the lender and
shall provide for the retention by the lender of
funds sufficient in the opinion of the planning
board and otherwise due the applicant, to secure the
construction of ways and the installation of
municipal services. Said agreement shall also
provide for a schedule of disbursements which may be
made to the applicant upon completion of various
stages of the work, and shall further provide that
in the event the work is not completed within the
time set forth by the applicant, any funds remaining
undisbursed shall be available for completion.
7.32 In addition to the performance guarantee required
above, no work within an existing public way which is
necessitated by the construction of proposed ways in an
approved subdivision and/or the installation of
municipal services in such a development shall be
performed until a permit allowing such work has been
issued by the Department of Public Works. The DPW
shall not grant such a permit until a monetary
performance guarantee of the type described in this
section, held separately from that of the development
itself, and in an amount sufficient to guarantee the
satisfactory completion of proposed work, has been
posted. Any security posted to guarantee work within a
public way shall be separate from securities posted to
guarantee work within an approved development.
7.33 The value of all monetary performance guarantees shall
be established by the Department of Public Works
utilizing the most current release of the Mass. Highway
Department Weighted Average Bid Prices Statewide and by
Districts from Highway and Bridge Projects. An
inflationary factor of 10% shall be added annually for
all monetary performance guarantees.
VI-13
7.34 When improvements have been completed to the
satisfaction of the Planning Board in accordance with
these Rules and Regulations, the Board will then
authorize in writing a release of the performance
guarantee and any applicable conditions relating to
such lots shall terminate.
7.4 RECORDING OF PLAN
7.41 A definitive subdivision plan, duly endorsed by the
Planning Board, shall be filed with the Hampden County
Registry of Deeds or Land Registration Office of
Hampden County within sixty (60) days of said
endorsement. Failure to record said plan within sixty
(60) days shall automatically rescind approval of this
plan.
7.42 Within ten (10) days after the Definitive Plan, as
approved and endorsed, has been recorded at the Hampden
County Registry Office of Deeds and in the case of
registered land, with the recorder of the Land
Registration Office of Hampden County, the applicant
shall notify the Board in writing of the date of such
recording and provide a certified copy of such
recording.
7.43 Upon receipt of certification of recording, the Board
shall file one print of the Definitive Plan with the
Building Commissioner. In accordance with the statute,
where approval with covenant is noted thereon, the
Building Commissioner shall not issue any permit for
the construction of a building on any lot within the
subdivision without receipt from the Board of a copy of
the release of covenant.
7.5 COMPLETION TIME SCHEDULE
7.51 The installation of all improvements as required by
these Rules and Regulations and the approval of the
Board shall be completed within two (2) years from the
date of endorsement of the approved subdivision plan.
Subdivisions creating more than twenty (20) building
lots may be phased over a period of not more than four
(4) years upon approval of the Planning Board.
7.52 Upon written request from the applicant with written
consent of the holder of the performance guarantee, the
Planning Board may, due to unforeseen circumstances
VI-14
related to the soil, shape or topography of the land,
grant an extension of time, and such agreement shall be
executed and affixed to the performance agreement.
7.53 Failure to complete the required improvements within
the two (2) year time frame or duly granted extension
by the Board may result, upon vote of the Board, in the
applicant/developer being in default of the performance
agreement.
7.54 Where the applicant is found in default of the
performance agreement, the Planning Board shall utilize
the performance agreement to complete the installation
of the improvements in accordance with M.G.L., Chapter
41, Section 81-U.
7.6 INCREASE OF PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE
If the specified subdivision improvements in accordance
with these Rules and Regulations are not completed within
two (2) years of the date of bond, deposit of money or
covenant, the Planning Board will require revised estimate
of the costs of the remaining work, change the amount of
the performance guarantee proportionately, and establish a
new date for the completion of said required improvements.
Failure of the developer to complete the improvements
within the original two (2) year period, or any extension
thereof, shall not relieve the developer from his
obligation to pay for increased costs for completing the
improvements in excess of his performance guarantee.
7.7 RELEASE OF PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE
7.71 Partial Release
The subdivider may, upon partial completion and
installation of required improvements in a subdivision
as specified in these Rules and Regulations, make
formal application to the Planning Board for partial
release of the performance guarantee, in accordance
with the procedures set forth herein:
7.711 Bond, Surety or other monetary deposit
The amount of any such bond or any deposit held may,
from time to time, be reduced by the Planning Board,
upon formal application in the manner prescribed
herein, and the obligations of the parties thereto
released by said Board in whole or in part.
VI-15
7.712 Covenant
Partial releases of a covenant shall not be allowed.
Partially completed subdivisions subject to a
covenant may exchange the covenant for a monetary
performance guarantee in accordance with the
procedures of these regulations.
7.72 Procedures for Full or Partial Release
Upon full or partial completion of construction and
installation of required improvements in a subdivision,
the subdivider may request a release of conditions of
the performance guarantee by:
7.721 Sending by registered mail or by hand delivery to
the Planning Board and Town Clerk a written
statement that he has completed the construction and
installation of ways and utilities covered by said
performance guarantee in accordance with these Rules
and Regulations;
7.722 Attaching to the written statement a Certificate of
Performance (see Appendix A) prepared by a
Registered Professional Engineer at the applicant's
expense, stating that the necessary streets, sewers,
storm drains, water lines, together with their
appurtenances and all other required improvements
have been constructed and installed as specified in
these Rules and Regulations and in accordance with
the approved plans.
7.723 Requests for final release of a performance
guarantee shall be accompanied by an "As-Built Plan"
and Roadway Acceptance Plan, as required in these
Rules and Regulations.
7.73 Approval of Release
7.731 In no instance shall a performance guarantee be
released for the final road course and sidewalks
until said work has withstood one full winter
season. Partial or final release for this work may
be requested of the Planning Board in April of the
calendar year subsequent to completion of way and
walks.
7.732 Before the Planning Board will release the interest
of the Town in a performance guarantee, the Planning
Board shall obtain in writing from the Department of
VI-16
Public Works a certificate or statement that all
work required by these Rules and Regulations under
the jurisdiction of the town has been inspected by
them or a designated party and completed in each
street or streets in the subdivision serving the
lots in question, including streets, storm drainage,
bridges, sewers, shoulders, sidewalks, curbs, etc.,
and that the method of construction and materials
used in the performance of such work meets with
their approval.
7.733 If the Planning Board determines that said
construction or installation has been completed
satisfactorily, it shall release the interest of the
Town in such performance guarantee. If the Planning
Board determines after inspection that said
construction or installation has not been completed
or wherein said construction or installation fails
to comply with these Rules or Regulations, the
Planning Board shall send by registered mail to the
applicant and to the Town Clerk the details wherein
said construction or installation fails to comply
with its rules.
7.734 Failure of the Planning Board to act on such an
application for release of the performance guarantee
within forty-five (45) days after the receipt of the
application by the Town Clerk, all obligations under
the bond shall cease and terminate by operation of
law, and any deposit shall be returned and any such
covenant shall become void.
7.735 Any such bond or deposit of money may be enforced
and any such deposit may be applied by the Planning
Board for the benefit of the Town of West
Springfield, as provided in Section 81-Y of M.G.L.
Chapter 41, upon failure of the performance for
which any such bond or deposit was given to the
extent of the reasonable cost to the Town of
completing such construction and installation.
7.8 DEVIATIONS FROM APPROVED PLAN
7.81 After approval of any Definitive Plan, the location and
width of ways shown thereon, or any street or way
subject to the Subdivision Control Law, shall not be
changed unless the plan is amended in accordance with
the provisions set forth in Section 81-W of Chapter 41
of the General Laws, and approved by the Planning
Board.
VI-17
7.82 In the event the applicant desires to alter or change
the grade of a street, or the size, location or layout
of a storm or sanitary line or appurtenant structure,
he shall:
7.821 provide the Board with a written statement
requesting such alteration or change, and;
7.822 provide the Board with three (3) prints of the
original Definitive Plan with the proposed changes
drawn on said prints in red.
7.83 No change, alteration or deviation shall be permitted
unless such change, alteration or deviation has been
approved by the Planning Board.
7.84 After approval of an alteration or modification, the
applicant shall cause such approved changes to be
corrected on the original drawings of the Definitive
Plan.
7.85 Deviations from material and construction
specifications shall not be allowed except as
specifically authorized by the Department of Public
Works or appropriate agency having jurisdiction over a
particular utility system and upon notification to the
Planning Board.
7.9 STREET ACCEPTANCE
7.91 Final approval of the Definitive Plan does not
constitute the laying out or acceptance by the Town of
any street or other public improvement shown on the
plan.
7.92 Procedures for the laying out and acceptance of Town
streets and ways are under the administration of the
Town Council.
VIII-1
SECTION VIII PROCEDURES FOR SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL OF
PLANS FOR MORE THAN ONE BUILDING FOR
DWELLING PURPOSES PER LOT
8.0 GENERAL
8.01 In order to ensure that adequate ways furnishing access
to each site for a building designed or available for
use for dwelling purposes are provided for, a Plan For
More Than One Building For Dwelling Purposes Per Lot
must be submitted by the applicant to the Planning
Board and Board of Health for approval.
8.02 The submission and approval of said plan shall be
governed by the Subdivision Rules and Regulations in
effect at the time of submission of such plan.
8.03 A Plan For More Than One Building For Dwelling Purposes
Per Lot shall be governed by the Zoning Ordinance in
effect at the time of submission of such plan.
8.1 FILING PROCEDURES
Any person who submits a Plan For More Than One Building
For Dwelling Purposes Per Lot to the Planning Board for
its consent shall file with the Board the following:
8.11 Two (2) Mylar drawings of the plan conforming to
Registry of Deeds standards and fifteen (15) contact
prints thereof, dark line on white background, as
described in Section 8.2 below. One reproducible set
shall be returned to the applicant after Board action.
It is strongly recommended that the applicant submit a
copy of the plans in digital format in accordance with
the standards outlined in the Appendix;
8.12 One original and fifteen (15) copies of a completed
Form D - Application for Approval of More Than One
Building For Dwelling Purposes Per Lot;
8.13 One (1) original and fifteen (15) copies of the
Development Impact Statement.
8.14 A filing fee in accordance with the Fee Schedule (see
Appendix C) shall be paid by the applicant to cover
costs of handling, town reviews and public hearings.
Any additional expenses for plans, surveys, inspections
or outside review shall be borne by the applicant;
VIII-2
8.15 One (1) original and two (2) copies of Form E -
Designers Certificate;
8.16 One (1) original and two (2) copies of Form F -
Statement of Interest;
8.17 A certified list of abutters obtained from the Town
Assessor's Office within 30 days of the filing of the
application;
8.18 A receipt of submission of the application from the
Town Clerk's office;
8.19 At the time of filing of the plan, it is recommended
that the applicant file a Request For Determination of
Applicability or Notice of Intent with the Conservation
Commission.
Receipt by the Planning Board of all filing requirements
as outlined above at one of its regularly scheduled
meetings shall constitute the effective date of submission
of the development plan.
8.2 CONTENTS
The Plan For More Than One Building For Dwelling Purposes
Per Lot shall be prepared by a Civil Engineer and/or Land
Surveyor registered in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
and shall be clearly and legibly drawn in black waterproof
ink on Mylar meeting all requirements of the Registry of
Deeds. The plan shall be at a scale of one-inch equals
forty feet (1" = 40'), unless otherwise specified by the
Planning Board. The sheet size shall not exceed an
outside dimension of twenty-four by thirty-six (24" X 36")
inches.
If multiple sheets are used, they shall be accompanied by
an index sheet showing the entire development and listing
all attached sheets.
The plan shall contain the following information:
8.21 The development name, boundaries, true North arrow,
date, scale, locus map, legend and title "Plan For More
Than One Building For Dwelling Purposes Per Lot";
8.22 Legend denoting all signs and symbols used on the plan
and not otherwise explained;
VIII-3
8.23 The location of all existing structures on the subject
property denoting future intentions;
8.24 The name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) of record,
mortgage holder(s) and applicant(s) certified by an
attorney; the name(s), official seal(s) and
signature(s) of the registered Civil Engineer and/or
Land Surveyor;
8.25 Zoning districts of all areas shown on the plan
including all overlay districts;
8.26 The location of all existing and proposed lines of
private access roads, ways and rights-of-way, easements
and any public or common areas within the development.
Proposed names of new access roads shall be shown in
pencil until they have been tentatively approved by the
Planning Board. All wording for proposed easements and
public or common areas shall be submitted with the
application for Town Counsel review and approval;
8.27 Location, names and present widths of pavement and
rights-of-way of adjacent public and private streets,
ways, abutting and within one hundred feet (100') of
the development;
8.28 The location, dimensions and purpose of all existing
and proposed easements recorded in favor of the
municipality, abutting and within one hundred feet
(100') of the development;
8.29 Location of all permanent monuments, pins and
benchmarker, properly identified as to whether existing
or proposed;
8.30 A topographic grading plan of the entire development at
two (2) foot contour intervals showing existing (broken
lines) and proposed (solid lines) topography with
proposed spot elevations at pertinent points to show
the proposed finished grading of the entire development
for roadway and building construction;
8.31 Location of natural waterways and water bodies within
and adjacent to the development;
8.32 All lands subject to M.G.L. Chapter 131, Section 40
(The Wetlands Protection Act);
8.33 All existing or proposed 10, 100 and 500 year
floodplain boundaries;
VIII-4
8.34 Subsurface conditions as they relate to soil, geology
and hydrology, as reasonably ascertainable;
8.35 Significant site features which include among others:
stone walls, fences, rock outcrops, trees greater than
8" Diameter Breast High in size, historical and scenic
areas, and slopes of 25% grade or greater;
8.36 Location of all existing utilities abutting and within
one hundred (100) feet of the development including but
not limited to water, sewer, storm drain, gas,
electric, cable, telephone, fire alarms and fire
hydrants, as reasonably ascertainable;
8.37 A layout plan consisting of plan and profile views
shall be drawn on separate sheets for each access road
within the development. The plan shall be drawn at a
horizontal scale of 1" = 40' and a vertical scale of 1"
= 4'. The plans shall show proposed exterior lines,
roadway lines, curb lines, intersection angles, points
of tangency and radii of curves. Also included on the
access road layout plan shall be location, size, type
of construction, elevation, and invert of all pipes and
conduits of the:
8.371 Water Supply System, including wells, pumps, valves,
stubs, gates, hydrants, and similar equipment;
8.372 Storm Drainage System, including manholes,
catchbasins, swales and appurtenant structures;
8.373 Sanitary Sewage System, including manholes, pumps,
and appurtenant equipment;
8.374 Electrical Supply Equipment, including transformers,
primary and secondary cables, lighting fixtures and
other electrical equipment as approved by Western
Mass. Electric Company;
8.375 Other Underground Utility Systems servicing the
development, including gas, telephone and cable T.V.
facilities;
8.38 A typical cross-section for the full width of the
proposed access road shall be shown in accordance with
the "Typical Cross-Section" illustrated in Appendix B;
8.39 Construction details for catchbasins, manholes,
endwalls, etc.;
VIII-5
8.40 Erosion control and stabilization details for all site
improvements including but not limited to access roads,
storm water management systems and structures;
8.41 Suitable space to record:
8.411 the action of the Planning Board and the signatures
of the members of the Board;
8.412 action and signature of the Town Clerk;
8.413 conditions of approval;
8.414 approval of waivers; and
8.415 recording of covenant and/or other performance
agreements;
8.42 Additional pertinent information the Planning Board may
request.
8.5 SPATIAL REFERENCE
The Town of West Springfield maintains a set of Tax Maps,
which are available free of charge online in the Adobe
Acrobat™ format. In addition to a regular set of tax maps,
a special set with property boundary reference numbers is
also available. Each property boundary intersection in
town has a unique reference number. All plans submitted
in accordance with the subdivision regulations, whether
paper or CADD format, must include at least three of these
points, along with the reference number as text
annotation. If three of these points do not fall within
the map area, it is acceptable to place points with a tie
(distance & bearing reference) to the location of a
boundary point.
Tax Maps and Property Boundary Reference Tax Maps are
available online at the following location: www.westspringfield.
ma.us/gis/maps.htm
8.6 SEWER EXTENSION PERMITS
8.61 Under the provision of Section 43, of Chapter 21 of the
General Laws, an application must be submitted by the
Town to the Department of Environmental Protection,
Division of Water Pollution Control, for a permit to
allow construction of any sewer extensions of a public
VIII-6
sewerage system, including construction plans for
pumping stations, forced mains, siphons and other
appurtenances (see Appendix E).
8.62 It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
furnish the Planning Board and Department of Public
Works, at time of submission of the development plan
with the necessary data, specifications and
construction plans of the proposed sewer extension
project, as required, and said application form to be
subsequently completed for submittal to the Division of
Water Pollution Control.
8.7 SUITABILITY OF THE LAND FOR DEVELOPMENT
8.71 Board of Health Review
8.711 At the time of filing of the Plan For More Than One
Building For Dwelling Purposes Per Lot, the
applicant shall also file with the Board of Health
one (1) print of the development plan, together with
other necessary documentation and reports. The
Board of Health shall review for such issues
including but not limited to slope, depth of water
table, suitability of potable water and sewage
disposal facilities and of material used for fill.
The Board of Health shall report to the Planning
Board, in writing within forty-five (45) days, its
approval or disapproval of said plan. If the Board
of Health disapproves said plan, it shall make
specific findings as why the development of the lot
shown on such plan cannot be used for building sites
without injury to the public health, and include
such specific findings and the reasons thereof in
such report, and, where possible, shall make
recommendations for the adjustment thereof. Any
approval of the plan by the Planning Board shall
only be given on condition that the land shall not
be built upon or served with any utilities such as
septic tanks, and drainage without prior consent of
the board of Health. The Planning Board shall
endorse on the plan such conditions as set forth by
the Board of Health.
8.712 All developments shall connect to the Town sanitary
sewerage system where physically capable and where
this system is available, and developments not
served by the Town sanitary sewerage system shall
have an adequate and approved sewage disposal
system, satisfactory to the Board of Health, in
VIII-7
accordance with Title V prior to the issuance of a
Building Permit.
8.713 All developments shall connect to a public water
supply system. All buildings not served by a public
system shall have an adequate supply of potable
water approved by the Board of Health. A
laboratory test of the water quality shall be
required and submitted to the Board of Health prior
to the issuance of a Building Permit. All
developments shall be serviced with adequate
pressure or volume from the public water supply for
fire protection services.
8.714 Any approval of a Plan For More Than One Building
For Dwelling Purposes by the Planning Board which
propose buildings not served by the municipal water
and sanitary sewerage system shall only be given on
condition that the land as to which such findings
were made shall not be built upon without prior
written consent of the Board of Health to the
Planning Board. The Planning Board shall endorse on
the plans such conditions, specifying the land to
which said conditions apply.
8.72 Review by other Town Agencies
The Planning Board shall, upon submission of a
development plan, transmit one copy of the plan and
development impact statement to: Department of Public
Works, Fire Department, Police Department, Building
Commissioner, Conservation Commission and Recreation
Department for their review. Comments and
recommendations shall be made to the Planning Board
within forty-five (45) days following receipt of a copy
of the plan and related DIS. Failure to comment within
the prescribed time limit shall be deemed as approval
of the proposed development.
8.8 SITE VISIT
Prior to the public hearing being held, a site visit maybe
conducted by the Planning Board or its designee in order
to familiarize themselves with the lay of the land and the
layout of the proposed development. In order to
facilitate the site visit and the gathering of pertinent
information, the developer shall stake out the centerline
of all proposed access roads in a general manner. The
staking shall be clearly visible, a minimum of three (3)
feet in height with the top one (1) foot painted
VIII-8
fluorescent orange. The stakes shall be placed no greater
than twenty (20) feet apart from one another.
8.9 PUBLIC HEARING
Before approval, modification and approval, or disapproval
of a Plan For More Than One Building For Dwelling Purposes
Per Lot is given, a public hearing shall be held by the
Planning Board within sixty (60) days of submission of
said plans. Notice of the time and place of the hearing,
and of the subject matter, sufficient for identification,
shall be given by the Planning Board at the expense of the
applicant by advertisement in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town of West Springfield once in each
of two successive weeks, the first publication being not
less than fourteen (14) days before the day of such
hearing. A copy of said notice shall be mailed to the
applicant and to all owners of land abutting upon the
subdivision as appearing on the most recent tax list.
9.0 APPROVAL, MODIFICATION, DISAPPROVAL
9.01 Prior to action by the Planning Board on the Plan For
More Than One Building For Dwelling Purposes Per Lot, a
joint meeting may be held with the developer, Planning
Department, the Department of Public Works,
Conservation Commission, Building Commissioner Fire
Department, Police Department and Director of Health to
facilitate a complete review of the proposed
improvements.
9.02 Within ninety (90) days of the close of the public
hearing, the Planning Board shall approve, modify and
approve, or disapprove the development plan. The
action of the Planning Board with respect to such plan
shall be by vote, copies of which shall be certified
and filed with the Town Clerk and sent by registered
mail to the applicant.
9.03 If the Plan For More Than One Building For Dwelling
Purposes Per Lot does not comply with the Rules and
Regulations of the Planning Board or the
recommendations of the Board of Health, the Planning
Board shall modify and approve or shall disapprove such
plan. In the event of disapproval, the Planning Board
shall state in detail wherein the plan does not conform
to the Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board or
the recommendations of the Board of Health. The
Planning Board shall revoke its disapproval and approve
VIII-9
a plan which, as amended, conforms to such Rules and
Regulations or recommendations only if the amended
development plan has been submitted within sixty (60)
days of the filing of the disapproval of said plan.
9.04 Final approval, if granted, shall be endorsed on the
original drawing of the development plan by the
signatures of a majority of the Planning Board, but not
until a twenty (20) day appeal period has elapsed
following the filing of the certificate of the action
of the Planning Board with the Town Clerk, and said
Clerk has notified the Planning Board that no appeal
has been filed, or if an appeal has been taken, that a
final decree has been entered by the court sustaining
the approval of the plan.
9.1 ENDORSEMENT
9.11 An approved plan shall not be endorsed until the
expiration of twenty days without notice of appeal to
the superior court, or, if appeal has been taken, the
expiration of twenty days after the entry of a final
decree of the court sustaining the approval of such
plan and not until the applicant has:
9.111 posted the necessary performance guarantee with
certification of recording;
9.112 made the necessary corrections on the plan, if
conditional approval was given, to the satisfaction
of the Planning Board;
9.113 delivered two (2) originals (one for recording and
one for the Board's file) and two (2) prints of the
More Than One Building for Dwelling Purposed Per Lot
Plan if no corrections to it were necessary. (Note:
If corrections were required, two (2) originals and
ten (10) prints shall be delivered); and
9.114 caused to be executed in a form acceptable to the
Town Counsel all deeds of easements as shown on the
plan and submission of such deeds and documents in
the form of certified copies to the Planning Board.
Failure of the applicant to meet the above requirements
shall be full and sufficient reason to withhold
endorsement.
9.12 If the applicant fails to submit the required
performance guarantees, easements and other
VIII-10
documentation and the endorsement of the plan by the
Planning Board is delayed more than sixty (60) days
from the date of approval, the Planning Board, on its
own motion, may exercise its power to modify, amend, or
rescind its approval of the development plan or to
require a change in the plan as a condition of said
plan retaining the status of an approved plan.
9.2 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE
9.21 Before endorsement of the Planning Board's approval of
the Plan For More Than One Building For Dwelling
Purposes Per Lot, the applicant shall agree to complete
the required improvements as specified in these Rules
and Regulations and such construction and installation
shall be secured by one, or in part by one and in part
by another, of the following methods which may be
varied from time to time:
9.211 By a proper bond, deposit of money or negotiable
securities, sufficient in the opinion of the Board
to secure performance of the construction of the
access roads and the installation of municipal and
private services required for buildings in the
development shown on the approved plan. Such
performance guarantee shall be approved as to form
and manner of execution as shown on the bond
agreement, and such money if deposited shall be
deposited in a local bank in the name of the Town of
West Springfield, and said deposit book shall remain
in the trust of the Town Treasurer.
9.212 By a covenant, executed and duly recorded by the
owner of record, running with the land, whereby such
access roads and services shall be provided to serve
the development before such buildings may be
constructed.
9.213 By delivery to the Planning Board of an agreement
executed after the recording of a first mortgage
covering the premises shown on the plan or a portion
thereof given as security for advances to be made to
the applicant by the lender, which agreement shall
be executed by the applicant and the lender and
shall provide for the retention by the lender of
funds sufficient in the opinion of the Planning
Board and otherwise due the applicant, to secure the
construction of access roads and the installation of
utilities. Said agreement shall also provide for a
schedule of disbursements which may be made to the
VIII-11
applicant upon completion of various stages of the
work, and shall further provide that in the event
the work is not completed within the time set forth
by the applicant, any funds remaining undisbursed
shall be available for completion.
9.214 When improvements have been completed to the
satisfaction of the Planning Board, the Board will
then authorize in writing, on the appropriate form,
a Release of conditions for recording in the
Registry of Deeds, and the conditions relating to
such buildings shall terminate.
9.22 In addition to the performance guarantee required
above, no work within an existing public way which is
necessitated by the construction of proposed access
roads in an approved development and/or the
installation of municipal services in such a
development shall be performed until a permit allowing
such work has been issued by the Department of Public
Works. The DPW shall not grant such a permit until a
monetary performance guarantee of the type described in
this section, held separately from that of the
development itself, and in an amount sufficient to
guarantee the satisfactory completion of proposed work,
has been posted. Any security posted to guarantee work
within a public way shall be separate from securities
posted to guarantee work within an approved
development.
9.23 The value of all monetary performance guarantees shall
be established by the Town Engineer utilizing the most
current release of the Mass. Highway Department
Weighted Average Bid Prices Statewide and by Districts
from Highway and Bridge Projects. An inflationary
factor of 10% shall be added annually for all monetary
performance guarantees.
9.3 RECORDING OF PLAN
9.31 A Plan For More Than One Building for Dwelling Purposes
Per Lot, duly endorsed by the Planning Board, shall be
filed with the Hampden County Registry of Deeds or Land
Registration Office of Hampden County within sixty (60)
days of said endorsement. Failure to record said plan
within sixty (60) days shall automatically rescind
approval of this plan.
9.32 Within ten (10) days after the development plan, as
approved and endorsed, has been recorded at the Hampden
VIII-12
County Registry of Deeds and in the case of registered
land, with the recorder of the Land Registration Office
of Hampden County, the applicant shall notify the Board
in writing of the date of such recording and provide a
certified copy of such recording.
9.33 Upon receipt of certification of recording, the Board
shall file one print of the development plan with the
Building Commissioner.
9.4 COMPLETION TIME SCHEDULE
9.41 The installation of all improvements as required by
these Rules and Regulations and the approval of the
Board shall be completed within two (2) years from the
date of endorsement of the approved development plan.
A development creating more than forty dwelling units
may be phased over a period of not more than four (4)
years upon approval of the Planning Board.
9.42 Upon written request from the applicant with written
consent of the holder of the performance guarantee, the
Planning Board may, due to unforeseen circumstances
related to the soil, shape or topography of the land,
grant an extension of time, and such agreement shall be
executed and affixed to the bond or covenant.
9.43 Failure to complete the required improvements within
the two (2) year time frame or duly granted extension
by the Board may result, upon vote by the Board, in the
applicant/developer being in default of the performance
agreement.
9.44 Where the applicant is found in default of the
performance agreement, the Planning Board shall utilize
the performance agreement to complete the installation
of the improvements in accordance with M.G.L., Chapter
41, Section 81-U.
9.5 INCREASE OF PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE
If the specified development improvements in accordance
with these Rules and Regulations are not completed within
two (2) years of the date of bond, deposit of money or
covenant, the Planning Board will require revised estimate
of the costs of the remaining work, change the amount of
the performance guarantee proportionately, and establish a
new date for the completion of said required improvements.
Failure of the developer to complete the improvements
VIII-13
within the original two (2) year period, or any extension
thereof, shall not relieve the developer from his
obligation to pay for increased costs for completing the
improvements in excess of his performance guarantee.
9.6 RELEASE OF PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE
9.61 Partial Release
The developer may, upon partial completion and
installation of required improvements in a development
as specified in these Rules and Regulations, make
formal application to the Planning Board for partial
release of the performance guarantee, in accordance
with the procedures set forth herein:
9.611 Bond or Surety
The amount of any such bond, or the amount of any
deposit held may, from time to time, be reduced by
the Planning Board, upon formal application in the
manner prescribed herein, and the obligations of the
parties thereto released by said Board in whole or
in part.
9.612 Covenant
Partial releases of a covenant shall not be allowed.
Partially completed developments subject to a
covenant may exchange the covenant for a monetary
performance guarantee in accordance with the
procedures of these regulations.
9.62 Procedures for Full or Partial Release
Upon full or partial completion of construction and
installation of required improvements in a development,
the developer may request a release of conditions of
the performance guarantee by:
9.621 Sending by registered mail or by hand delivery to
the Planning Board and Town Clerk a written
statement that he has completed the construction and
installation of access roads and utilities covered
by said performance guarantee in accordance with
these Rules and Regulations,
9.622 Attaching to the written statement a Certificate of
Performance (see Appendix A) prepared by a
Registered Professional Engineer, at the applicant's
VIII-14
expense, stating that the necessary access roads,
sewers, storm drains, water lines, together with
their appurtenances and all other required
improvements have been constructed and installed as
specified in these Rules and Regulations and in
accordance with the approved plans.
9.623 Requests for final release of a performance
guarantee shall be accompanied by an "As-Built
Plan", as required in these Rules and Regulations.
9.63 Approval of Release
9.631 In no instance shall a performance guarantee be
released for the final access road course and
sidewalks until said work has withstood one full
winter season. Partial or final release for this
work may be requested of the Planning Board in April
of the calendar year subsequent to completion of
access road and walks.
9.632 Before the Planning Board will release the interest
of the Town in a performance guarantee, the Planning
Board shall obtain in writing from the Department of
Public Works a certificate or statement that all
work required by these Rules and Regulations under
the jurisdiction of the town has been inspected by
them or a designated party and completed in each
access road within the development, including access
roads, storm drainage, bridges, sewers, shoulders,
sidewalks, curbs, etc., and that the method of
construction and materials used in the performance
of such work meets with their approval.
9.633 If the Planning Board determines that said
construction or installation has been completed
satisfactorily, it shall release the interest of the
Town in such performance guarantee and return the
bond or deposit to the person who furnished the
same, or release the covenant by appropriate
instrument, duly acknowledged, which may be
recorded. If the Planning Board determines after
inspection that said construction or installation
has not been completed or wherein said construction
or installation fails to comply with these Rules or
Regulations, the Planning Board shall send by
registered mail to the applicant and to the Town
Clerk the details wherein said construction or
installation fails to comply with its rules.
VIII-15
9.634 Failure of the Planning Board to act on such an
application for release of conditions within
forty-five (45) days after the receipt of the
application by the Town Clerk, all obligations under
the bond shall cease and terminate by operation of
law, and any deposit shall be returned and any such
covenant shall become void.
9.635 Any such bond or deposit of money may be enforced
and any such deposit may be applied by the Planning
Board for the benefit of the Town of West
Springfield, as provided in Section 81-Y of M.G.L.
Chapter 41, upon failure of the performance for
which any such bond or deposit was given to the
extent of the reasonable cost to the Town of
completing such construction and installation.
9.7 DEVIATIONS FROM APPROVED PLAN
9.71 After approval of any Plan For More Than One Building
For Dwelling Purposes Per Lot, the location and width
of access roads shown thereon, or any street or way
subject to the Subdivision Control Law, shall not be
changed unless the plan is amended in accordance with
the provisions set forth in Section 81-W of Chapter 41
of the General Laws, and approved by the Planning
Board.
9.72 In the event the applicant desires to alter or change
the grade of an access road, or the size, location or
layout of a storm or sanitary line or appurtenant
structure, he shall:
9.721 provide the Board with a written statement
requesting such alteration or change, and
9.722 provide the Board with three (3) prints of the
original development plan with the proposed changes
drawn on said prints in red.
9.73 No change, alteration or deviation shall be permitted
unless such change, alteration or deviation has been
approved by the Planning Board.
9.74 After approval of an alteration or modification, the
applicant shall cause such approved changes to be
corrected on the original drawings of the development
plans.
VIII-16
9.75 Deviations from material and construction
specifications shall not be allowed except as
specifically authorized by the Department of Public
Works or appropriate agency having jurisdiction over a
particular utility system and upon notification to the
Planning Board.
9.8 STREET ACCEPTANCE
9.81 Final approval of the Plan For More Than One Building
For Dwelling Purposes Per Lot does not constitute the
laying out or acceptance by the Town of any access road
or other improvement shown on the plan. Said access
roads and other improvements shall remain under the
ownership of the property owner and/or a homeowners
association and they shall be responsible for
maintenance and upkeep of these structures.
X-1
SECTION X DESIGN STANDARDS
10.0 BASIC REQUIREMENTS
The subdivider shall observe all design standards for land
division as hereinafter provided. These standards shall
be considered minimum standards and may be varied from or
waived by the Board only as provided in these Rules and
Regulations. State Construction Standards shall be
followed, and all matters left open or undefined in those
Standards shall be specified by the Board on a case-bycase
basis.
10.1 RELATIONSHIP TO TOWN PLANS
The design and layout of a proposed subdivision shall be
guided by the goals and objectives of any existing Master
Plans, Strategic Plans, or statements of goals and
objectives for the Town of West Springfield.
10.2 LOT SIZE AND CONFIGURATION
10.21 All lots created shall be of such size and dimensions
as to meet at least the minimum requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance. All lots shall be described in metes
and bounds on the Definitive Plan.
10.22 It is the recommendation of the Planning Board that all
lots be configured so as to have frontage on minor
streets. It is further recommended that lot lines be
configured to intersect roadways at ninety degree
angles and to be rectangular in design.
10.3 PROTECTION OF SIGNIFICANT FEATURES
All significant features such as trees of over 8" Diameter
Breast High (DBH), identified Heritage features, water
courses, one hundred year flood plains, wetlands, ponds
and other waterbodies, marshes, stone walls, scenic
points, and historic sites may be preserved in the
following manner:
10.31 Wetlands, water courses and 10 and 100 year flood
plains shall be located to the rear or along the side
property boundaries. Easements may be utilized as
provided by these regulations.
X-2
10.32 Stone walls shall be preserved by locating property
boundaries along the existing line of the walls.
10.33 Scenic points as identified in the Massachusetts
Landscape Inventory and historic sites identified by
the Massachusetts Historical Commission shall be
preserved by incorporating them within public open
space or easements as provided by these regulations.
10.34 Trees greater than 8" DBH in size shall be preserved
by retaining natural grades and locating houses to
minimize tree removal.
10.4 ACCESS THROUGH ANOTHER MUNICIPALITY
In cases where access to a subdivision crosses land in
another municipality, the board shall require
certification from appropriate authorities that such
access is in accordance with the Master Plan, zoning and
subdivision requirements of such municipality and that a
legally adequate performance bond has been duly posted or
that such access is adequately improved to handle
prospective traffic. In general, lot lines should be laid
out so as not to cross municipal boundary lines.
10.5 STREETS AND WAYS
10.51 Location and alignment
10.511 All streets in the subdivision shall be designed so
that in the opinion of the Board, they will provide
safe vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian travel. Due
consideration shall also be given by the subdivider
to the attractiveness of the street layout in order
to obtain the maximum livability and amenity of the
subdivision.
10.512 The proposed streets shall conform to the Master
Plan and other planning documents as adopted in
whole or in part by the Board and Town.
10.513 Provision satisfactory to the Board shall be made
for the proper projection of streets, or for access
to adjoining property that is not yet subdivided.
10.514 Reserve strips prohibiting access to streets or
adjoining property shall not be permitted.
X-3
10.515 Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as
nearly as possible at right angles. No street shall
intersect any other street at less than sixty (60)
degrees.
10.516 Streets shall be continuous and in alignment with
existing streets so far as practicable and shall
comprise a convenient system with inter-connections
to insure free circulation of vehicular, bicycle and
pedestrian traffic. This section is intended to
enable the Board to ensure both adequate access to
the subdivision from adjacent streets and continuity
of travel within the subdivision itself. (See
Section 10.6 of these Regulations concerning
adequate access from a public way.)
10.517 The paved surface of proposed subdivision streets
shall be designed no closer than forty (40) feet
from an existing residential dwelling unit. If
access from the proposed subdivision roadway to the
existing dwelling is not intended to be provided,
then a landscaped buffer not less than five (5) feet
in height shall be planted along the boundary of the
right-of-way and the affected property with the
approval of the affected landowner and the Tree
Warden.
10.52 Dead-end Streets
10.521 Any dead-end street shall be provided with a
circular turn-around at the end having an outside
paved roadway diameter not less than one hundred
(100) feet, and property line diameter of at least
one hundred forty (140) feet. (See Appendix B).
10.522 A dead-end street shall be no longer than one
thousand (1,000) feet, including the turnaround
unless, in the opinion of the Board, a greater
length is necessitated by topography or other local
conditions. The length shall be measured from the
end of the turnaround to the point where the
proposed street intersects an existing street having
two (2) distinct and separate points of access and
in the opinion of the Board, will be adequate for
safe, vehicular passage (see Appendix B for
graphical representation).
10.523 Any thoroughfare that joins or intersects a dead-end
street shall have adequate access at both ends from
a Town, County, or State public way adjacent to the
X-4
subdivision. (See Section 10.6 concerning adequate
access from public way).
10.524 The Board must be satisfied that there is adequate
access to all lots on the dead-end street for fire
engines, ambulances and other emergency equipment,
even if the street is blocked (such as by events
including but not limited to a fallen tree or
automobile accident).
10.525 A dead-end street shall not have a grade of greater
than three (3) percent for the last one hundred and
twenty feet (120).
10.526 The interior of a cul-de-sac shall include a lowmaintenance
landscaped island containing appropriate
trees, shrubs, and ground cover as approved by the
Tree Warden and the Board. The Town shall not be
responsible for maintenance of the landscaped area
of the cul-de-sac. The applicant shall provide by
proper covenant or other instrument, that the owners
of lots abutting the cul-de-sac shall be responsible
for maintenance of the landscaping.
10.53 Width and Grade
This section consists of a chart entitled "Right-of-Way
and Street Design Standards" and tables related to
Sight Distance that are included in these Regulations
and incorporated herein by reference. The Board may, in
its discretion, establish minimum design speeds and
maximum grades on a case-by-case basis which exceed the
minimum standards but which serve the public interest.
X-5
RIGHT-OF-WAY AND STREET DESIGN STANDARDS
Type of Street Right–
of–
way
Pavement
Width
Minimum
Radius of
Curvature
Maximum
Grade See Note 2
Sidewalk
Width
(minimum)
Minimum Length
Vertical
Curve
Design
Speed
Place 60’ 26’ 150’ 8% 5’ See 20 mph
Lane 60’ 26’ 225’ 8% 5’ Note 1 25 mph
Sub-Collector 60’ 28’ 325’ 8% 5’ Below 30 mph
Collector 60’ 30’ 400’ 5% 5’ 35 mph
Arterial 60’ To be determined by the Planning Board on an individual basis
Note 1: Based upon the most recent edition of the American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials (AASHTO) Policy on the Geometric Design of Highways and Streets.
Note 2: Minimum grades on all streets shall be 0.5%.
X-6
10.54 Sight Distance
10.541 Subdivision roadways shall provide adequate
Stopping Sight Distance at all locations along
the proposed subdivision roadway. Table 10-A
presents the minimum values for Stopping Sight
Distance (SSD).
10.542 At the intersection of the proposed subdivision
roadway and an existing street, Stopping Sight
Distance along the existing roadway shall be
provided at the intersection approaches. Table
10-B presents the minimum values for Stopping
Sight Distance at the intersection. In addition
to Stopping Sight Distance, Intersection Sight
Distance (ISD) shall be provided for the three
conditions presented in Tables 10-C, 10-D and
10-E.
10.543 If the grade of the roadway differs from what is
presented in the sight distance tables, then the
sight distance shall be calculated by the
project proponent using methodology in the most
current copy of the AASHTO "A Policy on the
Geometric Design of Highways and Street" and
shall be used as the minimum.
10.544 Speed used shall be the 85th percentile speed of
the roadway in the vicinity of the proposed
subdivision intersection or the legal and
enforceable posted speed limit in close
proximity plus 5 MPH, whichever is greater. If
the legal and enforceable speed limit is not
posted, a speed of not less than 30 MPH may be
assumed. The 85th percentile speed shall be
measured for a 24-hour period on an average
weekday other than a Monday or Friday. It shall
also be measured on a Saturday for a 24-hour
period.
10.545 If site conditions such as grade or the number
of travel lanes are different than what is
described within the sight distance tables, then
sight distance shall be calculated by the
project proponent using the methodology in the
most current AASHTO "A Policy on the Geometric
Design of Highways and Streets" consistent with
the appropriate conditions and shall be used as
the minimum.
X-7
10.55 Slopes within and abutting the right-of-way shall
not exceed a 1:3 maximum slope; a 1:4 slope is
preferable. Slope easements shall be obtained for
land adjacent to the right-of-way to provide a 1:3
slope from the edge of the right-of-way to the
final grade within the abutting land.
TABLE 10-A
SUBDIVISION ROADWAY STOPPING SIGHT DISTANCE
Type of
Street
Speed 0.0%
Grade
3.0%
Grade
6.0%
Grade
8.0%
Grade
Place 20 mph 115’ 116’ 120’ 124’
Lane 25 mph 155’ 158’ 165’ 170’
Sub-Collector 30 mph 200’ 205’ 215’ 223’
Collector 35 mph 250’ 257’ 271’ 282’
Arterial To be determined by the Board on an
individual basis
TABLE 10-B
STOPPING SIGHT DISTANCE ON EXISTING ROAD INTERSECTED BY
THE SUBDIVISION ROAD
Speed 0.0%
Grade
3.0%
Grade
6.0%
Grade
9.0%
Grade
20 mph 115’ 116’ 120’ 126’
25 mph 155’ 158’ 165’ 173’
30 mph 200’ 205’ 215’ 227’
35 mph 250’ 257’ 271’ 287’
40 mph 305’ 315’ 333’ 354’
45 mph 360’ 378’ 400’ 427’
50 mph 425’ 446’ 474’ 507’
55 mph 495’ 520’ 553’ 593’
60 mph 570’ 598’ 638’ 686’
X-8
TABLE 10-C
INTERSECTION SIGHT DISTANCE (ISD)
Condition 1 – Vehicle making a left turn from stop
position from the subdivision road onto a two-lane
roadway with no median (for grades of 3% or less)
Speed ISD
20 mph 225’
25 mph 280’
30 mph 335’
35 mph 390’
40 mph 445’
45 mph 500’
50 mph 555’
55 mph 610’
60 mph 665’
TABLE 10-D
INTERSECTION SIGHT DISTANCE (ISD)
Condition 2 – Vehicle making a right turn from stop
position from the subdivision road onto a two-lane
roadway with not median (for grades of 3% or less)
Speed ISD
20 mph 195’
25 mph 240’
30 mph 290’
35 mph 335’
40 mph 385’
45 mph 430’
50 mph 480’
55 mph 530’
60 mph 575’
X-9
TABLE 10-E
INTERSECTION SIGHT DISTANCE (ISD)
Condition 3 – Vehicle making a left turn from an existing
undivided roadway crossing one opposing travel lane
into the subdivision road (for grades of 3% or
less)
Speed ISD
20 mph 165’
25 mph 205’
30 mph 245’
35 mph 285’
40 mph 325’
45 mph 365’
50 mph 405’
55 mph 445’
60 mph 490’
10.56 Intersections
10.561 Rights-of-way shall be laid out so as to
intersect as nearly as possible at right angles.
No right-of-way shall intersect any other
right-of-way at less than sixty (60) degrees.
The vertical grade of the road shall not exceed
a slope of three (3) percent for a minimum
distance of 100 feet from the intersection.
10.562 Horizontal curves on the street centerline shall
not begin or end within 100 feet of the
centerline of the intersecting street.
10.563 Property lines at intersections of Major and
Secondary Streets shall be cut back to provide
for curb radii of not less than twenty-five (25)
feet. For Minor Streets a radius of not less
than fifteen (15) feet is required.
10.564 Streets entering opposite side of another street
shall be laid out either directly opposite each
other or with a minimum offset of one hundred
and fifty (150) feet between their centerlines.
Streets entering from the same side as another
shall be laid out with a minimum offset of three
hundred (300) feet between their centerlines.
This minimum offset shall be observed whenever
X-10
one or more streets entering another street are
existing or proposed.
10.57 Street Names
The name of a new street shall not duplicate
existing public or private street names in the Town
of West Springfield, or approximate such names in
spelling, sound or pronunciation, or by the use of
alternate suffixes such as lane, way, drive, court,
avenue or street. New streets shall bear the same
name of any continuation of, or when in alignment
with, an existing public or private street. All
street names shall be approved by the Planning
Board before the approval of definitive plan.
10.58 Street Signs
10.581 Street name signs, constructed to such standards
as the Planning Board and Department of Public
Works shall specify, shall be provided and
erected by the Developer at each street
intersection near the inside edge of the curb,
subject to approval of the Department of Public
Works. The post of such signs shall be buried
in concrete blocks ten (10) inches diameter and
twenty-four (24) inches in length.
10.582 Dead end streets shall be clearly marked as such
with proper signage.
10.583 Traffic control signs shall be designed and
installed where necessary (including existing
public and private ways providing access to the
subdivision) at the cost of the developer. The
design and installation of all signs shall
conform to the most recent edition of the Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted by
the Massachusetts Highway Department District II
office.
10.6 ADEQUATE ACCESS FROM PUBLIC WAY
10.61 Where the street system within a subdivision
does not connect with or have, in the opinion of
the Board, adequate access from a Town, County
or State public way, the Board shall require, as
a condition of approval of a plan, that such
adequate access be provided by the subdivider,
and/or that the subdivider make physical
X-11
improvement of access to and within such a way,
in accordance with the provisions of these
Regulations, either from the boundary of the
subdivision to a Town, County or State public
way, or along such public way for a distance
which, in the opinion of the Board, is
sufficient to provide adequate access to the
subdivision.
10.62 Where the physical condition or width of a
public way from which a subdivision has its
access is considered by the Board to be
inadequate to either provide for emergency
services or carry the traffic which is expected,
in the opinion of the Board, to be generated by
such subdivision, the Board may require the
subdivider to dedicate a strip of land for the
purpose of widening the abutting public way to a
width at least commensurate with that required
within the subdivision, and to make physical
improvements to and within such public way to
the same standards required within the
subdivision. Any such dedication of land for
purpose of way and any such work performed
within such public way shall be made only with
permission of the governmental agency having
jurisdiction over such way, and all costs of any
such widening or construction shall be borne by
the subdivider.
10.63 Where the configuration of the land allows, no
house lots shall have a direct access onto a
major street, a four lane or divided highway.
Such residences shall be provided with either a
frontage or service road, or may have their back
or side yards towards the road in question.
Access shall be onto the lesser traveled of two
streets for corner lots.
10.7 EASEMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS
10.71 Layout of Easements
10.711 Easements shall be continuous from lot to lot
and from street to street unless, in the opinion
of the Board, topography or other special
conditions make such continuity impossible.
Such easements shall be along rear or side lot
lines; and shall create as few irregularities as
possible.
X-12
10.712 Utility and drain easements shall follow lot
lines, and shall be not less than 20 feet in
width.
10.713 Easements for different purposes (such as
utility or drainage easements) may be adjacent,
but shall not overlap or occupy the same area.
10.72 Conservation Restrictions
10.721 Watercourses, drainage ways, channels or streams
may be located within easements conforming
substantially with the lines of their courses,
whose width shall be not less than 20 feet and
whose boundaries shall not be closer than 6 feet
horizontally from the one hundred year flood
plain. Wetlands may be located within easements
whose boundaries shall be not closer than one
hundred (100) feet from the boundaries of the
wetlands. No building shall be constructed and
no paving or other activity shall be permitted
within such easement except as permitted under
the Zoning Ordinance and under the Massachusetts
Wetlands Protection Act (M.G.L. Ch. 131, Sec.
40).
10.722 In any subdivision, the developer may grant to
the Town a conservation restriction over any
portion of the subdivision providing the area
subject to the restriction has the approval of
the Conservation Commission and the Mayor.
10.8 OPEN SPACE
10.81 Before approval of a plan, the Board may also
require the plan to show a park or parks suitably
located for playground of recreation purposes. The
park or parks shall be of reasonable size, but not
less than five (5) percent of the area of the land
to be subdivided or 10,000 square feet, whichever
is greater. The Board shall, by appropriate
endorsement on the plan, require that said land
shall not be developed for a period of not less
than three (3) years from the date of recording of
the plan without the approval of the Board. If
this land is not conveyed to the Town by sale or
gift within three years after the recording of the
Definitive Plan, then such land may be incorporated
into a subsequent subdivision.
X-13
10.82 No more than 5% of said land designated for open
space or park purposes shall contain wetlands,
ledge, slopes greater than 15% and other land
unsuitable for playground or recreation use without
the approval of the Planning Board.
10.83 Any open space, park, or playground shall be
provided with a minimum of one hundred feet (100)
continuous frontage on a street. Pedestrian ways
will be required to provide access from each of the
surrounding streets, if any, on which the open
space, park, or playground has no frontage.
Further, such parks and playgrounds may be required
to have maintenance provided for by covenants and
agreements acceptable to the Board, until such time
(if any) as public acquisition may be accomplished
by the community, but in no case longer than three
(3) years.
10.9 GENERAL UTILITIES
10.91 All utilities shall be located underground in
accordance with the Typical Street Cross-Section
standards.
10.92 All utilities shall be installed to the end of all
proposed rights-of-way.
10.93 No utilities shall be installed between the
sidewalk and the edge of the right-of-way.
10.94 All laterals for utilities shall be installed to
the property boundaries prior to the laying and
compaction of the base gravel course.
10.95 All above-ground utility boxes shall be screened
through the use of vegetative plantings. The
subdivision plan shall note the species and size of
the proposed plantings.
11.0 SEWERAGE
11.01 All lots within a subdivision shall be serviced by
the municipal sewer system where physically
feasible.
11.02 The developer shall apply for a sewer extension
permit as outlined in these Rules and Regulations.
X-14
11.03 The developer shall be responsible to confirm the
adequacy of the existing municipal water, sanitary
and storm water system to accommodate the proposed
development.
11.04 The proposed sanitary sewers shall be designed so
that the velocity of the flow will be at least two
(2) feet per second during periods of peak flow.
The sizing of sanitary sewers shall be approved by
the Department of Public Works.
11.05 All sanitary sewer lines shall be gravity fed
except as allowed by the Department of Public
Works. Sewage pumping stations or lift stations,
where necessary and allowed, shall meet with the
approval of the Department of Public Works. The
costs of operating and maintaining a station shall
not be assumed by the Town until one year from the
date of completion of the last house in the last
section of the subdivision.
11.06 The maximum distance between utility manholes shall
be three hundred (300) feet.
11.07 All sewer lines shall be true to line and grade
with no horizontal or vertical curvature permitted.
11.08 In areas where sanitary sewers are not presently
available but where provisions are made for their
future construction in the Town's Master Plan,
Capital Improvement Program and/or other Town
plans, a capped sanitary system, including
laterals, may be required to be installed.
11.09 All proposed lots shall be provided with a service
lateral that extend perpendicular from the sanitary
sewer main to the property line.
11.1 STORM DRAINAGE
11.11 Design storm intensity for surface run-off shall be
calculated according to the methodology set forth
in Technical Release Number 55, entitled "Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds," by the Soil
Conservation Service of the U. S. Department of
Agriculture, or such other methodology as the Board
may, in its discretion, approve. All tributary
areas shall be assumed to be fully developed in
accordance with the Zoning Ordinance unless
X-15
publicly owned or deed restricted. Water
velocities in pipes and paved gutters shall be
between three (3) and ten (10) feet per second, and
not more than five (5) feet per second on unpaved
surfaces. Facility design shall be as follows:
11.111 Street surface drainage (storm sewers, swales)--
25 year storm
11.112 Detention basins--50 year storm
11.113 Watercourses, drainage ways, channels or
streams--100 year storm
11.114 Culverts, bridges, other water crossings--100
year storm
11.12 Surface water from the lots shall not be deposited
directly into the ways through the use of piping,
conduits, channels, swales or other concentrating
method. The area within the front setback line may
be graded to sheet drain toward the street line.
All other surface water from individual lots shall
be handled insofar as possible within the lots
themselves. Developers may provide for lot surface
drainage by a system separate from drainage of the
street, by the use of swales, culverts, retention
ponds, yard drains and piping, rip-rapped outlets
at the water body, etc., in a manner that shall
protect the natural water table. The total design
of the system shall also meet with the approval of
the Department of Public Works.
11.13 Minimum size of pipe for surface run-off shall be
twelve (12) inches ID. Footing drains and subdrain
connection pipe size shall be a minimum of six (6)
inches ID.
11.14 Connection of footing drains, roof drains, or storm
drains to a septic disposal system is prohibited.
11.15 The maximum distance between manholes shall be 300
feet. The maximum distance for street run-off to
travel along a berm or gutter to a catch basin
shall be 300 feet. The maximum distance between a
catch basin and a manhole shall be 300 feet.
11.16 Catch basins shall be placed at all street
intersections to intercept surface run-off, and
will be placed to prevent water from crossing the
streets.
X-16
11.17 Proper drainage design includes appropriate storm
lines and channels to accommodate properties
"upstream" and appropriate structures to preclude
"downstream" damage to adjacent properties.
11.18 Water quality shall be preserved by directing all
stormwater to a vegetated detention/retention basin
or swale. These basins shall be designed to filter
out sediments, oils and greases, heavy metals and
other nutrients from stormwater prior to its
discharge to wetlands, waterbodies or ground water.
A maintenance program for the basins/swales shall
be prepared to ensure long-term filtration
integrity. All methodology implemented for water
quality protection shall follow the standards and
guidelines of the following documents: Stormwater
Management, Volume One: Stormwater Policy Handbook,
MA DEP, MA CZM, March 1997; Stormwater Management,
Volume Two: Stormwater Technical Handbook, MA DEP,
MA CZM, March 1997; Massachusetts Erosion and
Sediment Control Guidelines for Urban and Suburban
Areas, Franklin, Hampden, Hampshire Conservation
Districts, March 1997; all as revised.
11.19 All retention/detention basins and swales shall be
located within easements given to the Town of West
Springfield. Management plans for said water
quality systems shall be submitted to the
Department of Public Works for approval. The
management plan shall be recorded concurrent with
the recording of the subdivision plan and shall
require that the property owner whose land contains
the water management system shall be responsible
for all maintenance of the system. Failure of the
property owner to maintain the system may result in
a municipal lien being placed on the property to
cover the Town’s cost of maintenance.
11.20 Pre-development hydrological conditions shall be
maintained in post-development conditions. There
shall be no increase in run-off due to development.
Storm drainage shall be directed, when appropriate
in the opinion of the Board, to retention basins in
order to artificially recharge the ground water
system.
11.21 Peak stream flows and run-off at the boundaries of
the subdivision development shall be no greater
following development than prior to development.
X-17
11.22 Where property adjacent to the subdivision, but
within the same watershed, is not developed,
provision shall be made for proper projection of
the drainage systems by continuing appropriate
drains and easements to the exterior boundaries of
the subdivision at such size and grade as will
allow for such projection. Drainage rights that
are appropriate, sufficient, and necessary to
handle drainage from the subdivision and adjacent
areas shall be secured for the Town.
11.3 WATER SUPPLY
11.31 Water
11.311 All lots shall be serviced by the municipal
water system where physically feasible and shall
be approved by the Department of Public Works.
11.312 In order to ensure adequate fire protection and
water service, all new water lines shall be
looped and tied back into the existing municipal
system.
11.313 The developer shall confirm the adequacy of
water pressure and quantity of water (i.e. fire
protection) at the existing municipal system to
accommodate the increase in demand from the
proposed development.
11.314 Where connection to municipal services is not
feasible for the development of residential or
commercial structures, on-site water wells may
be approved by the Board of Health to provide
potable water. To ensure adequate fire
protection services are provided in the
subdivision, fire hydrants tied into the
municipal water system shall be required within
the development.
11.315 Adequate water pressure and volume shall be
provided for residential and commercial
development and also for fire protection
purposes meeting all pressure and volume
standards as adopted by the West Springfield
Fire Department. A measurement of adequacy of
the water system for residential and commercial
construction can be defined by the use of Town
wide GIS system. Elevations below 255’ and/or
having a least an existing static water pressure
X-18
of 40lbs or greater may provide adequate water
pressure and volume. Developments without
access to the municipal water system or are
above the recommended elevation of 255’ will
have to seek alternatives to an adequate water
source for residential and commercial potable
water. The exception would be the Northwest
District, said district is bounded from the
north by the West Springfield - Holyoke
municipal boundary, from the west the West
Springfield - Westfield municipal boundary, from
the south by the Massachusetts Turnpike and the
from the east by Interstate 91. In the
Northwest District, a measurement of adequacy of
the water system can be defined by an elevation
below 380’ and/or having at least a static
pressure of 40lbs or greater. Developments
without access to the municipal water system or
are above the recommended elevation of 380’ will
have to seek alternatives to an adequate water
source for residential and commercial potable
water.
11.316 The minimum size of all water mains shall be
eight (8) inches ID (inside diameter). Any
deviation from this requirement shall require
approval from the Department of Public Works.
11.32 Fire Hydrants
11.321 Maximum distance between hydrants shall be five
hundred (500) feet measured along the access
route, provided however, that at least one
hydrant shall be located at each street
intersection.
11.322 Minimum size of hydrant branch is six (6) inches
ID (inside diameter).
11.323 Maximum distance from any structure to a hydrant
shall be five hundred (500) feet measured along
the street.
11.4 SOLAR ENERGY
The purpose of this Section is to encourage the use of
solar energy systems and protect to the extent feasible
the access to direct sunlight of active and passive
solar energy systems. The applicant may utilize
passive solar energy techniques that maximize solar
X-19
heat gain, minimize heat loss during the heating season
and minimize heat gain and provide for natural
ventilation during the cooling season. These passive
solar energy techniques may include, but are not
limited to, the following:
11.41 The street and layout plan shall, as far as
practicable, provide for east-west street
orientations to facilitate the development of
properly oriented passive solar buildings. For
purposes of this regulation an east-west street
refers to any street with its axis within thirty
(30) degrees of true east.
11.42 In so far as practicable, side lot lines shall be
perpendicular to the street line unless that
purpose of the lot line orientation is to provide
greater solar access protection.
11.43 Proposed buildings may be located and oriented so
that the longest side of the building faces within
thirty (30) degrees of true south.
11.44 Proposed buildings may be located to avoid shadows
cast by other buildings, vegetation and natural and
manmade topographical features whenever
practicable.
11.45 Provided soil and topographic conditions permit,
primary and reserve leaching fields may be planned
and located to the south of a proposed house
locations whenever such location enhances solar
access to the south wall due to regrading and tree
removal associated with the installation of the
sewage disposal system.
11.46 Each lot within the subdivision may be evaluated to
determine if south wall solar access protection is
available meeting any solar access requirements of
the Zoning Ordinance.
11.47 At the discretion of the Board, taking into
consideration the need for solar access protection,
the applicant may be required to include solar
easements or restrictive covenants with the deeds
of each lot.
X-20
11.5 SIDEWALKS AND BICYCLE PATHS
11.51 Unless the Board determines that pedestrian
movement is otherwise provided for, sidewalks shall
be constructed between the roadway and the
right-of-way line as described in Appendix B. At a
minimum, all streets shall be provided with
sidewalks on one side of the street. Streets with
an ADT greater than 100 vehicles per day may be
required to install sidewalks on both sides of the
street. Pedestrian access other than by routes
parallel with roadways may be permitted, provided
easements are established.
11.52 The Planning Board may require bicycle paths
designed and constructed in accordance with the
design manual entitled Building Better Bicycling
from the Mass Highway Department, 1999 edition (and
any subsequent revision thereto). In certain
cases, at the discretion of the Planning Board, all
or part of the sidewalk requirements may be waived
where bicycle paths are provided.
11.53 Wherever a sidewalk or bicycle path intersects a
roadway, barrier-free curb cuts shall be provided.
Roadways, berms, curbs, curb cuts, and shoulders
should be constructed in accordance with State
Construction Standards. With respect to bicycle
paths, automobile barriers shall be provided.
11.6 EROSION CONTROL
11.61 General soil erosion of the proposed development
site shall be minimized by integrating the
development into the existing terrain by retaining
natural grades and soil cover.
11.62 During grading and construction of all
improvements, including all residential and
commercial structures associated with the
subdivision, erosion of soil shall be minimized by
implementing the guidelines and methodology
outlined in the document entitled Massachusetts
Erosion and Sediment Control Guidelines for Urban
and Suburban Areas prepared by the Franklin,
Hampden, Hampshire Conservation Districts dated
March 1997, as revised.
11.63 All paved roadway surfaces within the subdivision
and providing access to the development shall
X-21
remain free of dirt and debris. Periodic street
sweeping, especially after storm events, shall be
implemented to control dirt and dust.
11.7 PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT OF CONTIGUOUS LAND
The Board shall not approve a plan of a subdivision if
the applicant or parties related to the applicant own
land contiguous to that shown on the plan and fail to
furnish sufficient data to enable the Board to relate
the proposed subdivision to the remaining land. Such
data shall include the lines of proposed way and lots
and approximate grades and such other detail as the
Board may reasonably require.
XII-1
SECTION XII CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
12.0 BASIC REQUIREMENTS
12.01 The subdivider shall provide all of the improvements
required herein and installed at his own expense. All
work done under this section shall be done under the
direction of the Board. The subdivider shall be
responsible for providing a qualified engineer approved
by the Board to oversee and certify the installation of
all improvements as required in these rules and
regulations.
12.02 No performance guarantee shall be fully released until:
12.021 all streets and all other improvements shall have
been in place over at least one winter (December 1
through April 15) and/or one growing seasons for all
planting material;
12.022 full approval in writing, including a completed Form
G, of all work done under this section is received
from the Board's engineer(s) and any other
consultants; and
12.023 a cashier's check or money order, payable to "Town
of West Springfield, Massachusetts," has been
received to provide reimbursement for the full
amount of the cost of engineer(s), Department of
Public Works inspection services and other
consultants where applicable.
12.03 No trees, stumps, brush, roots, and like material and
no demolition material including but not restricted to
concrete, asphalt and lumber shall be disposed of
within the boundaries of the subdivision; said material
shall be disposed of in accordance with Title V.
12.1 STREET AND ROADWAY CONSTRUCTION
12.11 Clearing and Grubbing
12.111 No clearing or excavating shall be started on any
part of the street until the Tree Warden has
designated in writing those trees which are to
remain in the tree belt. Such trees to be preserved
shall be protected during construction as prescribed
by the Tree Warden.
XII-2
12.112 The entire area within the right-of-way of each
street shall be cleared of all stumps, brush, roots,
boulders and like material, except those trees that
are intended for preservation.
12.113 No perishable matter such as stumps, trunks, or
limbs of trees or brush shall be buried within the
limits of the subdivision.
12.114 All loam, peat, mulch and other yielding material
shall be removed from the roadway, side slopes,
driveway aprons and sidewalks to a depth specified
by the Department of Public Works and shall be
replaced with an acceptable granular material.
12.115 Wherever soil borings indicate ground water within
four (4) feet of the proposed roadway surface or
wherever the soil particle size indicates the
possibility of a capillary rise of water in the
subgrade soil, subdrains shall be installed under
both shoulders of the roadway. The design and depth
of the sub-drain shall meet with the approval of the
Department of Public Works.
12.116 Wherever rock is encountered it shall be excavated
to a depth of four (4) feet below the subgrade of
the roadway for the full width of the street layout.
The excavated rock shall be replaced with a granular
material satisfactory to the Department of Public
Works.
12.117 Whenever it is necessary to install fill to bring a
roadway to subgrade said fill shall be of a granular
material satisfactory to the Department of Public
Works. All fill shall be placed at a depth and
compacted to a density so specified in the Mass.
Highway Department Standard Specifications. The
developer shall be responsible for the costs of all
soil testing and analysis required by the Department
of Public Works.
12.118 The subgrade of the roadway shall be compacted to a
density and by a method approved by the Department
of Public Works prior to the placing of the sub-base
or base of the roadway.
12.2 GRAVEL FOUNDATIONS
12.21 Subgrade
XII-3
12.211 Within the roadway area including driveway aprons,
sidewalks, and grass strips, all material shall be
removed to subgrade and any unsuitable material, in
the opinion of the Department of Public Works, below
subgrade shall be removed and shall be replaced with
proper bank-run gravel and brought to proper
compaction. The depth of the subgrade will be
governed by existing conditions and shall be as
specified by the Department of Public Works.
12.212 The material used for a sub-base shall be of
bank-run or crushed gravel and shall conform to
AASHTO Soil Classification sub-groups A-1-a, A-2-4,
A-1-b or A-2-5, shall have a group index of O, a
maximum plasticity index of 6 and a maximum liquid
limit of 25. Furthermore, the gravel shall conform
to the gradation requirements of M1.03.0 Type a or b
of the Standard Specifications of the Mass. Highway
Dept.
12.213 The maximum size aggregate for sub-base courses
shall not exceed four (4) inches. The cost of any
soil tests needed to determine the suitability of a
material for use as a sub-base shall be borne by the
Developer.
12.214 The gravel shall be spread and compacted in layers
not exceeding six (6) inches in depth compacted
measurement. The gravel shall be compacted to the
density specified in Section 401 of the Standard
Specifications of the Mass. Highway Dept.
12.215 The subgrade shall be shaped and finish graded at
the required depth below and parallel to the
proposed pavement surface, in conformance with the
Typical Street Cross-Section.
12.216 Inspections, including density testing, shall be
required after completion of the subgrade.
12.22 Gravel Base
12.221 The gravel base course for residential subdivisions
shall consist of not less than twelve (12) inches of
well compacted gravel placed upon the subgrade the
entire width of the roadway. The depth of the
gravel base for non-residential subdivisions shall
be established through the review of the Preliminary
Subdivision plan.
XII-4
12.222 The material used for a base course shall be of
processed gravel that meets with the approval of the
Department of Public Works. This material shall
conform to AASHTO Soil Classification subgroup
A-1-a, or A-2-4, shall have a group index of O, a
maximum plasticity index of 3 and a maximum liquid
limit of 25. The gravel shall conform to the
gradation requirements of M1.03.0 Type b of the
Standard Specifications of the Mass DPW and shall be
bound with approved stone screenings. The cost of
any soil tests needed to determine the suitability
of a material for use as a base course shall be
borne by the Developer.
12.223 The gravel shall be spread and compacted in
accordance with Section 405 of the Standard
Specifications of the Mass. Highway Dept.
12.224 The gravel base surface shall be shaped and finish
graded at the required depth below and parallel to
the proposed pavement surface, in conformance with
the Typical Street Cross-Section.
12.225 Inspections shall be required before commencement
and after completion of the gravel base.
12.3 ROADWAY SURFACING
12.31 The roadway and driveway aprons shall be paved the
entire width, including under the berms, and the
surface treatment shall be compacted bituminous
concrete placed in two (2) layers.
12.32 The first layer or binder course for residential
subdivisions shall be Class I bituminous concrete
pavement, Type I-1, binder course mix, laid at a
thickness of two (2") inches in accordance with Section
460 of the Mass. Highway Dept. Standard Specifications
for Highways and Bridges. The first layer or base
course must be in place through one winter season after
the completion of all underground work such as water
and sewer mains, storm drains and other utilities and
have the approval of the Department of Public Works
before the second layer, or surface course, is applied.
The thickness of the binder course for non-residential
subdivisions shall be established through the review of
the Preliminary Subdivision plan.
12.33 The second layer or surface course for residential
subdivisions shall be Class I bituminous concrete
XII-5
pavement, Type I-1, top course mix, laid at a thickness
of one and one-half (1.5") inches in accordance with
Section 460 of the Mass. Highway Dept. Standard
Specifications for Highways and Bridges. The thickness
of the surface course for non-residential subdivisions
shall be established through the review of the
Preliminary Subdivision plan.
12.34 No paving shall be conducted when the air temperature
is 40 degrees Fahrenheit or less nor where the material
on which the pavement is to be placed contains frost.
12.35 The final bituminous surface shall show no deviation
greater than one-quarter (1/4) inch when tested with a
sixteen (16) foot straight edge placed parallel to the
centerline of the surface course.
12.36 Finished roadway and driveway apron surfaces less than
the required thickness or containing any soft or
imperfect places will not be approved.
12.37 All roadways shall be brought up to the finish grade as
shown on the Definitive Plan, and all manhole covers,
gate boxes, gas drips and other access to underground
utilities shall be set flush with the surface of the
road, grass strip or sidewalk.
12.38 The binder course shall be in place for at least one
calendar year prior to the installation of the surface
course.
12.39 Inspections shall be required upon completion of the
Binder and Surface courses.
12.4 INSTALLATION OF UTILITIES
12.41 General Standards
The installation of utilities and underground
structures shall conform to the following general
standards:
12.411 All public and private sewers, surface water drains,
water and gas pipes, electric, telephone and cable
T.V. lines, together with their appropriate
underground structures, within the street
right-of-way, shall be placed underground.
12.412 Underground utilities shall be installed after the
street has been excavated to subgrade.
XII-6
12.413 The location of the utilities shall conform to the
Definitive Plan and the Typical Street
Cross-Section, with the minimum cover as shown on
the Typical Street Cross-Section in Appendix B.
12.414 Material used surrounding and supporting pipes and
conduits in the utility trenches shall be of
compacted, screened gravel placed at least six (6)
inches in diameter around pipes, unless the trenches
are in ledge, peat or heavy clay which requires
twelve (12) inches of the compacted, screened
gravel.
12.415 Material used in back-filling utility trenches
around underground structures shall be placed in six
(6) inch layers and thoroughly compacted by
pneumatic or vibratory tamps.
12.416 Gravity sewer lines shall be true to line and grade
with no horizontal or vertical curvature permitted.
12.417 No footing drains, roof drains or storm water drains
shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system.
12.418 All lot connections shall be installed from the
utility main structures in the street to the
exterior right-of-way line for each lot regardless
of whether there is a building thereon. In the case
of a lot to be used for a park or playground or any
other purpose for which the Planning Boards deems
lot connections are not necessary, installation of
such connections may be waived by the Board.
12.419 Private, on-site water supply wells shall be located
a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from a leaching
field; ten (10) feet from a sewer line; and fifty
(50) feet from a septic tank in accordance with
Title V.
12.420 All underground utilities shall be properly
inspected, tested and approval given before the
back-filling of trenches and placement of gravel
base courses and pavement.
12.43 Water Mains
12.431 Materials
12.4311 All Ductile Iron Pipe furnished and installed
shall be Class 52 centrifically cast with
XII-7
push-on type joints. Pipe shall be double
cement-lined, tar coated, and in 18-20 foot
lengths. Pipe shall be in full conformance with
AWWA C151-76, AWWA C-111-79, and C104-80.
12.4312 Fittings shall be ductile iron with mechanical
joint connections on all ends. The inside of
all fittings other than sleeves and plugs shall
be cement lined and coated as specified for
pipe. Sleeves and plugs shall be tar coated
inside and out.
12.4313 Gate valves shall comply with AWWA C500 and C509
and shall be rated for 200 psi minimum working
pressure and a minimum 300 psi test pressure.
Valves shall be of the iron body, bronze
mounted, double disc, parallel seat or resilient
seat, non-rising stem type, fitted with "O-ring"
seals. Valves shall have mechanical joints
equal to AWWA C111.
The operating nut shall be standard AWWA 2-inch
square and shall be attached by a nut; pinning
is not acceptable. Gate valves shall OPEN to
the RIGHT or clockwise.
All ferrous parts of the valves, except finished
or bearing surfaces, shall be given two coats of
asphaltum varnish. After the valves are
assembled and tested, a third coat shall be
applied on the exterior. The body ring shall be
free of any asphalt solution.
The design of the valve shall be such that the
seal plate can be fitted with "O" rings while
the valve is under pressure in the fully opened
position.
12.4314 Hydrants: SIZE 4 ½" Compression Type Fire
Hydrants with 2-2 ½' Hose Outlets National
Standard Thread with 1-4 ½" Steamer Outlet
National Standard Thread suitable for 5 ½"
Trench, 6" M.J. Connections for Class 52 pipe,
open left hand, 1 ½" operating nut with at least
1-1/8" height above top of any other projection
on hydrant, outlet drip end with breakable
section at ground line. Hydrant to be dry top
construction with self contained Lubrication.
XII-8
Approval of the Fire Hydrants must be obtained
by the Department of Public Works.
12.4315 Street Gate Valve Boxes shall be 2 piece sliding
type tops 26" long, bottoms 36" long, tar coated
inside and out. They shall have a flange
located at the top approximately 3" down. Boxes
shall be Buffalo #5664-S or equal. Box covers
shall be marked "WATER".
12.432 Lining of Pipe and Fittings
12.4321 All ductile iron pipe and fittings shall be tar
coated on the outside and cement-lined on the
inside. The cement lining is to be sealed with
a bituminous coating. The coating and lining
shall meet the A.W.W.A. specifications.
12.4322 In handling and hauling of pipe and fittings,
care should be taken to prevent any damage to
the lining or coating. Should the lining be
damaged to any extent, the Water Department
reserves the right to reject the pipe or
fittings. Should the coating be damaged, the
Contractor will be directed to paint the damaged
area with a suitable asphalt paint.
12.433 Appurtenances and Installation
12.4331 The approximate location of pipe lines, valves,
valve boxes, hydrant connections, taps, service
pipes, etc. as shown on the plans shall be
constructed as shown unless changed by the
Department of Public Works. The Department of
Public Works reserves the right to change the
location of any or all such appurtenances shown
on the plans. The Department of Public Works
shall have the right to order the installation
of extra valves, hydrants, fittings, or other
appurtenances over and above those shown on the
plans.
12.4332 Pipe and fittings, whether in the trench or on
the bank, shall not be used at any time as a
place for the temporary storage of tools, joint
components, rubber boots, overalls, etc. Open
ends of the pipe in the trench shall be plugged
with ductile iron plug at all times.
12.4333 Thrust blocks must be placed at all fittings and
hydrants as directed by the Department of Public
XII-9
Works. Blocks may be of poured concrete or of
suitable stone or masonry construction. Drip
areas of crushed stone, gravel or other suitable
material must be constructed around hydrants or
blow-offs. No back-filling can be carried out
around drips until they have been approved.
12.434 Pipeline Testing
12.4341 After the pipeline is laid it shall be tested
with water pressure. The Contractor shall
furnish all necessary plugs, meters, gages, and
any other necessary equipment and labor required
in testing. All calculations related to the
pressure test shall be provided by the
contractor in writing to the Department of
Public Works a minimum of 72 hours prior to the
pressure test being conducted.
12.4342 Pressure to be raised to 150 pounds and
maintained for four (4) hours. Under this
condition the leakage should not exceed 150
gallons per inch of diameter in 24 hours per
mile of pipe to be considered satisfactory.
Leakage in excess of above limit must be
located, repaired, and retested. Any material or
joints shown to be defective must be replaced or
repaired.
12.435 Cleaning and Sterilizing
12.4351 Each pipe and special casting before being laid
in trench, and each valve before being set,
shall be carefully cleaned throughout; and the
bell and spigot ends cleaned to obtain good
joints.
12.4352 The Contractor shall use one do the following
chlorination methods utilizing the standards in
the following table:
TABLE 12-1
CHLORINATION METHODS FOR DINIFECTING WATER MAINS
Chlorination
Method Used
Maximum
Chlorine Dose
(note a)
Minimum
Contact
Time
Minimum
Chlorine
Residual
Continuous 50 mg/L 24 hours 25 mg/L
Slug 500 mg/L 3 hours 300 mg/L
Tablet (note b) 50 mg/L 24 hours 25 mg/L
XII-10
Note a: AWWA Standard C651-92 recommends the following
doses: Continuous – 25 mg/L; Slug – 100 mg/L;
Tablet – 25 mg/L. The minimum chlorine dose
depends on whether you are disinfecting an
existing main (high dose of 500 mg/L and short
contact time of 15 minutes), or a new main
(continuous minimum residual of 25 mg/L for 24
hours). The developer shall utilize the minimum
dose strength and length of contact time to
produce negative coliform test results.
Note b: Tablets must be placed at the inside top of pipe
when the pipe is being laid. In addition, two
tablets must be placed at all joints on both
sides of the pipe at the half/full location.
Place on ounce (28g) of HTH powder per inch
(25mm) of pipe diameter in the first length of
pipe and again after each 500 feet (150m) of
pipe. This ensures that the first water
entering the spaces at joints will have high
chlorine residual. Fill the pipe with water
velocities of less than 1 ft/sec.
The developer shall be responsible for providing
and paying for the costs of all water tests.
12.4353 Flushing After Disinfection
Flush lines after disinfection under all
alternative procedures until residual chlorine
is less than 1 mg/L. Velocity of flushing is
not critical if the preventive and preliminary
procedures detailed above were adequately
performed. All flush water must be
dechlorinated prior to disposal into the
sanitary or storm water system.
12.4354 Testing After Disinfection
After disinfection and prior to placing a line
in service, bacteriological test (24-hour
membrane filter) are required as follows:
1.In a chlorinated water system, test at least
one sample for each section disinfected.
XII-11
2.Test at least two samples for each section
disinfected in an unchlorinated water system.
3.For long lines, test samples along the entire
line as directed by the Department of Public
Works. Water lines greater than 2,500 lineal
feet (750 meters) are considered long lines.
If bacteriological tests are unsatisfactory,
disinfection must be repeated. Repeat of tablet
is not possible and an alternative procedure
must be utilized. It is suggested that the main
be flushed and additional samples be taken at
water taps other than fire hydrants and blow-off
valves.
If the bacteriological tests remain
unsatisfactory, the main must be dewatered
utilizing compressed air. Refill the empty main
with water containing a chlorine residual
between 50 and 100 mg/L. Allow the water to
remain in the main for a minimum of 48 hours.
Flush the main and resample. It is suggested
that the water entering the main be tested to
rule out cross-contamination.
The developer shall be responsible for providing
and paying for the costs of all bacteriological
water tests prior to the approval of the water
main being placed in service.
12.436 Trenching and Back-filling
Trench is to be dug, unless otherwise directed, so
as to give the pipe five foot (5') of cover to the
proposed finished grade. The bottom of the trench
is to be leveled by hand and any excess excavation
hand back-filled and tamped. Pipe, fittings, and
valves are to be set on hardwood blocks if needed.
Pipe is to be back-filled by hand until at least
six inches (6") of cover is over pipe and this is
to be tamped around pipe and over it as
back-filling progresses. All rock encountered in
trench must be removed for distance of one foot
(1') from pipe before laying and no rock shall be
placed around pipe in back-filling.
12.44 Sanitary Sewer Main
12.441 Sanitary sewers, mains and laterals shall be of PVC
SDR 35 or greater as required by the Department of
XII-12
Public Works. The minimum size for a sewer main
shall be eight (8) inches while the minimum size of
sewer laterals shall be four (4) inches.
12.442 All sanitary sewers, sewer force mains and sewer
laterals shall be installed in "first class" bedding
and in accordance with the Department of Public
Works specifications. Sewers shall be installed to
the line and grade indicated on the plans.
12.443 Only precast concrete manholes of a design approved
by the Department of Public Works shall be installed
on a sanitary sewer main. Sanitary sewer manholes
shall be installed no further than three (300)
hundred feet apart and the sewer shall be laid in a
straight line between manholes.
12.444 Before any sanitary sewer will be accepted by the
Board it must pass an infiltration or exfiltration
test made in accordance with the Department of
Public Works specifications. Said test will be made
at the Developer's expense and shall be made under
the direction of the Department of Public Works.
12.445 Where rock is encountered it shall be removed to a
depth of one foot below the flowline of the sewer
and the pipe laid in a properly compacted granular
material approved by the Department of Public Works.
12.446 Only granular material approved by the Department of
Public Works shall be used as backfill in any trench
excavation.
12.45 Storm Water Drains
12.451 Storm drains shall be installed using ADS N-12 Pro
Link Ultra or equal. The minimum allowable size is
a twelve (12) inch diameter pipe including catch
basin leaders.
12.452 All storm drains including catch basin leaders and
culverts shall be installed in "first class"
bedding. All work and materials shall be in
accordance with the Department of Public Works
specifications.
12.453 Precast concrete or concrete block manholes of a
design approved by the Department of Public Works
shall be used on storm drains. The distance between
manholes shall not be greater than three (300)
hundred feet.
XII-13
12.454 Precast concrete or concrete block catch basins
shall be installed at intervals of three (300)
hundred feet on both sides of a roadway and at
intersections as necessary. The basins shall have a
three flange frame and grates and a granite curb
inlet, and shall be of a design approved by the
Department of Public Works.
12.455 Where rock is encountered it shall be removed to a
depth of one foot below the flowline of the drain
and the pipe laid in a properly compacted granular
material approved by the Department of Public Works.
12.456 Only granular material approved by the Department of
Public Works shall be used as back-fill in any
trench excavation.
12.46 General Utilities
12.461 Street lights shall be installed by the Subdivider
at his expense and he shall be responsible for the
cost of lighting until the street is accepted by the
Town. The lighting shall be installed on a street
prior to occupancy of any house on that street.
12.462 All underground utilities such as gas mains, cable,
electric and telephone lines, including service
connections shall be installed prior to the
construction of the roadway surface, base or
sub-base. All methods used to install these
utilities shall be subject to the approval of the
Department of Public Works. Only granular material
approved by the Department of Public Works shall be
used as back-fill in any utility trench.
12.5 BERMS AND CURBING
12.51 Bituminous concrete curbs of the type and dimensions as
shown on the Typical Street Cross-Section, (see
Appendix B), shall be required along both sides of the
roadway, except at curb inlets or where, in the opinion
of the Planning Board, such curbs are not necessary.
12.52 The berms shall be constructed of Type I-1, Class I
bituminous concrete, and laid with a berm forming
machine.
12.53 All berms shall have a minimum reveal as shown on the
berm details in Appendix B.
XII-14
12.54 Along the inside pavement radius of cul-de-sacs and at
the intersection of any two streets, granite curbing
shall be installed along the arc of the curves. The
granite curbing shall have a reveal equal to or greater
than the bituminous curb and a width at the top of six
(6) inches.
12.55 Bituminous curbs shall butt against all granite curb
inlets, and constructed so as to be true to line and
grade after compaction. Any mixture which becomes
defective in any way shall be replaced with a fresh
mixture.
12.56 Under special conditions, specially constructed berms
or gutters may be required by the Planning Board,
particularly in areas of heavy slope.
12.57 Bituminous concrete berms shall be applied onto the
base course of roadway paving and the top course of
pavement laid against the face of the berm.
12.58 At all curb cuts, all berms shall be installed so as to
return to the sidewalk or the property line.
12.6 SIDEWALKS AND BICYCLE PATHS
12.61 In residential subdivisions, sidewalks of not less than
five (5) feet in width shall be constructed on both
sides of the street within the street right-of-way,
abutting the property line and in conformity with
specifications of the West Springfield Planning Board.
12.62 The sidewalk grade shall be parallel to the center line
and not more than twelve (12) inches above the roadway
center line grade. Sidewalks shall be sloped to the
roadway at all street intersections for a distance of
not less than thirty (30) inches from the roadway edge.
12.63 Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete using wood
frames of not less than four (4) inches in depth,
placed five (5) feet wide and consist of the following:
12.631 A gravel base upon the subgrade, wetted and
compacted to a depth of eight (8) inches with a
self-propelled roller of not less than five (5)
tons. Stones larger than one and one-half (1.5)
inches shall not be used;
XII-15
12.632 Portland cement of a 1-2-3-mixture (4000 psi) shall
be poured, monolithic, to a thickness of four (4)
inches;
12.633 A dummy joint shall be scored every five (5) feet
with a three-eighths (3/8) inch bituminous fiber
expansion joint provided every twenty (20) feet;
12.634 At all driveways, the concrete shall be of minimum
depth of six (6) inches and reinforced with four (4)
inch square welded wire fabric of at least 0.12
square inches of steel in longitudinal and
transverse direction.
12.64 Bicycle Paths
12.641 Bicycle paths shall be provided for as required by
the Planning Board under Section 11.5 of these
regulations.
12.642 Easements or rights-of-way shall be given to the
Town for all paths which do not lie within the
roadway right-of-way.
12.643 Bicycle paths shall be constructed of Type I-1,
Class I Bituminous Concrete Surface, at a width
approved by the Board, and shall consist of the
following:
12.6431 A six (6) inch gravel base having a maximum size
aggregate not exceeding four (4) inches
compacted with a power roller weighing not less
than five (5) tons.
12.6432 A bituminous concrete surface compacted with a
roller weighing not less than one and one-half
(1.5) tons having a thickness of not less than
two (2) inches.
12.6433 Where the path intersects roadway rights-of-way,
a barrier approved by the Board shall be
constructed so as to allow bicycles while
prohibiting automobiles.
12.7 GROUNDWATER DRAINAGE
As construction progresses, unforeseen groundwater
conditions may be encountered which require additional
subdrains or curtain drains. These conditions include
potential problems if construction is in progress at a
XII-16
time of low water table or other dry conditions. The
Board reserves the right to require appropriate systems
to accommodate this problem.
12.8 RETAINING WALLS
Upon approval of the Planning Board and the Department of
Public Works, retaining walls shall be installed where
deemed necessary and they shall be designed by a
Professional Engineer registered in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts.
12.9 BOUNDS AND LOT CORNERS
12.91 Bounds shall be set on both sides of each proposed
street at all angle points, at the beginning and end of
all curves thereof, and at all intersections of streets
and ways with each other or with Plan boundary lines.
The bounds shall be of granite or reinforced concrete,
shall be not less than four (4) feet in length and not
less than six (6) inches in width and breadth and shall
have a drill hole in the center. All bounds shall be
set flush with the surface of the adjoining ground.
Wrought iron rods may be used where the points fall on
exposed ledge. The placement and accurate location of
these bounds shall be certified to by the Registered
Land Surveyor of the developer by a letter which shall
be submitted with the As-Built Plan. Entrances to
subdivisions shall not be marked by elaborate
monuments.
12.92 Lot corners in the subdivision shall be set in a manner
similar to the setting of the bounds. These corners or
points of deflection will be marked with iron ins (or
equal) as permanent markers. The same certification is
required as in the case of the bounds.
13.0 TREES AND PLANTINGS
13.01 Treebelt
13.011 All areas of the treebelt not reserved for
sidewalks, bicycle paths and other impervious
structures shall be finished with eight (8) inches
of loam and planted with seed mixture, sod or
plantings approved by the Tree Warden and the Board.
XII-17
13.012 Areas of the treebelt, which have been planted as in
13.011 above, shall be watered and maintained by the
developer to ensure the viability of the vegetation.
13.02 Existing Trees
Trees on the site, especially those over eight (8) inch
DBH in size should be preserved. The Tree Warden shall
inspect and approve all trees over eight (8) inch DBH
for preservation/removal. Following is a list of
recommended measures for the protection of trees:
13.021 There should be no operation of heavy equipment or
storage of any materials under said tree within its
natural drip line.
13.022 Wherever possible no grading or filling should be
done within the drip line.
13.023 Supplemental irrigation should be provided to all
trees as needed during the summer months to insure
healthy maintenance.
13.024 No black top paving or vehicle parking should be
located under evergreen trees. No more than twenty
(20) percent of the area under any deciduous tree's
natural drip line may be so paved.
13.025 All drainage from paved areas should be directed
away from root zones.
13.03 Street Trees
13.031 The subdivider is required to plant suitable
broad-leaved deciduous shade or ornamental trees
along roads, or ways, unless specifically exempted
by the Board. All trees shall be the equivalent of
well-rooted nursery-grown stock free of injury,
harmful insects, and diseases. They shall meet
minimal standards of ANSI Z60.1-1990, American
Standard For Nursery Stock, as amended.
13.032 Acceptable types of street trees, which include
large-growing, medium-growing, and small-growing
deciduous shade and ornamental trees indigenous to
the area, shall be planted to enhance the visual and
aesthetic uniqueness of the site and shall be
subject to approval of the Tree Warden.
13.033 Large growing trees shall be spaced at intervals of
45 to 55 feet, medium-growing trees at intervals of
XII-18
30 to 40 feet, and small-growing trees at intervals
of 20 to 30 feet or as recommended by the Tree
Warden and approved by the Board. Trees on one side
of the street may be set either opposite or
diagonally to trees on the opposite side.
13.034 Minimum acceptable sizes of trees to be planted
shall be as follows:
Large-growing--2 ½" trunk diameter, caliper at 1'
above ground;
Medium-growing--2 ½" trunk diameter, caliper at 1'
above ground;
Small-growing--9' crown height, 5' spread; or as
recommended by the Tree Warden and approved by the
Board.
13.035 Planting operations shall be conducted as specified
in the Tree and Shrub Transplanting Manual printed
by the International Society of Arboriculture or as
approved by the Tree Warden.
13.036 Requirements for support stakes, guy wire and cable,
ground anchors, hose, and wrapping material shall be
those contained in the Tree and Shrub Transplanting
Manual or as approved by the Tree Warden.
13.037 The subdivider shall be responsible for maintenance
of planted trees and replacement of those which have
died or become diseased from the time of planting
through two full growing season.
13.038 Existing trees over eight (8) inch DBH in the
proposed right-of-way shall be preserved unless
removal has been approved by the Tree Warden. Trees
which are to be preserved shall be pruned and shaped
as required by the Tree Warden.
13.04 Bank Plantings
13.041 All cut or fill bankings that tend to wash or erode
shall be planted with suitable, well-rooted, and
low-growing plantings. All plants shall be the
equivalent of nursery grown stock in good health,
free from injury, harmful insects, and diseases
meeting all standards of ANSI Z60.1-1990, American
Standard For Nursery Stock, as amended.
XII-19
13.042 Acceptable planting types which include very
low-growing (4" to 12"), low growing (12" to 30"),
and herbaceous plantings shall be approved by the
Tree Warden. Perennial grass turf installed as sod
is an acceptable alternative for the planting of
banks.
13.043 If bank plantings are of a type which are properly
spaced at close intervals, 8" to 12" of loam shall
be spread over the entire bank. If the plantings
are to be widely spaced they may be planted in loam
pits.
13.044 Mulch (wood chips or equal) shall be spread evenly
among plantings for weed and erosion control to a
depth of not more than four (4) inches.
13.045 The subdivider shall be responsible for maintenance
of bank plantings and replacement of those which
have died or become diseased from the time of
planting through two full growing season.
13.05 Corner Plantings
Requirements for plantings adjacent to street
intersections shall be the same as those for Bank
Plantings with the following exceptions:
13.051 Turf may be provided by seeding as well as by
planting sod.
13.052 Bushy shrubs and herbaceous plantings which are over
three and one-half (3.5) feet in height or that
would tend to obscure visibility are not permitted
within twenty-five (25) feet of the intersection of
the curbs adjacent to the corner lot. The
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and Chapter
162, Section 8 of the Town Ordinance shall be
adhered to.
13.06 Cul-de-Sac Plantings
13.061 The central portion of a permanent dead-end street
shall be landscaped with low-maintenance plantings.
The following options are permitted:
13.0611 Planting ornamental shrubs and trees of a type
acceptable to the Board.
XII-20
13.0612 Retaining existing vegetation, with the approval
of the Board.
13.062 The standards and specifications for existing and
proposed trees as outlined in this section shall be
adhered to.
13.07 Utility Structures
All above ground structures associated with underground
utilities (i.e. transformers, switchboxes, etc.) shall
be screened with suitable evergreen vegetation approved
by the Board and Tree Warden.
13.1 GUARD RAILS
Guard rails shall be installed as required by the Board
and the Department of Public Works or its engineering
consultant, based on State Construction Standards.
13.2 EXCAVATION WITHIN EXISTING STREETS
13.21 Street Openings
Before starting work, the developer shall obtain all
necessary permits for excavating and/or storing
material on a public or private way, and any other
permits or bonds required. Special provisions will
apply to streets openings to any street that has been
resurfaced within the prior five (5) calendar years.
13.22 Provisions for Traffic
13.221 Conduct all operations so that interference with the
flow of traffic will be held to a minimum.
Construct temporary bridging across trenches when
necessary for traffic and pedestrians.
13.222 Take all necessary precautions to prevent injury to
the public due to open trenches. Erect protective
fences and barricades and provide adequate warning
lights at all trenches, excavated material,
equipment, or any other obstacle which may in any
way be a source of potential danger to the public.
13.223 Provide and pay all costs for police protection in
connection with maintaining traffic while work is in
progress.
XII-21
13.224 The contractor shall remain fully responsible for
the protection of persons and property at all times.
13.23 Construction Procedures
All construction procedures shall conform to specifications
in the West Springfield "Manual for Occupancy of Public Way"
unless otherwise directed by the Department of Public Works.
13.3 INSPECTIONS OF IMPROVEMENTS
13.31 Subject to approval by the Department of Public Works,
it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
engage a Professional Engineer registered in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts to provide engineering
supervision during construction to ensure proper
installation of improvements in accordance with the
approved plan. Said Engineer shall be approved by the
Planning Board and Department of Public Works. In
accordance with these rules and regulations, the
supervising Engineer(s)shall certify that all work has
been conducted and completed strictly in accordance
with Mass. Highway Department standards, the approved
plans and these Rules and Regulations. The developer
shall be responsible for all expenses incurred for the
inspection of all improvements related to the
subdivision.
13.32 During the active construction phase of a development,
bi-weekly reports shall be submitted to the Planning
Board and Department of Public Works by the developer's
Engineer outlining work completed and condition of
site.
13.33 At various specified stages of construction of streets
and ways, utilities, and other improvements,
inspections shall be mandatory and shall be made and
approved in writing by a Registered Professional
Engineer approved or appointed by the Board, or a
representative of the appropriate agency involved.
Certification of the completeness of the improvements
shall be noted in Form G of these regulations and shall
be submitted to the Board.
13.34 Construction of streets and installation of utilities
may be phased provided that each section shall not be
less than five hundred (500) feet.
13.341 The water system and appurtenant facilities shall be
inspected by the Department of Public Works.
XII-22
13.342 Upon the request of the Department of Public Works,
the applicant shall have an inspection of installed
drainage lines and sewer mains performed by means of
a television camera after the filling and compacting
of the utility trenches. This inspection shall be
conducted at the applicant's expense, and the
results forwarded to the Department of Public Works.
13.343 At the completion of all the improvements in the
subdivision including loaming and seeding, curbs,
monuments, plantings and signs, the Department of
Public Works and Tree Warden shall make an
inspection before final release of the performance
guarantee.
13.35 Each specified construction stage shall be completed to
the satisfaction of the inspecting Professional
Engineer and given in writing, before further work
shall be done. Any development which progresses beyond
an inspection stage without written approval shall be
required to return the construction to the status
necessary to perform the required inspection.
13.36 In lieu of the applicant securing the services of a
Professional Engineer, the Planning Board may hire an
outside consultant to oversee and inspect all
improvements related to the development of the
subdivision. All fees for the consultant shall be paid
by the developer and administered in accordance with
M.G.L. Chapter 44, Section 53G.
13.4 AS-BUILT PLAN
13.41 After construction of all improvements is completed,
and before final release of the Performance Guarantee,
the subdivider shall prepare and submit to the Board
three copies of the Definitive Plan, revised in an
As-Built Record Plan at a scale of one inch equals
forty feet (1" = 40'), which shall indicate the
location of the following as built:
13.411 Street lines, showing centerline elevations at fifty
(50) foot intervals;
13.412 Edge of traveled way, locations of paths and
sidewalks;
13.413 All permanent monuments and all bounds;
XII-23
13.414 Location and inverts of drainage systems and any
utilities required to be installed by the developer
including all laterals from the mains to the street
edge of the right-of-way. Where houses or cellars
exist, additional measurements to such structures
shall be shown as more convenient information;
13.415 Location of all other underground utilities (such as
electricity, telephone, cable, gas, etc.) including
all laterals (as d. above); and
13.416 All other improvements required by these Regulations
or agreed upon as a condition to plan approval.
13.42 The accuracy of such record plan shall be certified by
a professional land surveyor registered in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
13.43 As part of the As-Built Plan, the developer shall
submit to the Board a certification, by a registered
engineer, in which said engineer certifies that all
construction was executed strictly in accordance with
these Regulations and with all requirements agreed upon
as a condition to plan approval.
13.5 FINAL CLEANING
Upon completion of the work, the subdivider shall remove
from the right-of-way and adjoining property all temporary
structures, surplus material, and rubbish which may have
accumulated during the execution of the work, and shall
leave the subdivision area in a neat and orderly
condition. Burning or burying of the rubbish and waste
material is prohibited.
13.6 STREET ACCEPTANCE PLANS
After construction of all improvements is completed, and
before final release of the Performance Guarantee, the
subdivider shall prepare and submit to the Board three
copies of Street Acceptance Plan. The plan shall be at a
scale of one-inch equals forty feet (1" = 40'), unless
otherwise specified by the Planning Board. The sheet size
shall not exceed an outside dimension of twenty-four by
thirty-six (24" X 36") inches. The Street Acceptance Plan
shall indicate the following information:
XII-24
13.61 The subdivision name, true North arrow, date, scale,
locus map, legend and title "Street Acceptance Plan
- proposed street name";
13.62 Legend denoting all signs and symbols used on the
plan and not otherwise explained;
13.63 The location in metes and bounds description of all
lines of streets, ways and rights-of-way proposed
for acceptance as a public way;
13.64 Location of all permanent monuments, pins and
benchmarker;
The above reference plan and a separate legal description
of the roadway shall be prepared by a Civil Engineer
and/or Land Surveyor registered in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts.
XIV-1
SECTION XIV ADMINISTRATION
14.0 AUTHORITY
Under the authority vested in the Planning Board of the
Town of West Springfield by Section 81-Q of Chapter 41 of
the General Laws as amended and all subsequent amendments
thereto, said Board hereby adopts these Rules and
Regulations governing the Subdivision of land in the Town
of West Springfield under the Subdivision Control Law,
Section 81-K through 81-GG, inclusive, Chapter 41, of the
General Laws, as amended.
14.1 VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY
Should any section or provision of these Rules and
Regulations be declared by the courts to be invalid, such
decision shall not invalidate any other section or
provision of these Rules and Regulations.
14.2 INVALIDATION BY STATE LAW OR COURT DECISION
Any part of these Regulations subsequently invalidated by
a new state law or State or Federal court decision or
modification of an existing state law or State or Federal
Court decision shall automatically be brought into
conformity with the new or amended law, and shall be
deemed to be effective immediately, without recourse to a
public hearing and the customary procedures for amendment
or repeal of such regulations.
14.3 AMENDMENTS
These Rules and Regulations or any portion thereof may be
amended from time to time by the Planning Board in
accordance with Section 81-Q, of the Subdivision Control
Law.
14.4 TABLE OF CONTENTS AND INDEX
The administrative content of these areas of the Rules and
Regulations may be revised from time to time by
administrative action of the Planning Board and/or the
Planning Department.
XIV-2
14.5 APPENDICES
Appended to the Regulations hereto are appendices for the
administration of these Regulations. The administrative
content of these forms may be revised from time to time by
administrative action of the Planning Board and/or the
Planning Department.
14.6 MISREPRESENTATION
Any person who the Board determines has intentionally
misrepresented or falsified any facts submitted for review
under these Rules and Regulations shall be prohibited from
participating in or requesting any Board action for five
years from the date of determination of the Board. Board
determination shall require a 4/5 affirmative vote of the
Board. The decision of the Board shall be filed with the
Town Clerk's office with notice being sent by certified
mail, return receipt, to the person and, with respect to
registered engineers and land surveyors, to the
Massachusetts Board of Registered Professional Engineers
and Professional Land Surveyors.
14.7 OWNERSHIP OF SUBMITTED MATERIALS
The Town of West Springfield shall become the sole owner
of all materials submitted to the Town in connection with
the application and administration of these Rules and
Regulations except as provided for herein.
14.8 ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS AND OCCUPANCY PERMITS
14.81 No building permit shall be issued by the Building
Commissioner for any structures within a subdivision
that is under construction until:
• roadway improvements have been installed that provide
adequate access for emergency vehicles; and
• two copies of an as-built plan showing the location
and elevation of water, sanitary sewer and stormwater
utilities along with laterals servicing the building
lots have been submitted to and approved by the
Department of Public Works.
XIV-3
14.82 No occupancy permits shall be issued by the Building
Commissioner for any structures within a subdivision
that is under construction until a monetary performance
guarantee has been approved by the Planning Board and
duly enacted.
TOWN OF WEST SPRINGFIELD
PLANNING BOARD
26 Central Street, Suite 20
West Springfield, MA 01089-2764
Phone: (413) 263-3271 FAX: (413) 736-4144
e-mail: dmattoon@west-springfield.ma.us
Douglas P. Mattoon
Director of Planning and Development
FORM A
APPLICATION FOR ENDORSEMENT OF PLAN
BELIEVED NOT TO REQUIRE APPROVAL UNDER
SUBDIVISION CONTROL
Property address / location: __________________________________________________
To the Planning Board:
The undersigned wishes to record the accompanying plan and requests a
determination and endorsement by said Board that approval by it under the
Subdivision Control Law is not required. The undersigned believes that such
approval is not required for the following reasons: (Circle as appropriate)
1. The accompanying plan is not a subdivision because the plan does not show
a division of land.
2. The division of the tract of land shown on the accompanying plan is not a
subdivision because every lot shown on the plan has frontage of at least
such distance as is presently required by the West Springfield Zoning
Ordinance under Section ____________ which requires ____________ feet for
erection of a building on such lot; and every lot shown on the plan has such
frontage on:
a. a public way or way which the Town Clerk certifies is maintained and
used as a public way, namely _______________________________________; or
b. a way shown on a plan therefore approved and endorsed in accordance
with the Subdivision Control Law, namely ___________________________ on
__________________________, and subject to the following conditions
________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________; or
c. a private way in existence on May 23, 1955, the date when the
Subdivision Control Law became effective in the Town of West Springfield
having, in the opinion of the Planning Board, sufficient width, suitable
grades, and adequate construction to provide for the needs of vehicular
traffic in relation to the proposed use of the land abutting thereon or
served thereby, and for the installation of municipal services to serve
such land and the buildings erected or to be erected thereon, namely:
___________________________________________________________________.
3. The division of the tract of land shown on the accompanying plan is not a
subdivision because it shows a proposed conveyance/other instrument,
namely ___________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________ that adds to/takes
away from/changes the size and shape of lots in such a manner so that no
lot affected is left without frontage as required by the West Springfield
Zoning Ordinance under Section __________ which requires ___________ feet.
4. The division of the tract of land shown on the accompanying plan is not a
subdivision because two or more buildings, specifically _______ buildings,
were standing on the land prior to May 23, 1955, the date when the
Subdivision Control Law went into effect in the Town West Springfield and
one of such buildings remains standing on each of the lots; said buildings
are shown and located on the accompanying plan. Evidence of the existence
of such buildings prior to the effective date of the subdivision control law is
submitted as follows:
___________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________
5. Other reasons or comment (See M.G.L., Chapter 41, Section 81-l):
___________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________
The owner's title to the land is derived under deed from _______________________
________________________________________, dated ____________________, ________,
and recorded in Hampden County Registry of Deeds, Book ______________, Page
______________ or Land Registration Office of Hampden County, Certificate of
Title No. _________________.
Description of lot line amendments: __________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
Name of Applicant ___________________________________________________________
Address _____________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________
Email _______________________________________________________________________
Phone Number ______________________________________________________________
Signature of Applicant ______________________________________________________
Date ________________________________________________________________________
Name of Owner ______________________________________________________________
Address _____________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________
Email _______________________________________________________________________
Phone Number ______________________________________________________________
Signature of Owner __________________________________________________________
Date _______________________________________________________________________
Name of Engineer/Surveyor __________________________________________________
Address _____________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________
Email ________________________________________________________________________
Phone Number ______________________________________________________________
Check-list of items to be submitted with application
1.____ Original Form A Application + two copies
2.____ Original Form E Designer's Certificate
3.____ Original Form F Statement of Interest
4.____ Application fee:
Amount Submitted $ _________
5.____ One Mylar print of the non-subdivision plan
6.____ Three copies of the non-subdivision plan
THE APPLICANT SHOULD BE FAMILIAR WITH THE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
AND SHOULD ENSURE THAT THE APPLICATION COMPLIES WITH SAID
REQUIREMENTS AND IS COMPLETE. FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH THE
REQUIREMENTS MAY RESULT IN A DENIAL OF THE APPLICATION.
THE FILING OF THIS APPLICATION WITH THE TOWN OF WEST SPRINGFIELD
AUTHORIZES EMPLOYEES, AGENTS AND REPRESENTATIVES OF THE TOWN TO
ENTER AND INSPECT THE SUBJECT PREMISES, INCLUDING LAND AND STRUCTURES,
TO EVALUATE EXISTING AND PROPOSED CONDITIONS AS THEY RELATE TO THE
SUBMITTED APPLICATION.
S:\Planning\Subdivision Regulations\Regulations\Form B.doc
TOWN OF WEST SPRINGFIELD
PLANNING BOARD
26 Central Street, Ste. 22
West Springfield, MA 01089-2753
Phone: (413) 263-3271 FAX: (413) 736-4144
e-mail: dmattoon@west-springfield.ma.us
Douglas P. Mattoon
Director of Planning and Development
FORM B
APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF A PRELIMINARY
SUBDIVISION PLAN
Property address / location: __________________________________________________
To the Planning Board:
The undersigned, being the applicant as defined under Chapter 41, Section
81-L for approval of a proposed subdivision shown on a plan entitled:
_____________________________________________________________________________
drawn by ___________________________________________________________________
dated ______________________________, ____________ and described as follows:
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
located ______________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________,
number of lots proposed _____________, total acreage of tract _________________,
hereby submits said plan as a PRELIMINARY plan in accordance with the
Rules and Regulations of the West Springfield Planning Board and makes
application to the Board for approval of said plan.
The undersigned's title to said land is derived from ___________________________
_______________________________________________________________ by deed dated
______________________ and recorded in the Hampden County Registry of Deeds
Book __________, Page __________, or registered in the Land Registration Office
of Hampden County, Certificate of Title No. ______________; and said land is free
of encumbrances except for the following: ____________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________
S:\Planning\Subdivision Regulations\Regulations\Form B.doc
_____________________________________________________________________________
The undersigned hereby applies for the approval of said PRELIMINARY plan by
the Board, in belief that the plan conforms to the Subdivision Rules and
Regulations of the Town of West Springfield.
Name of Applicant (print) ____________________________________________________
Address ____________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________
Phone Number ______________________________________________________________
Signature ___________________________________________________________________
Date ________________________________________________________________________
Name of Owner (print) _______________________________________________________
Address ____________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________
Phone Number ______________________________________________________________
Signature ___________________________________________________________________
Date ________________________________________________________________________
Name of Engineer/Surveyor (print) __________________________________________
Address ____________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________
Phone Number ______________________________________________________________
Name of representing Attorney (print) ________________________________________
Name of firm ________________________________________________________________
Address _____________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________
Phone Number ______________________________________________________________
S:\Planning\Subdivision Regulations\Regulations\Form B.doc
Check-list of items to be submitted with application
1.____ Original Form B Application + 15 copies
2.____ Original Form E Designer's Certificate + 2 copies
3.____ Original Form F Statement of Interest + 2 copies
4.____ Original Draft Development Impact Statement + 15 copies
5.____ Application fee submitted: $ _________________
6.____ Two sets of Mylar prints of the proposed preliminary subdivision
7.____ Fifteen sets of copies of the proposed preliminary subdivision
Note: All items listed in the above check-list must be submitted before the
application will be deemed complete.
S:\Planning\Subdivision Regulations\Regulations\Form C.doc
TOWN OF WEST SPRINGFIELD
PLANNING BOARD
26 Central Street, Ste. 22
West Springfield, MA 01089-2753
Phone: (413) 263-3271 FAX: (413) 736-4144
e-mail: dmattoon@west-springfield.ma.us
Douglas P. Mattoon
Director of Planning and Development
FORM C
APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF A DEFINITIVE
SUBDIVISION PLAN
Property address / location: __________________________________________________
To the Planning Board:
The undersigned, being the applicant as defined under Chapter 41, Section
81-L for approval of a proposed subdivision shown on a plan entitled:
_____________________________________________________________________________
drawn by ___________________________________________________________________
dated ______________________________, ____________ and described as follows:
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
located ______________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________,
number of lots proposed _____________, total acreage of tract _________________,
hereby submits said plan as a DEFINITIVE plan in accordance with the Rules
and Regulations of the West Springfield Planning Board and makes application
to the Board for approval of said plan.
The undersigned's title to said land is derived from ___________________________
_______________________________________________________________ by deed dated
______________________ and recorded in the Hampden County Registry of Deeds
Book __________, Page __________, or registered in the Land Registration Office
of Hampden County, Certificate of Title No. ______________; and said land is free
of encumbrances except for the following: ____________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________
S:\Planning\Subdivision Regulations\Regulations\Form C.doc
_____________________________________________________________________________
Said plan ( ) has ( ) has not evolved from a Preliminary Plan submitted to the
Board on ___________________________, __________ and ( ) approved ( ) approved
with modifications ( ) disapproved on ____________________________, __________.
The undersigned hereby applies for the approval of said DEFINITIVE plan by
the Board, in belief that the plan conforms to the Subdivision Rules and
Regulations of the Town of West Springfield.
Name of Applicant (print) ____________________________________________________
Address ____________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________
Phone Number ______________________________________________________________
Signature ___________________________________________________________________
Date ________________________________________________________________________
Name of Owner (print) _______________________________________________________
Address ____________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________
Phone Number ______________________________________________________________
Signature ___________________________________________________________________
Date ________________________________________________________________________
Name of Engineer/Surveyor (print) __________________________________________
Address ____________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________
Phone Number ______________________________________________________________
Name of representing Attorney (print) ________________________________________
Name of firm ________________________________________________________________
Address _____________________________________________________________________
S:\Planning\Subdivision Regulations\Regulations\Form C.doc
_____________________________________________________________________
Phone Number ______________________________________________________________
Check-list of items to be submitted with application
1.____ Original Form C Application + 15 copies
2.____ Original Form E Designer's Certificate + 2 copies
3.____ Original Form F Statement of Interest + 2 copies
4.____ Original Development Impact Statement + 15 copies
5.____ Application fee submitted: $ _________________
6.____ Advertisement fee of $65 made payable to the West Springfield Record
7.____ Two sets of Mylar prints of the proposed definitive subdivision
8.____ Fifteen sets of copies of the proposed definitive subdivision
9.____ 5 copies of all engineering, drainage and traffic impact calculations
10.____ Original certified list of abutters obtained from the West Springfield
Assessor's office
Note: All items listed in the above check-list must be submitted before the
application will be deemed complete.
S:\Planning\Subdivision Regulations\Regulations\Form CC.doc
TOWN OF WEST SPRINGFIELD
PLANNING BOARD
26 Central Street, Ste. 22
West Springfield, MA 01089-2753
Phone: (413) 263-3271 FAX: (413) 736-4144
e-mail: dmattoon@west-springfield.ma.us
Douglas P. Mattoon
Director of Planning and Development
FORM CC
APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF AN AMEMDED
DEFINITIVE SUBDIVISION PLAN
Property address / location: __________________________________________________
To the Planning Board:
The undersigned, being the applicant as defined under Chapter 41, Section
81-L for approval of a proposed subdivision shown on a plan entitled:
_____________________________________________________________________________
drawn by ___________________________________________________________________
dated ______________________________, ____________ and described as follows:
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
located ______________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________,
number of lots proposed _____________, total acreage of tract _________________,
hereby submits said plan as an AMENDED DEFINITIVE plan in accordance
with the Rules and Regulations of the West Springfield Planning Board and
makes application to the Board for approval of said plan.
The undersigned's title to said land is derived from ___________________________
_______________________________________________________________ by deed dated
______________________ and recorded in the Hampden County Registry of Deeds
Book __________, Page __________, or registered in the Land Registration Office
of Hampden County, Certificate of Title No. ______________; and said land is free
of encumbrances except for the following: ____________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________
S:\Planning\Subdivision Regulations\Regulations\Form CC.doc
_____________________________________________________________________________
Said plan has evolved from a Definitive Subdivision Plan submitted to the
Board on ___________________________, __________ and ( ) approved ( )
disapproved on ____________________________, __________.
The undersigned hereby applies for the approval of said AMENDED
DEFINITIVE plan by the Board, in belief that the plan conforms to the
Subdivision Rules and Regulations of the Town of West Springfield.
Name of Applicant (print) ____________________________________________________
Address ____________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________
Phone Number ______________________________________________________________
Signature ___________________________________________________________________
Date ________________________________________________________________________
Name of Owner (print) _______________________________________________________
Address ____________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________
Phone Number ______________________________________________________________
Signature ___________________________________________________________________
Date ________________________________________________________________________
Name of Engineer/Surveyor (print) __________________________________________
Address ____________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________
Phone Number ______________________________________________________________
Name of representing Attorney (print) ________________________________________
Name of firm ________________________________________________________________
Address _____________________________________________________________________
S:\Planning\Subdivision Regulations\Regulations\Form CC.doc
_____________________________________________________________________
Phone Number ______________________________________________________________
Check-list of items to be submitted with application
1.____ Original Form CC Application + 15 copies
2.____ Original Form E Designer's Certificate + 2 copies
3.____ Original Form F Statement of Interest + 2 copies
4.____ Application fee submitted: $ _________________
5.____ Advertisement fee of $50 made payable to the West Springfield Record
6.____ Two sets of Mylar prints of the proposed amended definitive subdivision
7.____ Fifteen sets of copies of the proposed amended definitive subdivision
8.____ 5 copies of all engineering, drainage and traffic impact calculations
9.____ Original certified list of abutters obtained from the West Springfield
Assessor's office
Note: All items listed in the above check-list must be submitted before the
application will be deemed complete.
S:\Planning\Subdivision Regulations\Regulations\Form D.doc
TOWN OF WEST SPRINGFIELD
PLANNING BOARD
26 Central Street, Ste. 22
West Springfield, MA 01089-2753
Phone: (413) 263-3271 FAX: (413) 736-4144
e-mail: dmattoon@west-springfield.ma.us
Douglas P. Mattoon
Director of Planning and Development
FORM D
APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF PLANS FOR
MORE THAN ONE BUILDING FOR DWELLING
PURPOSES PER LOT
Property address / location: __________________________________________________
To the Planning Board:
The undersigned, being the applicant as defined under Chapter 41, Section
81-L for approval of a proposed subdivision shown on a plan entitled:
_____________________________________________________________________________
drawn by ___________________________________________________________________
dated ______________________________, ____________ and described as follows:
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
located ______________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________,
number of lots proposed _____________, total acreage of tract _________________,
hereby submits said plan as a PLAN FOR MORE THAN ONE BUILDING FOR
DWELLING PURPOSES PER LOT plan in accordance with the Rules and
Regulations of the West Springfield Planning Board and makes application to
the Board for approval of said plan.
The undersigned's title to said land is derived from ___________________________
_______________________________________________________________ by deed dated
______________________ and recorded in the Hampden County Registry of Deeds
Book __________, Page __________, or registered in the Land Registration Office
of Hampden County, Certificate of Title No. ______________; and said land is free
of encumbrances except for the following: ____________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________
S:\Planning\Subdivision Regulations\Regulations\Form D.doc
_____________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________
The undersigned hereby applies for the approval of said PLAN FOR MORE
THAN ONE BUILDING FOR DWELLING PURPOSES PER LOT plan by the
Board, in belief that the plan conforms to the Subdivision Rules and
Regulations of the Town of West Springfield.
Name of Applicant (print) ____________________________________________________
Address ____________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________
Phone Number ______________________________________________________________
Signature ___________________________________________________________________
Date ________________________________________________________________________
Name of Owner (print) _______________________________________________________
Address ____________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________
Phone Number ______________________________________________________________
Signature ___________________________________________________________________
Date ________________________________________________________________________
Name of Engineer/Surveyor (print) __________________________________________
Address ____________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________
Phone Number ______________________________________________________________
Name of representing Attorney (print) ________________________________________
Name of firm ________________________________________________________________
Address _____________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________
Phone Number ______________________________________________________________
S:\Planning\Subdivision Regulations\Regulations\Form D.doc
Check-list of items to be submitted with application
1.____ Original Form D Application + 15 copies
2.____ Original Form E Designer's Certificate + 2 copies
3.____ Original Form F Statement of Interest + 2 copies
4.____ Original Development Impact Statement + 15 copies
5.____ Application fee submitted: $ _________________
6.____ Advertisement fee of $50 made payable to the West Springfield Record
7.____ Two sets of Mylar prints of the proposed development plan
8.____ Fifteen sets of copies of the proposed development plan
9.____ 5 copies of all engineering, drainage and traffic impact calculations
10.____ Original certified list of abutters obtained from the West Springfield
Assessor's office
Note: All items listed in the above check-list must be submitted before the
application will be deemed complete.
S:\Planning\Subdivision Regulations\Regulations\Form E.doc
TOWN OF WEST SPRINGFIELD
PLANNING BOARD
26 Central Street, Suite 20
West Springfield, MA 01089-2764
Phone: (413) 263-3271 FAX: (413) 736-4144
e-mail: dmattoon@west-springfield.ma.us
Douglas P. Mattoon
Director of Planning and Development
FORM E
DESIGNER’S CERTIFICATE
In preparing the plan entitled _______________________________________________
________________________ and dated __________________________________ I hereby
certify that the above named plan and accompanying data is true and correct
to the accuracy required by the current Rules and Regulations governing the
subdivision of land in West Springfield Massachusetts and required by the
rules of the Massachusetts Registries of Deeds. My source of information
about the location of boundaries shown on said plan were one or more of the
following:
1. Deed from _____________________________________________________________ to
___________________________________________________________________________
dated _____________________________ and recorded in Hampden County
Registry of Deeds in Book ______________, Page ______________ or registered
in the Land Registration Office of Hampden County, Certificate of Title No
_______________.
2. Other deeds and plans, as follows ________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
3. Oral information furnished by ____________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
4. Actual measurement on the ground from a starting point established by
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
S:\Planning\Subdivision Regulations\Regulations\Form E.doc
5. Other sources ___________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________
Name of Surveyor ____________________________________________________________
Address _____________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________
Email _______________________________________________________________________
Phone _______________________________________________________________________
Signature ___________________________________________________________________
Registration No. _____________________________________________________________
Seal of Surveyor
Name of Engineer ____________________________________________________________
Address _____________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________
Email _______________________________________________________________________
Phone _______________________________________________________________________
Signature ___________________________________________________________________
Registration No. _____________________________________________________________
Seal of Engineer
S:\Planning\Subdivision Regulations\Regulations\Form F.doc
TOWN OF WEST SPRINGFIELD
PLANNING BOARD
26 Central Street, Suite 20
West Springfield, MA 01089-2764
Phone: (413) 263-3271 FAX: (413) 736-4144
e-mail: dmattoon@west-springfield.ma.us
Douglas P. Mattoon
Director of Planning and Development
FORM F
STATEMENT OF INTEREST
The petitioner(s) hereby certifies that he/she/they is/are the owner(s) of all
lands contained within the description of the application.
Name (print) _________________________________________________________________
Address _____________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________
Email _______________________________________________________________________
Phone _______________________________________________________________________
Signature ___________________________________________________________________
Name (print) _________________________________________________________________
Address _____________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________
Email _______________________________________________________________________
Phone _______________________________________________________________________
Signature ___________________________________________________________________
Name (print) _________________________________________________________________
Address _____________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________
Email _______________________________________________________________________
Phone _______________________________________________________________________
Signature ___________________________________________________________________
S:\Planning\Subdivision Regulations\Regulations\Form F.doc
Commonwealth of Massachusetts
County ss ______________
On this ________ day of _____________, 20 , before me, the undersigned notary public,
personally appeared __________________________ proved to me through satisfactory evidence
of identification, which was/were ______________________ to be the person(s) whose name(s)
is signed on the preceding document, and acknowledged to me that he/she/they signed it
voluntarily for its stated purpose.
My Commission Expires __________________
_________________________________
Notary Public
Stamp
S:\Planning\Subdivision Regulations\Regulations\Form G.doc
TOWN OF WEST SPRINGFIELD
PLANNING BOARD
26 Central Street, Ste. 22
West Springfield, MA 01089-2753
Phone: (413) 263-3271 FAX: (413) 736-4144
e-mail: dmattoon@west-springfield.ma.us
Douglas P. Mattoon
Director of Planning and Development
FORM G
INSPECTION OF SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS
At various stages during the installation of improvements related to the
construction of a subdivision or development of more than one building for
dwelling purposes per lot, inspections shall be conducted as required in the
Rules and Regulations governing the subdivision of land in the Town of West
Springfield. It is the responsibility of the owner/developer to engage a certified
engineer or land surveyor registered in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
who has been approved by the Planning Board to provide engineering
supervision during construction to ensure proper construction of
improvements and to certify that all improvements have been installed in
accordance with the Town's Rules and Regulations. This form shall be
submitted prior to the reduction, modification or release of any performance
guarantee related to the subdivision/development. The Department of Public
Works shall verify the completeness of all work.
Name of subdivision _________________________________________
Date ____________________________________________________
Inspection conducted from station ____________ to ____________
The undersigned hereby certifies that the required improvements listed on
sheet two of this form have been completed in conformity with the approved
subdivision/development plans and in compliance with the Rules and
Regulations governing subdivision of land in the Town of West Springfield.
Stamp
_____________________________
Signature
______________________________
Date
S:\Planning\Subdivision Regulations\Regulations\Form G.doc
IMPROVEMENT % COMPLETED
DATE
Clearing, Grubbing
and Excavation
Erosion control
Storm Drainage system
Subsurface pipes
Detention Basins & swales
Water system
Fire Hydrants
Sewer system
Underground Utilities
Electrical
Cable
Telephone
Gas
Backfill, fill and
rough grading
Gravel base
Bituminous concrete (base course)
Curbs/berms
Bituminous concrete (surface course)
Sidewalks
Street lights
Loam and seed treebelt
Street trees
Cud-de-sac landscaping
Road signs
Monuments & bounds
Other
Other
Other
Other
Other
Final Clean-up
Final Inspection
"As-Built" Plans
Roadway Acceptance Plans
S:\Planning\Subdivision Regulations\Regulations\Form H.doc
TOWN OF WEST SPRINGFIELD
PLANNING BOARD
26 Central Street, Ste. 20
West Springfield, MA 01089-2764
Phone: (413) 263-3271 FAX: (413) 736-4144
e-mail: dmattoon@west-springfield.ma.us
Douglas P. Mattoon
Director of Planning and Development
FORM H
COVENANT
KNOW ALL MEN by these presents that the undersigned has submitted an
application dated ___________________________________, to the West Springfield
Planning Board for approval of a definitive plan of a subdivision of land
entitled: ____________________________________________________________________,
plan by: ____________________________________________________________________,
dated: ______________________________________________________________________,
and owned by: ______________________________________________________________,
address: ____________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________,
land located: ________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________,
and showing ______________ proposed lots. The undersigned has requested the
Planning Board to approve such plan without requiring a monetary
performance bond.
NOW THEREFORE, THIS AGREEMENT WITNESSETH, that in consideration of
the West Springfield Planning Board, approving said plan without requiring a
performance bond, the undersigned hereby covenants and agrees with the
Town of West Springfield, a municipal corporation in Hampden County
Massachusetts as follows:
1. That the undersigned is the owner* in fee simple absolute of all the land
included in the subdivision and that there are no mortgages of record or
otherwise on any of the land, except for those described below, and that the
present holders of said mortgages have assented to this covenant prior to its
execution by the undersigned. Receipt of the recorded copies of the
Subordination Agreements of all said mortgages must be filed with this
Board before this covenant becomes effective.
S:\Planning\Subdivision Regulations\Regulations\Form H.doc
*If there is more than one owner, all must sign. "Applicant" may be an
owner or his agent or representative, or his assigns, but the owner of record
must sign the covenant..
2. That the undersigned will not sell or convey any lot in the subdivision or
erect or place any permanent building on any lot until the construction of
ways and installation of municipal services necessary to adequately serve
such lot has been completed in accordance with the covenants, conditions,
agreements, terms and provisions as specified in the following:
a. The Application for Approval of Definitive Plan (Form C) of the West
Springfield Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
b. The Subdivision Control Law and the Planning Board's Rules and
Regulations governing this subdivision.
c. The certificate of approval and the conditions of approval specified
therein, issued by the Planning Board, dated _____________________
____________________________________.
d. The definitive plan as approved and as qualified by the certificate of
approval.
e. Other document(s) specifying construction to be completed, namely:
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
However, a mortgagee who acquires title to the mortgaged premises by
foreclosure or otherwise and any succeeding owner of the mortgaged
premises or part thereof may sell or convey any lot, subject only to that
portion of this covenant which provides that no lot be sold or conveyed or
shall be built upon until ways and services have been provided to serve
such lot; and provided, further, that nothing herein shall be deemed to
prohibit a conveyance by a single deed, subject to such covenant, of either
the entire parcel of land shown on the subdivision plan or of all lots not
previously released by the planning board. A deed of any part of the
subdivision in violation hereof shall be voidable by the grantee prior to the
release of the covenant but not later than three years from the date of such
deed.
3. That this covenant shall be binding upon the executors, administrators,
devisees, heirs, successors and assigns of the undersigned and shall
constitute a covenant running with land included in the subdivision and
shall operate as restrictions upon the land.
S:\Planning\Subdivision Regulations\Regulations\Form H.doc
4. That particular lots within the subdivision shall be released from the
foregoing conditions upon the recording of a certificate of performance
executed by a majority of the Planning Board and enumerating the specific
lots to be released.
5. That nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit a conveyance by a single
deed subject to this covenant, of either the entire parcel of land shown on
the subdivision plan or of all lots not previously released by the Planning
Board.
6. That the undersigned agrees to record this covenant and all Subordination
Agreements with the Hampden County Registry of Deeds, forthwith, or to
pay the necessary recording fees to the said Planning Board in the event the
Planning Board shall record this covenant and/or Subordination
Agreements forthwith. Reference to this covenant shall be entered upon the
definitive subdivision plan as approved.
7. A deed of any part of the subdivision in violation of the covenant shall be
voidable by the grantee prior to release of the covenant; but not later than
three (3) years from the date of such deed, as provided in Section 81-U,
Chapter 41, M.G.L.
8. That this covenant and any necessary Subordination Agreement shall be
executed before endorsement of approval of the definitive plan by the
Planning Board and shall take effect upon the endorsement of approval. No
endorsement shall be made on any plan until a certified copy of the
recorded covenant and subordination agreement have been filed with the
Planning Board.
9. Upon final completion of the construction of ways and installation of
municipal services as specified herein, on or before two years from the date
of Planning Board endorsement, the Planning Board shall release this
covenant by an appropriate instrument, duly acknowledged. Failure to
complete construction and installation within the time specified herein or
such later date as may be specified by vote of the Planning Board with a
written concurrence of the applicant, shall result in automatic rescission of
the approval of the plan. Upon performance of this covenant with respect to
any lot, the Planning Board may release such lot from this covenant by an
appropriate instrument duly recorded.
10. Nothing herein shall prohibit the applicant from varying the method of
securing the construction of ways and installation of municipal services
from time to time or from securing by one, or in part by one and in part by
another of the methods described in M.G.L., Chapter 41, Section 81-U, as
long as such security is sufficient in the opinion of the Planning Board,
applying good business practices, to secure performance of the obligation of
the developer including but not limited to the construction and installation.
S:\Planning\Subdivision Regulations\Regulations\Form H.doc
For title to the property, see deed from ______________________________________,
to __________________________________________________________________________,
dated ________________________________________, recorded in Hampden County
Registry of Deeds, Book _______________, Page _______________, or registered in
____________________ Land Registration Office of Hampden County as
Document No _______________, and noted on Certificate of Title No ____________,
in Registration Book _______________, Page _______________.
_________________________________________, spouse of the undersigned applicant
hereby agrees that such interest as I/we, may have in the premises shall be
subject to the provisions of this covenant and insofar as is necessary releases
all rights of tenancy by the dower or homestead and other interests therein.
Executed as a sealed instrument this ________________________________ day of
______________________________, _______________
______________________________________________________________________________
Owner
______________________________________________________________________________
Spouse of Owner
______________________________________________________________________________
Mortgagee
______________________________________________________________________________
Planning Board of West Springfield
S:\Planning\Subdivision Regulations\Regulations\Form H.doc
PLANNING BOARD
Hampden County, ss __________________________, ______________
On this ________ day of _____________, ________, before me, the undersigned notary public,
personally appeared __________________________ proved to me through satisfactory evidence
of identification, which was/were ______________________ to be the person(s) whose name(s)
is signed on the preceding document, and acknowledged to me that he/she/they signed it
voluntarily for its stated purpose.
My Commission Expires ___________________
_________________________________
Notary Public
Stamp
PROPERTY OWNER
_________________________, ss __________________________, ______________
On this ________ day of _____________, _____, before me, the undersigned notary public,
personally appeared __________________________ proved to me through satisfactory evidence
of identification, which was/were ______________________ to be the person(s) whose name(s)
is signed on the preceding document, and acknowledged to me that he/she/they signed it
voluntarily for its stated purpose.
My Commission Expires _________________
_________________________________
Notary Public
Stamp
S:\Planning\Subdivision Regulations\Regulations\Form H.doc
MORTGAGEE
_________________________, ss __________________________, ______________
On this ________ day of _____________, ______, before me, the undersigned notary public,
personally appeared __________________________ proved to me through satisfactory evidence
of identification, which was/were ______________________ to be the person(s) whose name(s)
is signed on the preceding document, and acknowledged to me that he/she/they signed it
voluntarily for its stated purpose.
My Commission Expires ____________________
_________________________________
Notary Public
Stamp
S:\Planning\Subdivision Regulations\Regulations\Form I.doc
TOWN OF WEST SPRINGFIELD
PLANNING BOARD
26 Central Street, Ste. 22
West Springfield, MA 01089-2753
Phone: (413) 263-3271 FAX: (413) 736-4144
e-mail: dmattoon@west-springfield.ma.us
Douglas P. Mattoon
Director of Planning and Development
FORM I
SUBORDINATION AGREEMENT
AGREEMENT made this ______________ day of _____________________, __________
between ______________________________ of ___________________________________,
Massachusetts (hereinafter referred to as "Developer"), and ___________________
Bank of ___________________________, Massachusetts (hereinafter referred to as
"Lender").
The parties hereto recite and declare that:
1. Lender is the owner and holder of a certain note and mortgage made by the
Developer to Lender, dated _________________________________, ____________,
and recorded in the Hampden County Registry of Deeds, Book ____________,
Page ____________, and covering the following described premises:
SEE SCHEDULE A ATTACHED HERETO
2. The Town of West Springfield, acting through its Planning Board (Town), is
about to endorse a subdivision plan (Plan) for property described in
Schedule A owned by the Developer and secured by said mortgage on and
covering the above-described premises.
3. To induce the Town to endorse said plan it is necessary that the mortgage
held by Lender be subordinated to the plan of the subdivision about to be
endorsed by the Town as above set forth.
For the reasons set forth above, and in consideration of the mutual covenants
and promises of the parties hereto, Developer and Lender covenant and agree
as follows:
S:\Planning\Subdivision Regulations\Regulations\Form I.doc
1. Subordination. For the purpose of inducing the Town to endorse the
aforesaid plan and acknowledging that the Town will endorse said plan only
in reliance upon the promises of the Lender contained herein, Lender hereby
covenants, consents, and agrees with the Town that the aforesaid mortgage
and note held by Lender is and shall continue to be subject and subordinate
in lien to the plan about to be endorsed by the Town as aforesaid.
2. Binding Effect. This agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the
benefit of the respective successors and assigns of the parties hereto.
WITNESS our hands and seals this ______________________________ day of
_________________________________, ________________.
DEVELOPER: _______________________________
By: _________________________________________
Its
__________________________, ss. _______________________, ___________
Then personally appeared before me the above named ________________________
_________________________________ and acknowledged the foregoing instrument
to be _______________________ free act and deed.
____________________________________
Notary Public
My Commission Expires:
____________________________________
S:\Planning\Subdivision Regulations\Regulations\Form I.doc
LENDER: ___________________________________
By: _________________________________________
Its
__________________________, ss. _______________________, ___________
On this __________________ day of _____________________, ___________, personally
appeared before me the above named ___________________________________ , who
being by me duly sworn, did say that ______ is the __________________________ of
_____________________________________________; that said instrument was signed
and sealed on behalf of _____________________________________________; and
______ acknowledged said instrument to be the free act of and deed of
_____________________________________________________________.
____________________________________
Notary Public
My Commission Expires:
____________________________________






APPENDIX C
APPLICATION FEES
Approval Not Required Plan - Form A $50 + $20 / lot for plans containing more than 3 lots
Preliminary Subdivision Plan - Form B $100 + $20 / lot
Definitive Subdivision Plan - Form C $250 + $30 / lot with approval of preliminary plan
$500 + $50 / lot without approval of preliminary plan
Amended Subdivision Plan - Form CC $100 / affected lot
More Than One Building Plan - Form D $500 + $50 / building
Inspection Charges $5 per lineal foot of roadway
$250 per detention / retention / subsurface leaching basin
Public hearing notice $65 (check made payable to the West Springfield Record)
All checks except that for the Public Hearing Notice are to be made payable to the Town of West Springfield.
All fees must be submitted in full at the time of application in order for an application to be deemed complete.
S:\Planning\Subdivision Regulations\Regulations\Form DIS.doc
TOWN OF WEST SPRINGFIELD
PLANNING BOARD
26 Central Street, Ste. 22
West Springfield, MA 01089-2753
Phone: (413) 263-3271 FAX: (413) 736-4144
e-mail: dmattoon@west-springfield.ma.us
Douglas P. Mattoon
Director of Planning and Development
FORM DIS
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT STATEMENT
A Development Impact Statement (DIS) is a documented, written analysis of a
proposed development that provides the Planning Board and municipal officials
with information necessary for development review.
It is the applicant's responsibility to prepare and document the DIS in
sufficient detail to permit an adequate evaluation by the Planning Board;
however, the Board may request additional data. The applicant shall respond
to all sections and subsections of the DIS form in full except when an
exemption is granted by the Planning Board (in cases of a Draft DIS, all
questions need only be answered in general fashion). The applicant is urged to
contact the Planning Department in the process of completing a Development
Impact Statement.
Name of project: _____________________________________________________________
Type of project: ______________________________________________________________
Location: ____________________________________________________________________
Applicant ____________________________________________________________________
Address _____________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________
Phone _______________________________________________________________________
Owner ______________________________________________________________________
Address _____________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________
Phone _______________________________________________________________________
S:\Planning\Subdivision Regulations\Regulations\Form DIS.doc
Engineer ____________________________________________________________________
Address _____________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________
Phone _______________________________________________________________________
Surveyor ____________________________________________________________________
Address _____________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________
Phone ______________________________________________________________________
Zoning district(s): ____________________________________________________________
I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION
A. Number of Residential Units:
Total ______ Single Family ______ Two-Family ______ Multi-family ______
Number of Bedrooms Per Unit: _______________
Approximate price/unit: _______________
B. Number of principal, non-residential structures: _______________
Use of structures: ______________________________________________
Floor area of retail/office space: _______________
Number of employees: _______________
Hours of operation: ________________
II. CIRCULATION SYSTEMS
A. Street Design – Explain how the street layout enhances public safety,
minimizes impacts on congestion and provides convenient interconnection
with surrounding neighborhoods.
B. Traffic volume - Project the number of motor vehicles to enter or depart the
site per average day and peak hour.
S:\Planning\Subdivision Regulations\Regulations\Form DIS.doc
C. Pedestrian and bicycle circulation - Discuss provisions for pedestrian and
bicycle pathways and linkage to existing pedestrian and bicycle facilities.
D. Access to schools and playgrounds - Discuss how non-vehicular access will
be provided to existing schools, playgrounds and recreational facilities.
III. SUPPORT SYSTEMS
A. Water Distribution
1. Public - Discuss the project's water distribution system, including
projected demand, the ability to serve all lots, pressure and flow
analysis for fire protection, and any special problems such as check
valves or booster pumps that must be considered.
2. Private - Discuss the types of wells proposed for the project, means for
providing potable water, and any special problems that might arise.
B. Sewage Disposal
1. Public - Discuss the project's sewage disposal system, including
projected flow, adequacy of existing municipal system in the area of
the project, size of pumping stations including auxiliary power, and
any special problems such as check valves, etc. which must be
considered.
2. Private - Discuss the type of system, level of treatment, suitability of
soils, potential environmental impacts, and results of percolation tests.
C. Storm Water Management - Discuss the storm drainage system including
the projected flow from a 25, 50 and 100-year storm, name of the receptor
area, and any flow constrictions between the site and the receptor area. A
detailed storm water management plan must be submitted utilizing Best
Management Practices in order to comply with the implementation of
NPDES Phase II implementation.
D. Refuse Disposal - Discuss the locations and type of facilities, hazardous
materials requiring special precautions, screening and method of disposal.
E. Lighting - For non-residential development discuss the location and size of
lights, and in the case of non-residential development, methods used to
screen adjoining properties from glare.
F. Fire Protection - For non-residential development discuss the type and
capacity of fuel storage facilities, location of storage areas for hazardous
S:\Planning\Subdivision Regulations\Regulations\Form DIS.doc
substances, special requirements, location of existing and proposed
hydrants, and distance to fire station.
G. Recreation
l. Public - Indicate the distance to and type of public facilities.
2. Private - Discuss the type of private recreation facilities to be provided
within the development.
H. Schools - Project the student population of the project for the nursery,
elementary, Middle School and Senior High School levels and indicate the
distance, capacity, and present enrollment of the nearest elementary and
secondary schools.
IV. NATURAL CONDITIONS - Describe the following natural conditions and
design considerations implemented to reduce disturbance/potential impacts:
A. Topography - Indicate datum, source, date, and existing slopes greater than
25%.
B. Soils – Indicate soil types and extent of land which has been/will be filled.
C. Mineral Resources - Indicate extent and economic importance of resource,
extent and means of proposed extraction, rehabilitation measures.
D. Surficial geology - Indicate depth to bedrock and any rock outcrops.
E. Flood prone areas - Indicate 10, 100 and 500-year floodplains and methods
implemented to prohibit alteration of 10 and 100-year floodplain.
F. Depth to water table - Indicate depth to mean high water table.
G. Vegetative cover - Describe existing vegetative cover and methods of
preservation.
H. Aquifer recharge areas - Indicate all aquifer recharge areas and methods to
protect said resources.
I. Unique wildlife habitats - Indicate all areas and methods of preservation.
J. Wetlands - Indicate all wetlands subject to state and federal jurisdiction and
methods of preservation.
K. Unique flora - Indicate unique flora and methods of preservation.
S:\Planning\Subdivision Regulations\Regulations\Form DIS.doc
L. Watercourses - Indicate all watercourses and methods of protection.
V. ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT
A. Measures taken to prevent surface water contamination during
construction
B. Measures taken to prevent ground water contamination during
construction
C. Measures taken to maximize ground water recharge post-construction
E. Measures taken to prevent erosion and sedimentation during construction
F. Measures taken to maintain slope stability during construction
G. Measures taken to reduce noise levels pre- and post-construction
H. Measures taken to preserve significant views
I. Measures taken in project design to conserve energy
J. Measures taken to preserve wildlife habitats
K. Measures taken to ensure compatibility with surrounding land uses
L. Measures taken to reduce cut and fill activity
VI. PLANS - Describe how the project relates to the following guidelines:
A. Master Plan
B. Open Space and Recreation Plan
C. Regional plans prepared by the Pioneer Valley Planning Commission
D. Other municipal plans
VII. PHASING - If the development of the site will take place over more than
one year, supply a schedule showing how the development will be phased. A
flow chart is helpful. This timetable shall include the following elements:
S:\Planning\Subdivision Regulations\Regulations\Form DIS.doc
A. Stripping and/or clearing of site
B. Installation of water, sewer, storm water, and other utilities
C. Rough grading and construction
D. Construction of grade stabilization and sedimentation control structures
E. Final grading and vegetative establishment
F. Landscaping
G. The construction of any public improvements shall be specified explaining
how these improvements are to be integrated with the development.
H. The number of housing units and the square footage of residential and
nonresidential uses to be constructed each year and their estimated value
shall be specified.
West Springfield CADD Plan Submission Guidelines
Introduction
The Town of West Springfield maintains all maps in a digital format within a Geographic
Information System (GIS). A considerable amount of staff time is devoted to keeping these maps
up to date, while maintaining the integrity of the map information. Although a majority of
engineers currently use Computer-Assisted Design and Drafting (CADD) software, subdivision
plans have traditionally been submitted in paper format. A CADD-based submission standard is
being proposed in an effort to minimize the potential for degradation of map accuracy, as well as
minimizing the amount of effort that is necessary in order to convert subdivision plans into a GIS
format.
General Guidelines
The submission of subdivision plans in a CADD format is not mandatory. If plans are not
submitted in a CADD format, the existing paper-based subdivision plan specifications must be
adhered to & a processing fee will be charged. This fee will be waived whenever a plan is
submitted in the CADD format specified within these guidelines. It is the discretion of the Town
Planner to reject a CADD-based plan if it is found that the format does not fall within these
guidelines.
File Format, Delivery Medium, and Content
File Format
CADD files must be delivered as ASCII version of AutoCAD drawing exchange files (.DXF).
This file format has become a de-facto standard for exchanging CADD files between CADD
software and it can be imported by most GIS software. The ASCII version of DXF is a larger
file size. However, if there are problems with the file, it can be examined in a text editor,
perhaps making it possible to fix the problem.
It is acceptable for the DXF file(s) to be compressed into the Zip (.ZIP) format, which is a
de-facto standard for exchanging compressed data.
Delivery Medium and Documentation
Files must be delivered on windows or MS-DOS formatted 3.5” diskette or CD-ROM.
Submissions will also be accepted in ZIP format as attachments sent to
rwerbiskis@west-springfield.ma.us
The delivery medium or e-mail message must be labeled/titled with project identifying
information (e.g., street name, address, municipal project number, subdivision name, etc)
and the format and version of the computer operating system on which the media was
written. Accompanying documentation in a text (.TXT) file must include:
• Name & Release Number of the CADD software on which the DXF file was created.
• Format and version of the computer operating system on which the file was created.
• The same project identifying information as on the delivery media.
• A list of the file names on the delivery with a description of what is in each file.
Certification that the delivery media is free of known computer viruses, the name of the
virus scanning software and the date of its most recent update, and the date on which the
virus scan was performed.
File Content
The following practices must be followed in creating the CADD file:
• CADD file model space must be the source of the DXF file.
• Linear features must be continuous
• Linear features must not be broken by text
• When creating features that will be represented as polygons in a GIS, CADD users must
snap end points of lines together and must make sure polygon areas for the same feature
type (e.g., property boundaries) do not overlap.
• Features destined for use in a GIS must be separated onto layers separate from features
that will not be used in the GIS. In particular, details, insets, and title block information
should be isolated on their own layers.
• Features must be organized into layers, with one layer for each separate linear and point
feature type in each of the following categories of map features: water system, sanitary
sewer system, storm drainage collection system, topographic, planimetric.
The CADD file used to produce the DXF file for import into West Springfield's GIS should
conform to the following practices, and corresponding ones in Microstation (taken partly from
A/E/C CADDD Standard, p. 4 – see references):
Avoid using groups
Avoid multiline line types
Do not explode bocks representing point features before exporting to .DXF
Do not using hatching objects, splines, ellipses
Do not use external drawing references
Do not use dimension objects
Do not use layer 0 for features destined for a GIS database
Do not rotate the UCS (User Coordinate System)
Do not change the origin
Do not use MTEXT (Multi-line Text) - Use DTEXT (Dimensional Text)
Do not use dimensions unless they are exploded into simple text (DTEXT)
Do not use hatches
Do not use leaders (The line leading from a feature being labeled to the label)
File Naming and Symbolization
Each feature in the CADD .DXF file submitted will be named and symbolized as described
in the CADD Standard Map Features table.
Spatial Reference
The Town of West Springfield maintains a set of Tax Maps, which are available free of charge
online in the Adobe Acrobat™ format. In addition to a regular set of tax maps, a special set with
property boundary reference numbers is also available. Each property boundary intersection in
town has a unique reference number. All plans submitted in accordance with the subdivision
regulations, whether paper or CADD format, must include at least three of these points, along with
the reference number as text annotation. If three of these points do not fall within the map area, it
is acceptable to place points with a tie (distance & bearing reference) to the location of a boundary
point.
Tax Maps and Property Boundary Reference Tax Maps are available online at the following
location: www.west-springfield.ma.us/gis/maps.htm
REFERENCES
“A/E/C CADDD Standard” (release 1.8), published by U.S. Army Engineer Research and
Development Center Waterways Experiment Station as Technical Report CADDD-99-1, October
1999. Available at http://tsc.wes.army.mil/Products/standards/aec/intro.asp
“Integrating CADD Data with Geographic Information Systems using AutoCAD and Arc/Info
Software”, by Pul T. Cedfeldt and Mark A. Scott, published by U.S. Army Engineer Research
and Development Center Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory, March 2000.
Available from
http://www.crrel.usace.army.mil/techpub/CRREL_Reports/html_files/Cat_S.html
“Draft MassGIS Standard for CADD Files Submitted for GIS Database Update”
(version 2.0), by Neil MacGaffey, June 2001.
CADD Standard Map Features
NOTE: Because Microstation-based CADD systems cannot use alpha-numeric layer names, DXF files created in
Microstation should use the suggested MICROSTATION NUMBERs
LAYER CATEGORY/NAME DESCRIPTION MICROSTATION NUMBER SYMBOL TYPE
CADASTRAL FEATURES
C-PROP Property Boundary 1 Line
C-EASE Easement 2 Line
C-ROW Right-of-Way Boundary 3 Line
C-DIM Property Dimension 4 Text
C-REF Property Corner Reference Point 5 Point/block
C-REF-TXT Property Corner Reference Number 6 Text
PLANIMETRIC FEATURES
PB-EOP Edge of Pavement 7 Line
P-SWALK Edge of Sidewalk 8 Line
P-BLDG Building Outlines 9 Line
P-WATER Stream & Pond Edges 10 Line
P-WET Wetland Boundaries 11 Line
P-TOPO Topographic Contours - Interval 12 Line
P-TOPO-IDX Topographic Contours - Index 13 Line
P-TOPO-TXT Elevation Value 14 Text
P-SPOT Spot Elevations 15 Point/block
P-WALL Retaining Walls 16 Line
P-RAIL Rail Road Line 17 Line
P-FENCE Fence Line 18 Line
P-SHRUB Shrub or Shrubbery 19 Point/block
P-CL Road Centerline 20 Line
P-FOREST Forested Area 21 Line
P-TREE Tree (>= 6" diam) 22 Point/block
WATER UTILITY
W-MAINS Water Mains 23 Line
W-SERVICE Water Services 24 Line
W-VALVE Water Valves 25 Point/block
W-REDUCER Water Reducer 26 Point/block
W-WELL Well 27 Point/block
W-MPIT Meter Pit 28 Point/block
W-STORE Water Storage Unit 29 Point/block
W-PUMP Water Pump Station 30 Point/block
SEWER UTILITY
S-MAINS Sewer Mains 31 Line
S-UNDER Sewer Under Drains 32
S-SERVICE Service Lines 33 Line
S-MANHOLE Manholes 34 Point/block
S-PUMP Pump Station 35 Point/block
S-WET Wet Well 36 Point/block
STORM DRAIN UTILITY
D_MAIN Mains 37 line
D-MANHOLE Manholes 38 Point/block
D-CB Catch Basin 39 Point/block
D-CULVERT Culvert 40 Point/block