Part I: Administrative Legislation 

Chapter 1 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 

1:1 

ARTICLE I 
Construction 
[Adopted 3-11-1980 by Ord. No. 310 as Ch. 1, Arts. 1 and 3 of the
1980 Code] 

§ 1-1. How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shallconstitute and be designated as the "Code of the Town of Bel Air" and maybe so cited. The Code may also be cited as "Bel Air Town Code." 
§ 1-2. Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following rulesshall be observed unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Commissioners: 
A. 	Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall besufficient. 
B. 	Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shallbe computed by excluding the first and including the last day, and if thelast day is Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. 
C. 	County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall refer to HarfordCounty, Maryland. 
D. 	Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
E. 	Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or morepersons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
F. 	Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall meanand include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or a servant, agent oremployee. 
G. 	May. The word "may" is permissive. 
H. 	Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
I. 	Number. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the pluralincludes the singular number. 
J. 	Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may besubstituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
1:3 

K. 	Owner. The word "owner" applied to a building or land shall include anypart owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
L. 	Person. The word "person" shall include a corporation, company,partnership, association or society as well as a natural person. 
M. 	Personal property. Personal property includes money, goods, chattels,things in action and evidences of debt. 
N. 	Preceding; following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
O. 	Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
P. Real property. Real property shall include lands, tenements and hereditament. 
Q. 	Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property intended for the use of pedestrians. 
R. 	Signature or subscription. Signature or subscription includes a markwhen the person cannot write, his name being near it and witnessed by a person who writes his own name as a witness. 
S. 	State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Maryland. 
T. 	Street. The word "street" shall include any public ways, roads, highways, avenues, alleys and lanes within the Town. 
U. 	Tenant; occupant. The words "tenant" and "occupant" applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the whole or apart of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
V. 	Time. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
W. 	Town. The words "the Town" or "this Town" shall mean the Town of Bel Air, in the County of Harford and State of Maryland, except as otherwise provided. 
X. 	Writing. The word "writing" shall include printing. 
Y. 	Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
§ 1-3. Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface typeare intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of such sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be 
1:4 

deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amendedor reenacted. 
§ 1-4. Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before orat the time the ordinance repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal tookeffect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of therepeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
§ 1-5. Provisions deemed continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same insubstance as ordinances existing at the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.1 
§ 1-6. Coat of Arms and Seal. 
A. 	The layout and design attached to this section shall be the Coat of Arms and Seal for the Town and the same as and when reproduced shallbe reproduced in the same form and in the same colors shown on theattached layout and design.2 
B. 	The Coat of Arms and Seal may be used for stamping official papersof the Town, as an insignia on motor vehicles of the Town and onuniforms worn by personnel of the Town and for other similar municipal purposes. 
§ 1-7. Applicability of county legislation. 
Except as provided in § 2B(b) of Article 23A of the Annotated Code of Maryland, any legislation enacted by Harford County, Maryland, and relating to a subject with respect to which the Town of Bel Air has a grant oflegislative authority provided either by Public General Law or by its Charter shall not apply in the Town of Bel Air unless the Town of Bel Air by ordinanceduly enacted and ordained specifically makes such legislation of HarfordCounty applicable within the corporate boundaries of the Town of Bel Air, and the Town of Bel Air hereby exempts itself generally from all countylegislation covered by any such grants of authority. This exemption shallapply to all legislation of Harford County, Maryland, relating to a subject with respect to which the Town of Bel Air has a grant of legislative authorityprovided either by Public General Law or by its Charter and having eitherprospective or retrospective applicability. 
1. 
Editor's Note: Original § 1-106, General Penalty: Misdemeanors and Municipal Infractions,which immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.1, General Provisions, Art. III). See now Art. II, Penalties, of this Code. 

2. 
Editor's Note: The layout and design are on file at the office of the Town Clerk. 


1:5 
ARTICLE II 
Enforcement 
[Adopted 3-11-1980 by Ord. No. 310 as Ch. 14, Art. 7 of the 1980
Code] 


§ 1-8. General penalty for misdemeanors.3 
Unless otherwise provided herein, any person found guilty of violating anyprovision of this Code, or violating an ordinance or resolution of the Town ofBel Air, which violation is a misdemeanor as defined herein, shall be subject to a penalty adopted by resolution of the Board of Town Commissionersafter a public hearing. Each day such violation continues shall constitute aseparate offense. 
§ 1-9. General penalty for municipal infractions.4 
Any person found guilty of violating a provision of this Code, which violationis a municipal infraction as declared herein, shall be subject to a fine adopted by resolution of the Board of Town Commissioners after a publichearing. The fine shall be paid by the offender to the Town within 20calendar days of receipt of a citation. Each day a violation continues shall, unless otherwise provided in this Code, constitute a separate or repeatoffense. 
§ 1-10. Infraction procedure. 
A. 	Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have themeanings indicated: 
MISDEMEANOR — 
(1) 	
A criminal offense, not amounting to a felony, arising from a violation of a law of the state, which violation is defined as a misdemeanor; or 

(2) 	
Unless otherwise specified, a violation of any law of this Town. Allviolations of this Code shall be treated as misdemeanors unless specifically declared to be municipal infractions. 


MUNICIPAL INFRACTION — Any violation of this Code, which violationhas been specifically declared to be a municipal infraction. For purposes of this Code, a municipal infraction is a civil offense. 
B. 	Declaration of infractions; fine. The Board of Town Commissioners shall set forth specifically the ordinances and resolutions the violationof which shall be classified as a municipal infraction and for each such municipal infraction shall set forth a specific fine. The fine set 
3. 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 

4. 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 


1:7 
C. 

D. 
E. 
F. 
forth for a municipal infraction shall never exceed the maximum fineauthorized by state law for each single violation. The fine shall be expressed as a discrete and exact amount rather than being expressedin terms of a maximum or minimum amount. The authority to declaremunicipal infractions and set fines shall not be delegated by the Board of Town Commissioners to any other administrative or legislative body.

[Amended 11-17-2008 by Ord. No. 715-08] 
Issuance of citation. Those officials authorized by the Board of Town Commissioners to enforce this Code shall deliver a citation to any person alleged to be committing a municipal infraction under thisCode. The citation shall conform to the standard State of Maryland Uniform Criminal/Civil Citation Form. A copy of the citation shall beretained by the Town and shall bear the certification of the enforcingofficial attesting to the truth of the matters set forth in the citation. The citation shall contain at a minimum the following information:

[Amended 11-17-2008 by Ord. No. 715-08] 
(1) 	
Name and address of the person charged and in the case of a parking citation the license number of the vehicle in violation; 

(2) 	
The nature of the municipal infraction; 

(3) 	
The time and location the municipal infraction is alleged to have occurred; 

(4) 	
The amount of the municipal infraction fine assessed; 

(5) 	
The manner, location, and time in which the fine may be paid to the Town; 

(6) 	
The right of the accused to stand trial for the infraction; and 

(7) 	
The effect of failure by the accused to pay the assessed fine or to file a demand for trial within the prescribed time shown on thecitation. 


Payment of fine. The fine for a municipal infraction shall be as set by the Board of Town Commissioners. The fine is payable by the recipient of acitation to the Town of Bel Air within the 20 calendar days of receipt of the citation. [Amended 11-17-2008 by Ord. No. 715-08] 
No formal hearing by Town. The Town shall not conduct any formalhearing for those persons in receipt of a citation for a municipal infraction. Any offender so cited may pay the fine as indicated in thecitation or elect to stand trial for the offense. This provision shall notprevent an offender from requesting, either personally or through an attorney, additional information concerning the municipal infraction. 
Election to stand trial. A person receiving the citation for a municipalinfraction may elect to stand trial for the offense by notifying the Town in writing of his intention to stand trial. The notice shall be given atleast five days prior to the date of payment as set forth in the citation. 
1:8 

G. 
H. 
I. 
J. 
Upon receipt of the notice of intention to stand trial, the Town shallforward to the District Court of Maryland in Harford County a copy of the notice from the person who received the citation indicating hisintention to stand trial. Upon receipt of the citation, the District Courtshall schedule the case for trial and notify the defendant of the trial date. All fines, penalties, or forfeitures collected by the District Courtfor violations of municipal infractions shall be remitted to the generalfund of the Town. 
Failure to pay fine. If a person receiving a citation for a municipalinfraction fails to pay the fine for the municipal infraction by the dateof payment set forth on the citation and fails to file a notice of his intention to stand trial for the offense the person is liable for theassessed fine. The Town may double the fine set forth by the Boardof Town Commissioners if the Board so specifies; in no event may a fine which is doubled exceed the maximum fine authorized by statelaw. The Town of Bel Air may request adjudication of the case throughthe District Court of Maryland, including the filing of a demand for judgment on affidavit. The District Court shall promptly schedule thecase for trial and summon the defendant to appear. The defendant'sfailure to respond to such summons shall result in the entry of judgment against the defendant in favor the Town of Bel Air in the amount then due if a proper demand for judgment on affidavit has been filed.

[Amended 11-17-2008 by Ord. No. 715-08] 
Action by District Court. If the District Court of Maryland shall find anyperson to have committed a municipal infraction: 
(1) 	
The person shall be required to pay the fine determined by the District Court, not to exceed the limit set forth under state law; 

(2) 	
The person shall be liable for costs of the proceeding in the DistrictCourt; and 

(3) 	
The Court may permit the Town of Bel Air to abate any such condition at the person's expense. 


Effect of infraction. Adjudication of a municipal infraction as defined in § 3(b)(1) of Article 23A of the Annotated Code of Maryland is not acriminal conviction for any purpose nor does it impose any of the civildisabilities ordinarily imposed by a criminal conviction. 
General provisions. In any proceeding for a municipal infraction: 
(1) 	
It shall be the burden of the state to prove the guilt of thedefendant to the same extent as is required by law in the trial of criminal causes, and in any such proceeding the Court shall applythe evidentiary standards as prescribed by law or rule for the trialof criminal causes. 

(2) 
The Court shall ensure that the defendant has received a copy ofthe charges against him and that he understands those charges. In 


1:9 

such proceedings, the defendant shall be entitled to cross-examineall witnesses who appear against him, to produce evidence or witnesses in his own behalf, or to testify in his own behalf, if heelects to do so. 
(3) 	
A defendant shall be entitled to be represented by counsel of his own selection and at his own expense. 

(4) 	
A defendant may enter a plea of guilty or not guilty, and the verdictof the Court in such case shall be guilty of a municipal infraction or not guilty of a municipal infraction, or the Court may, beforerendering judgment, place the defendant on probation, in the samemanner and to the same extent as is permitted by law in the trial of a criminal case. 


K. 	Court costs. The Court costs in a municipal infraction case in whichcosts are imposed are $5. A defendant shall not be liable for payment to the criminal injury compensation fund. 
L. 	Suspension of fine; contempt of Court. When a defendant has beenfound guilty of a municipal infraction and a fine has been imposed by the Court, the Court may, at its discretion, direct that the paymentof said fine be suspended or deferred under such conditions as theCourt may establish. Whenever any defendant has been found guilty of a municipal infraction and willfully fails to pay the fine imposed bythe Court, that willful failure may be treated as a criminal contemptof Court for which the defendant may be punished by the Court as is provided by law in such cases. 
M. 	Court proceedings and rights of accused. In any proceeding concerninga municipal infraction, it shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth in Article 23A, § 3(b) of the Annotated Code ofMaryland and the accused shall have those rights as therein set forth. 
1:10 

ARTICLE III 
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 11-17-2008 by Ord. No. 715-08] 


§ 1-11. Adoption of Code. 
The ordinances of the Town of Bel Air of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Board of Town Commissioners of Bel Air, as revised, codifiedand consolidated into chapters and sections by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 450, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Townof Bel Air," hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code." 
§ 1-12. Code supersedes prior ordinances. 
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, exceptsuch ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or continued in force. 
§ 1-13. Continuation of existing provisions. 
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as those of the ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of theCode by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinancesand not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the prior ordinances. 
§ 1-14. Copy of Code on file. 
A copy of the Code has been filed in the office of the Director of Administration and shall remain there for use and examination by the publicuntil final action is taken on this ordinance, and if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Director of Administration of the Town of Bel Air by impressing thereon the Seal of the Town, andsuch certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Director ofAdministration of the Town, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while the Code is in effect. 
§ 1-15. Amendments to Code. 
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the Board ofTown Commissioners to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to beincorporated into such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Town of Bel Air" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to theCode shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be inserted in the Code as amendments and supplements thereto. 
1:11 

§ 1-16. Publication and filing. 
The Director of Administration of the Town of Bel Air, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published, in the manner required, a notice of the passage ofthis ordinance in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town. Sufficientcopies of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Director of Administration for inspection by the public at all times during regular officehours. Publication of such notice, coupled with availability of copies of theCode for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes. 
§ 1-17. Code to be kept up-to-date. 
It shall be the duty of the Director of Administration, or someone authorized and directed by the Director of Administration, to keep up-to-date thecertified copy of the Code required to be filed in the Director's office forthe use of the public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of this codification which shall be adoptedspecifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be includedtherein by reference until such changes or new ordinances are included as supplements to said Code. 
§ 1-18. Sale of Code. 
Copies of the Code may be purchased from the Director of Administration upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Board of TownCommissioners, which may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures forthe periodic supplementation thereof. 
§ 1-19. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additionsor deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Town ofBel Air to be misrepresented thereby. Any violation of this section shall bepunishable as a municipal infraction. 
§ 1-20. Severability of Code provisions. 
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independentsection or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not bedeemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections orparts thereof. If any provision of this Code or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of this Code and theapplication of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not beaffected thereby. 
1:12 

§ 1-21. Severability of ordinance provisions. 
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for anycause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of anyother sections or parts thereof. 
§ 1-22. Repealer. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent natureadopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of thisordinance, except as hereinafter provided. 
§ 1-23. Legislation saved from repeal. 
The adoption of this Code and repeal of ordinances provided for in § 1-22of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights andobligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal: 
A. 	Any ordinance adopted subsequent to October 6, 2008. 
B. 	Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under anylegislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right orliability. 
C. 	Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this ordinance in violation of any legislative provisions or any penalty,punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom. 
D. 	Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinancebrought pursuant to any legislative provision. 
E. 	Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted or conferred. 
F. 	Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof. 
G. 	Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing theissuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence ofthe Town's indebtedness. 
H. 	Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of propertyor any lawful contract or obligation. 
I. 	The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges. 
1:13 

J. 	Ordinances providing for local improvements or assessing taxes or special assessments therefor. 
K. 	The annexation or dedication of property or approval of preliminary orfinal subdivision plats. 
L. 	Ordinances establishing the amount and manner of payment of salaries or compensation of officers and employees, establishing workdays andworking hours of certain employees and providing for holidays andvacations for employees and keeping of employment records. 
M. 	Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pensionfund for municipal employees. 
N. 	All resolutions, including Charter resolutions. 
O. 	The Town Development Regulations (Zoning, Subdivision and Signs)and all amendments thereto and all ordinances adopting or amending azoning map or otherwise rezoning property. 
§ 1-24. Changes in previously adopted legislation. 
A. 	In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision aspart of the Code, certain grammatical changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Board of Town Commissioners that all such changes be adopted aspart of the Code as if the ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to read as such. 
B. 	The following changes are made throughout the Code: 
(1) 	
References to the "Board of Commissioners" are amended to read "Board of Town Commissioners." 

(2) 	
References to the "Department of Planning" and "Director of Planning" are amended to read "Department of Planning and Community Development" and "Director of Planning and Community Development," respectively. 

(3) 	
References to the "Superintendent of Public Works" are amended to read "Director of Public Works." 


C. 	The amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedules A and B,5 attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to 
5. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-24C, the chapters, parts and sections which wereadded, amended, adopted or deleted by Schedule A of this ordinance are indicatedthroughout the Code by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III.During routine supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletionswill be replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 11-17-2008 by Ord.No. 715-08." The chapters, parts and sections which were added, amended, adopted ordeleted by Schedule B of this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code with thefollowing history: "Amended (added, deleted) 11-17-2008 by Ord. No. 715-08." SchedulesA and B, which contain complete descriptions of all changes, are on file in the Townoffices. 
1:14 
become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapterand section number references are to the ordinances as they have been renumbered and appear in the Code.) 
§ 1-25. Effective date. 
All provisions of this ordinance and the Code shall be in full force and effect on and after January 6, 2009. 
1:15 

Chapter 10 
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Board of Ethics — See Ch. 43. Historic Preservation Commission — See Ch. 
246. 
1:16 

ARTICLE I 
Planning Commission
[Amended 2-4-2008 by Ord. No. 704-08] 



§ 10-1. Establishment; powers and duties.6 
Pursuant to the provisions of § 3.01 et seq. of Article 66B of the Annotated Code of Maryland there is hereby established a Town Planning Commissionwhich shall have all the powers and duties as set forth in Article 66B, § 3.01et seq., as amended from time to time. 
§ 10-2. Incorporation of statutory provisions. 
With respect to Planning Commission generally, Article 66B, § 3.01 et seq.,as amended from time to time, are hereby incorporated by reference and made a part hereof. 
§ 10-3. Membership; residency requirement; minimum numberrequired for hearings. 
The Planning Commission shall consist of five members and one alternatemember who may be empowered to sit on the Commission in the absence ofany member of the Commission. When the alternate is absent, the Board of Town Commissioners may designate a temporary alternate. Each memberand the alternate shall be a resident of the Town and shall have maintained such residency for a minimum of one year. At no time shall the Planning Commission hear cases with fewer than three members present. 
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:17 
ARTICLE II 

Economic and Community Development Commission 
§ 10-4. Establishment; purpose.7 
The Town of Bel Air hereby establishes an Economic and Community Development Commission for the purpose of acting as the Town's Community Development Agency in carrying out community developmentprojects. "Community development project" means any undertaking or project, or portion thereof, including lands, buildings and improvements,real, mixed and personal properties or interest therein, that is planned,acquired, owned, developed, constructed, reconstructed, rehabilitated, or improved for purposes of creating a healthy economic environment inconjunction with increasing the quality of life in our community or anyundertaking or project, or portion thereof, consisting of facilities such as streets, roads, sewer and water lines or other public and private facilitiesintended for commercial, educational, cultural, recreational, community orother civic purposes as may be deemed necessary for sound community development. 
§ 10-5. Membership; terms of office; compensation; officers;meetings; quorum. 
The Town Economic and Community Development Commission shall consistof an odd number of members, but not fewer than five nor more than nine. The members shall be appointed by the Board of Town Commissioners of Bel Air and shall be removable for cause. Those first appointed shall beappointed to serve for terms as follows: of a five-member Commission, oneshall be appointed to serve for one year, two for two years, and two for three years; of a seven-member Commission, two shall be appointed to serve forone year, two for two years, and three for three years; and of a nine-memberCommission, two shall be appointed to serve for one year, three for two years and four for three years. Thereafter, members shall be appointed forterms of three years each. Vacancies shall be filled by the Board of TownCommissioners of Bel Air for the unexpired portion of a term. Members shall serve without compensation but may receive such reimbursement fortravel and other expenses incurred in the interest of the Town as the Boardof Town Commissioners may from time to time allow. The Commission shall elect a Chairman from its members by majority vote of all its members.Meetings of said Commission shall be held at least nine times per yearand additional meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such other times as the Commission may determine. Three members shallconstitute a quorum. 
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:19 
§ 10-6. Powers.8 
The Commission shall have those powers as set forth in Appendix I, Urban Renewal Authority for Slum Clearance, of the Charter of the Town of Bel Air. 
§ 10-7. Powers reserved to Board of Town Commissioners.9 
The following powers are specifically withheld from the area of authority of the Economic and Community Development Commission and reserved tothe Bel Air Board of Town Commissioners: 
A. 	The power to pass a resolution to initiate an economic or community development project pursuant to Appendix I, Urban Renewal Authorityfor Slum Clearance, of the Charter of the Town of Bel Air. 
B. 	The power to appropriate funds and to levy taxes and assessments pursuant to Appendix I, Urban Renewal Authority for Slum Clearance,of the Charter of the Town of Bel Air. 
§ 10-8. Previous actions ratified. 
The Board of Town Commissioners hereby ratifies and confirms any andall actions taken by it pursuant to recommendations or other actions bythe Development Commission hitherto in existence under the provisions of Ordinance No. 237 and direct that all records of such DevelopmentCommission be transferred to the Economic and Community DevelopmentCommission established hereby. It is thus the intention hereof to continue in effect all previous community development projects, all of which shallhereby be included within the definition of economic and communitydevelopment projects, and to affirm the legal validity of all other actions taken by the previously established Development Commission, insofar assuch actions have been in accordance with law. The CommunityDevelopment Commission shall hereafter be known as the "Economic and Community Development Commission." 
8. 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 

9. 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 


1:20 ARTICLE III 

Board of Appeals 
§ 10-9. Establishment; powers and duties.10 
Pursuant to the provisions of § 4.07 of Article 66B of the Annotated Code of Maryland there is hereby established a Town Board of Appeals whichshall have all the powers and duties as set forth in Article 66B, § 4.07, asamended from time to time. 
§ 10-10. Incorporation of statutory provisions. 
With respect to the Board of Appeals generally, Article 66B, § 4.07, asamended from time to time, is hereby incorporated by reference and made a part hereof. 
§ 10-11. Membership; residency requirement; minimum numberrequired for hearings. 
The Board of Appeals shall consist of five members and one alternate member who may be empowered to sit on the Board in the absence of anymember of the Board. When the alternate is absent, the Board of Town Commissioners may designate a temporary alternate. Each member and thealternate shall be a resident of the Town and shall have maintained such residency for a minimum of one year. At no time shall the Board hear cases with fewer than three members present. 
10.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:21 
ARTICLE IV 
Appearance and Beautification Committee 

§ 10-12. Establishment. 
The Appearance and Beautification Committee is hereby established as a standing committee of the Town of Bel Air to be organized and its functionas stated within the following sections of this article. 
§ 10-13. Purpose. 
It shall be the purpose of the Appearance and Beautification Committee to: 
A. 	Act as an advisory committee to the Board of Town Commissioners onmatters pertaining to the appearance and beautification of the Town. 
B. 	Coordinate and assist in the planting, maintenance and protection ofplant material within the Town and to attempt to create civic beauty byassisting in the improvement of roadsides, parks and other public areas within Town. 
C. 	Encourage efforts and activities in connection with the beautification ofBel Air and its environs. 
D. 	Promote conservation and civic pride through Committee activities andin cooperation with other organizations. 
E. 	Work in cooperation with the duly appointed Town authorities and other established committees/commissions for the overall improvement of theTown's appearance. 
§ 10-14. Membership; terms of office; quorum. 
A. 	The Appearance and Beautification Committee shall consist of notfewer than nine nor more than 12 members, each over the age of18, who shall be appointed by the Board of Town Commissioners. A majority of the membership will be made up of either residents of theTown of Bel Air, owners of real property in the Town or proprietorsof businesses within the Town. Members shall serve staggered four-year terms with initial appointments of one, two, three and four years.Thereafter, appointments shall be made on a four-year basis. In theevent that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, a successor shall be appointed by the Board of Town Commissioners forthe unexpired portion of the term. 
B. 	In addition, the Committee may seek out consultants who may be advisory, nonvoting members. A majority of the voting members shallconstitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Any member whois absent from three consecutive meetings, without notifying the Chairman in advance of such meeting, shall forfeit membership. 
§ 10-15. Officers. 

1:23 

A. 	The Committee shall elect officers on an annual basis. All members of the Committee appointed by the Board of Town Commissioners are eligible to hold office. 
B. 	The Committee shall adopt rules and bylaws governing its action andkeep records of its proceedings. 
C. 	The Committee shall have the following officers: 
(1) 	
Chairman. The Chairman shall preside at all meetings of theCommittee and perform all such duties as are incidental to the office of Chairman and are properly required of him/her. 

(2) 	
Vice Chairman. In the absence of the Chairman, he/she shallexercise all functions of the Chairman and shall be vested with all of his/her powers. 

(3) 	
Secretary. The Recording Secretary shall have charge of all records, keeping such records in a centralized location, and perform such duties as are incidental to that office and properlyrequired of him/her by the Committee. 

(4) 	
Treasurer. The Treasurer shall have charge of all Committee finances and its records, record and submit the annual budgetrecommendations of the Committee, report at each meeting the status of funds, authorize for payment all legitimate invoices tendered and due, and perform other duties as are incidental to theoffice. 


§ 10-16. Meetings and compensation. 
Regular meetings shall be held monthly at such time and place as themembers shall designate, unless otherwise determined by the Committeeofficers. Additional meetings may be called by the Chairman, as required. The annual meeting for election of Committee officers shall be held in Aprilor at the earliest date possible thereafter. Members of the Committee shallserve without compensation. 
§ 10-17. Powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the Appearance and Beautification Committeeshall be as follows. The Committee shall: 
A. 	Review and make recommendation on proposed landscape design/plantselection for new commercial projects within the Town to the Department of Planning and Community Development. 
B. 	Develop planting plans, prepare plant orders and schedule/overseeinstallation of material in Town-owned landscape areas. 
C. 	Plan, prepare and coordinate the installation of Town Christmas decorations. 
1:24 

D. 	Prepare an annual budget related to projects within the Committee'sscope which shall cover the period from July 1 through June 30 of each year. The budget is to be submitted to the Board of Town Commissioners no later than the first working day in March of each year.11 
11.Editor's Note: Original Ch. 4, Art. 5, Historic Preservation Commission, which immediatelyfollowed this article, is now included as Ch. 246, Historic Preservation, of this Code. 
1:25 
ARTICLE V 
Committee on the Elderly and Needy Citizens 

§ 10-18. Establishment. 
The Committee on the Elderly and Needy Citizens is hereby established as a standing committee of the Town of Bel Air to be organized and to functionas stated in the following sections of this article. 
§ 10-19. Purpose. 
It shall be the purpose of the Committee on the Elderly and Needy Citizens to: 
A. 	Serve as an advisory committee to the Board of Town Commissioners. 
B. 	Examine, study and evaluate the Bel Air living environment from thestandpoint of its elderly and needy residents. 
C. 	Identify problems being experienced by the Town's elderly and needy citizens and through periodic meetings or reports advise the Board ofTown Commissioners of these problems and recommend solutions. 
D. 	Through a mutually agreeable arrangement, coordinate the Committee's activities and recommend solutions with the Town's Economic and Community Development Commission.12 
§ 10-20. Membership; terms of office. 
A. 	The Committee on the Elderly and Needy Citizens shall consist of fivemembers appointed by the Board of Town Commissioners. Those firstappointed shall be appointed to serve for terms as follows: of the five-member Committee, one shall be appointed to serve for one year, twofor two years, and two for three years. Thereafter, members shall beappointed for terms of three years each. Vacancies shall be filled by the Board of Town Commissioners for the unexpired portion of a term. 
B. 	Additional members may be appointed to the Committee to serve as anex officio members. These members may be members of the Board of Town Commissioners, other standing committees or commissions of theTown or Town officials. 
§ 10-21. Officers. 
The Committee shall elect a Chairperson from its membership by a majorityvote and determine the length of term in office. The Committee may alsoelect such other officers as it deems necessary and establish their terms of office. 
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:27 
§ 10-22. Meetings. 
A. 	The Committee shall meet at least quarterly or at such times as it may determine. 
B. 	Appointed members of the Committee on the Elderly and Needy Citizens may, if they are unable to attend a meeting, designate a representative from their organization to attend. 
1:28 

ARTICLE VI 

Tree Committee 
§ 10-23. Establishment. 
A Tree Committee is hereby established as a standing committee of the Town of Bel Air to be organized and function as stated within the followingarticle. 
§ 10-24. Purpose. 
The purpose of the Tree Committee shall be as follows: 
A. 	To preserve and protect existing trees and forest within the Town of BelAir. 
B. 	To promote planting and maintenance of trees located within the Town. 
C. 	To protect trees located in public areas from undesirable and unsafepractices. 
D. 	To guard trees against the spread of disease and pests. 
E. 	To prevent damage to any public sewer or water main, street, sidewalkor other public property resulting from tree locations/plantings. 
§ 10-25. Membership; terms of office; quorum. 
The Tree Committee shall consist of not fewer than three nor more than five members who shall be appointed by the Board of Town Commissioners. Members shall serve staggered three-year terms, with initial appointmentsof one, two and three years. Thereafter, appointments shall be made ona three-year basis. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, a successor shall be appointed by the Board of TownCommissioners for the unexpired portion of the term. A majority of themembers shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Any member who is absent from three consecutive meetings, without notifyingthe Chairman in advance of such meeting, shall forfeit membership. 
§ 10-26. Officers; rules and records. 
A. 	The Committee shall elect officers on an annual basis. All members of the Committee appointed by the Board of Town Commissioners areeligible to hold office. 
B. 	The Committee shall have the following officers: 
(1) 	Chairman. The Chairman shall preside at all meetings of theCommittee and perform all such duties as are incidental to the office of Chairman and are properly required of him/her. 
1:29 

(2) 	Vice Chairman. In the absence of the Chairman, he/she shallexercise all the functions of the Chairman and shall be vested with all of his/her powers. 
C. 	The majority of the members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The Committee shall adopt rules and bylaws governing its action and keep a record of its proceedings. 
§ 10-27. Meetings and compensation. 
Regular meetings shall be held monthly at such time and place as the members shall designate, unless otherwise determined by the Committeeofficers. An annual meeting for the election of the Committee officers shallbe held in April or at the earliest date possible following the appointment/ confirmation of membership by the Board of Town Commissioners. Additional meetings may be called by the Chairman, as required. Thepurpose of the meetings shall be stated in the written or verbal notice. Members of the Committee shall serve without compensation. 
§ 10-28. Powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the Tree Committee shall be as follows. The Committee shall: 
A. 	Prepare a Comprehensive Tree Plan for the Town of Bel Air. Such plan shall be presented annually to the Board of Town Commissioners; upon acceptance by the Board, the plan shall become the OfficialComprehensive Tree Plan of the Town of Bel Air. The ComprehensiveTree Plan for the Town should address the preservation, pruning, planting, removal and disposition of trees in the public areas of theTown. 
B. 	Make findings and prepare reports and recommendations upon any special matter or question coming within the scope of its work. 
C. 	Study problems and determine the needs of the Town in connectionwith the street planting, protection and maintenance program. 
D. 	Assist in dissemination of news and information regarding selection,planting and maintenance of trees within areas subject to the jurisdiction of the Town, whether on private or public property, and make recommendations for legislation concerning the tree programand activities. 
E. 	Investigate alternative funding sources for planting and maintenance of trees and shrubs on public lands. 
F. 	Develop a municipal tree ordinance for consideration by the Board ofTown Commissioners.13 
13.Editor's Note: See Ch. 435, Trees. 
1:30 
ARTICLE VII 
Cultural Arts Commission 
[Amended 1-6-2014 by Ord. No. 764-13; 12-21-2015 by Ord. No.
773-15] 



§ 10-29. Establishment. 
A Cultural Arts Commission is hereby established as a standing commissionof the Town of Bel Air to be organized and to function as stated within thefollowing sections of this article. 
§ 10-30. Purpose. 
It shall be the purpose of the Cultural Arts Commission to: 
A. 	Serve as an advisory commission to the Board of Town Commissioners on matters pertaining to the celebration and promotion of the culturalarts in the Town of Bel Air. 
B. 	Support the development of a facility for cultural arts. 
C. 	Participate in the coordination of cultural arts programs and eventswithin the Town of Bel Air and to work closely and in cooperation withthe Events Committee, Bel Air Economic and Community Development Commission, Bel Air Downtown Alliance, Rockfield Foundation, and other established committees and commissions in the celebration of the arts in the Town of Bel Air. 
§ 10-31. Membership; terms of office; quorum. 
The Cultural Arts Commission shall consist of not fewer than five nor more than nine members who shall be appointed by the Board of Town Commissioners. Members shall serve staggered three-year terms, withinitial appointments of one, two and three years. Thereafter, appointmentsshall be made on a three-year basis. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, a successor shall be appointed by theBoard of Town Commissioners for the unexpired portion of the term. Threemembers shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Any member who is absent from three consecutive meetings, without notifyingthe Chairman in advance of such meeting, shall forfeit membership. 
§ 10-32. Officers; rules and records. 
A. 	An annual meeting for the election of officers shall be held in January,or the earliest practical date thereafter. All appointed members of theCommission are eligible to hold office. 
B. 	The Commission shall have the following officers: 
(1) 	Chairman. The Chairman shall preside at all meetings of theCommission and perform all such duties as are incidental to the office of Chairman and are properly required of him/her. 
1:31 

(2) 	Vice Chairman. In the absence of the Chairman, he/she shallexercise all the functions of the Chairman and shall be vested with all of his/her powers. 
C. 	The majority of the members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The Commission shall adopt rules and bylaws governing its actions and keep a record of its proceedings. 
§ 10-33. Meetings and compensation. 
The Commission shall meet at least quarterly or at any special meeting called by the Chair. Special meetings may be called with a written or verbalnotice, and the purpose of said meeting shall be specified in the minutes.Members of the Commission shall serve on a volunteer basis. 
§ 10-34. Powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the Cultural Arts Commission shall be as follows.The Commission shall: 
A. 	Prepare an annual report for the Board of Town Commissioners detailing the Commission's activities during the previous year. 
B. 	Prepare reports and make recommendations upon special matters or questions within the scope of its work. 
C. 	Prepare an annual budget related to projects within the Commission'sscope which shall cover the period from July 1 through June 30 of each year. The budget is to be submitted to the Board of Town Commissioners no later than the first working day in March of each year. The budget request should outline as closely as practical the forthcoming events and the funds allocated to each event. Funds raisedby the Cultural Arts Commission are to be used for the development ofactivities, events and facilities that will promote the arts in the Town of Bel Air. 
1:32 

ARTICLE VIII 
Board of Building Appeals 

§ 10-35. Establishment. 
The Board of Building Appeals is hereby established as an official board of the Town of Bel Air to be organized and to function as stated in the followingsections of this article. 
§ 10-36. Purpose. 
It shall be the purpose of the Board of Building Appeals to afford anyperson the right to appeal a decision of the Town of Bel Air Building Officialeither refusing to grant or granting a modification to the provisions of the Town Building Code14 or a decision regarding Chapter 364, Property Maintenance, of this Code. 
§ 10-37. Membership; terms of office; qualifications. 
A. 	The Board of Building Appeals shall consist of three members appointed by the Board of Town Commissioners of Bel Air as follows: one for four years, one for three years and one for two years. Thereafter, each new member shall serve for four years or until asuccessor has been appointed. 
B. 	Each member shall be a licensed professional engineer or architect or a builder or superintendent of building construction with at leastseven years of experience, four of which shall have been in responsiblecharge of work. At least one member shall be a licensed professional engineer or architect. Not more than two members shall be from thesame profession or occupation, and it is desirable that one member bea professional engineer in the structural or civil field with architectural engineering experience. 
C. 	The Board of Town Commissioners of Bel Air shall appoint one alternatemember who shall be called by the Board of Building Appeals Chairman to hear appeals during the absence or disqualification of a member. Thealternate member shall possess the qualifications required for Boardmembership and shall be appointed for three years or until a successor has been appointed. 
D. 	The Town Building Official shall designate a Secretary to the Board. TheSecretary shall file a detailed record of all proceedings in the Bel Air Building Official's office. 
14.Editor's Note: See Ch. 145, Building Construction. 
1:33 
§ 10-38. Meetings and compensation. 
The Board shall meet upon notice from the Chairman, within 10 days of the filing of an appeal, or at stated periodic meetings. The members of theBoard shall serve without compensation. 
§ 10-39. Powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the Board shall be as provided in the TownBuilding Code.15 

15.Editor's Note: See Ch. 145, Building Construction. 
1:34 
Chapter 28 
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION 
§ 28-1. Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
OFFICIAL — Includes all elected officials of the Town, the Town Administrator, the Director of Public Works, the Deputy Director of PublicWorks, the Director of Planning, the Planners, the Director of Administration, the Director of Finance, the Chief of Police and all policeofficers.16 
§ 28-2. Town to provide legal defense. 
The Town of Bel Air shall provide and pay for a legal defense for any of itsofficials in any action which alleges damages resulting from tortious acts oromissions committed by an official within the scope of his or her office, duty or employment with the Town. The right to a legal defense given herein iscontingent upon an official's full cooperation in such defense. If an officialshould fail to cooperate, he or she shall forfeit the right to a legal defense guaranteed hereunder. 
§ 28-3. Exceptions and conditions. 
A. 	Except as limited by Subsections B and C hereof, the Town of Bel Air shall indemnify any of its officials for any personal liability arising fromtortious acts or omissions done by any such official within the scope ofhis or her office, duty or employment with the Town of Bel Air. 
B. 	The right to indemnify granted hereunder is contingent upon an official's full cooperation in the legal defense provided pursuant to§ 28-2 hereof; if an official fails to cooperate fully in such defense he or she forfeits any right to indemnity granted hereunder. 
C. 	Under no circumstances shall the Town of Bel Air indemnify any officialfor legal or other expenses or for any damages incurred as a result of acts which are determined in any court or other legal proceedingsto constitute gross negligence or willful or wanton conduct taken inreckless disregard for the rights of others. 
D. 	Under no circumstances shall the Town of Bel Air indemnify any officialfor punitive damages of any kind assessed or levied in any action fortort, contract or other liability brought against such employee. 
E. 	In cases involving employees, retirees, former employees, former members of the Board of Town Commissioners and members of the 
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:35 
Planning Commission, Appearance and Beautification Committee, Economic and Community Development Commission, Board of Appeals, Board of Building Appeals, Board of Ethics, Historic PreservationCommission, Tree Committee, Cultural Arts Commission and Board of Election Judges, the Board of Town Commissioners may consider paying for the legal defense or indemnification or both on a case-by­case basis.17 
Chapter 37 
ELECTIONS 
§ 37-1. Definitions and word usage. 
A. 	Words and phrases defined. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
ABSENTEE BALLOT — A ballot not used in a polling place. 
BALLOT or OFFICIAL BALLOT — Includes an absentee ballot, a voting unit ballot or provisional ballot. "Ballot" or "official ballot" does notinclude a sample ballot or a specimen ballot.[Amended 3-2-2009 by Ord. No. 719-09] 
BOARD — The Board of Election Judges, as that term is defined inArticle V, Section 503 of the Charter of the Town of Bel Air. 
CANDIDATE — Any qualified voter who files written notice, in the form of a certificate of candidacy, of his or her intention to run for the officeof Commissioner of Bel Air at least 30 days before a general or specialelection for Commissioner. 
DISABLED — Having a temporary or permanent disability. 
ELECTION — The process by which the voters of the Town vote forany candidate pursuant to the laws of the Town or for or against any Charter provisions of the Town or other public act or question pursuantto procedures provided by state statute or by the Town Charter, andshall include all elections, general or special, conducted by the Town. 
ELECTRONIC STORAGE FORMAT — A computer disk or other information storage and retrieval medium approved by the state. 
GENERAL ELECTION — The election held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of every odd-numbered year at whichthe voters of the Town may vote for candidates for the office of Commissioner of Bel Air. 
GENERAL RETURN SHEET — The tally sheet signed by the Board ofElection Judges for each election recording the votes registered on eachvoting machine and by absentee ballot or by all ballots, all votes cast 
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:36 
for each candidate and for or against each question, the total number ofvotes and voters, the number of voters who have voted on each voting unit and the number who have voted by absentee ballot. 
MANAGER CARD — Programmed to allow access to supervisoryfunctions. 
POLL BOOK — An electronic book or printed book with signature capabilities. 
PROVISIONAL BALLOT — A ballot that is cast by an individual but not counted until the individual's qualifications to vote have been confirmedby the Town's election board.[Added 3-2-2009 by Ord. No. 719-09] 
REGISTRATION — The act by which a person becomes qualified to votein any election of the Town. 
REGISTRATION APPLICATION FORM — The form to be filled out and signed by each prospective registrant containing the necessaryinformation to establish his/her eligibility as a voter in Town elections. 
SAMPLE BALLOT — A facsimile of the ballot that the voter will use to register his/her vote in the election. 
SPECIAL ELECTION — Every election called by resolution of theCommissioners, including but not limited to elections to fill vacancies in the offices of Commissioners pursuant to Article III, Section 307 of theCharter of the Town of Bel Air and referendum elections on the questionof proposed Charter amendments of the Town as required by state law or as provided in § 37-7 of this chapter. Special elections shall be heldin accordance with § 37-7 of this chapter. 
TOWN CLERK — The custodian of the voting records of the Town of Bel Air. 
VOTER IDENTIFICATION CARD — The card sent by the Town Clerk or designee to each registrant to establish the fact and date of registration. 
VOTING AUTHORITY CARD OR BOOK — The card or book to be signedby each voter at the polls. 
VOTING MACHINE CUSTODIAN — The person, Harford County Boardof Elections or company contracted by the Bel Air Board of TownCommissioners who or which shall prepare the voting units for use before each election and shall be responsible for keeping such unitsin good working order and repair during each election and shall storesuch units locked and their keys sealed and separate for one month after each such election. 
VOTING UNIT — The station or booth used in casting and tabulating ballots or votes. 
VOTING UNIT BALLOT — A ballot posted on or in the voting unit. 
1:37 

B. 	Gender. Whenever in this chapter words or phrases are used denotingthe masculine gender, they should be taken to include the feminine gender. 
C. 	Computation of time. In computing the times for notices to be givenor for the performing of any other act under this chapter, Sunday and legal holidays shall be included, except when the day on whichthe notice should be given or act should be performed occurs on Sunday or on a legal holiday, in which case the notice shall be given or the act performed on the next regular business day following suchSunday or legal holiday. In such computation, the day of giving noticeor performing any act and the day of registration or election shall be excluded. 
§ 37-2. Board of Election Judges. 
A. 	The Board of Town Commissioners shall appoint a three-member Board of Election Judges on or before the first Monday of October in everysecond even-numbered year for a term of four years in accordance withArticle V, Section 503 of the Charter of the Town of Bel Air. The Board of Town Commissioners shall appoint one Alternate Election Judge tothe Board of Election Judges who may be empowered to act in theabsence of a regular Judge on Election Day. The Election Judges shall be qualified voters of the Town and shall not hold a Town office orbecome candidates for any elective office of the Town or otherwiseduring their term of office. The Board of Election Judges shall appoint one of its members as Chairman. Any vacancy on the Board of ElectionJudges shall be appointed by the Commissioners for the remainder of an unexpired term. [Amended 11-17-2008 by Ord. No. 715-08;10-5-2009 by Ord. No. 725-09] 
B. 	As provided in Article V, Section 503 of the Charter of the Town ofBel Air, the Board of Election Judges shall be responsible for the supervision of registration of voters or their designees and shallconduct all Town elections and for each special and general electionshall provide a suitable place for voting and shall decide all questions on eligibility of voters. The Board shall give four weeks' notice ofevery election by advertisement published in at least one newspaper ofgeneral circulation in the Town and by posting a notice thereof at the Town office. 
C. 	Each Election Judge shall receive compensation as determined by theBoard of Town Commissioners for the day of election and any other day the Election Judges are called to work by the Town Clerk. 
D. 	The Board of Elections shall have the same election powers as the Clerkof the Town of Bel Air and shall provide all supplies and equipment necessary and proper for the registration of voters and the conductof elections. Expenses incurred by the Board of Election Judges infurnishing supplies and equipment and all other necessary and reasonable expenses of the Board of Election Judges shall be an 
1:38 

E. 
F. 
G. 
H. 
expenditure of the Town payable as other expenses are payable by the Board of Town Commissioners. [Amended 11-17-2008 by Ord. No. 715-08] 
If the voting units are delivered to the voting place prior to election day,the Town Clerk will serve as voting unit custodian for the purpose of securing the units. 
Each Election Judge shall take the oath of office as prescribed by ArticleI, Section 9 of the Constitution of Maryland. 
The Election Judges may appoint poll workers to assist the ElectionJudges on the day of the election. All poll workers must meet theeligibility requirements of Election Judges and shall receive compensation as determined by the Bel Air Board of Town Commissioners on the day of the election and any other day the pollworker is called to work by the Town Clerk. Poll workers shall take the oath required of the Election Judges. 
Substitution of Election Judges. If any Election Judge shall not bepresent at the expiration of 15 minutes after the time for the opening of the polls during an election, the Election Judge or Judges present shallfill the place of the absent Judge by appointing in his stead one of thequalified poll workers or a qualified voter of the Town of Bel Air who shall not hold a Town office or be a candidate for any elective office inthe Town or otherwise to serve as a substitute for the day of the electiononly. 
(1) 	
After the opening of the polls, no Election Judge shall absenthimself therefrom until all the ballots cast shall have been counted and the returns completed except in the case of absolute necessity. If in the case of absolute necessity any Election Judge in attendanceshall be compelled to absent himself, he shall appoint one of thequalified poll workers or some fit person, a qualified voter of the Town not holding a Town office or being a candidate for anyelective office in the Town or otherwise, to act in his stead until his return, having first administered to such substitute the same oath as he, himself, has taken. 

(2) 	
Blank forms for the appointment of substitute judges and foradministering the oath aforesaid shall be supplied by the Board of Election Judges. The oath, when administered, shall be preservedand the reason for appointment of the substitute and the time whensuch substitute began and ceased shall be preserved by the Board of Election Judges in writing. Any substitute shall cease to actwhenever the Election Judge in whose stead he was appointed shallbe present. 


§ 37-3. Polling place; election hours; places of registration. 

1:39 

A. 	It shall be the duty of the Board of Election Judges to select a suitablepolling place(s) as it deems it necessary. If possible, it shall be the duty of the Board of Election Judges to use the Town Hall or other publicbuildings for such polling places. 
B. 	The polling places in Bel Air shall be opened by the Board of Election Judges at 7:00 a.m. on the day of the election and the polling placesshall remain open until 8:00 p.m. on the same day when the pollingplaces shall be closed. 
C. 	Places of registration shall be the office of the Harford County Boardof Elections and such other places as shall be authorized by Title 3,Subtitle 2 of the Election Law, Annotated Code of Maryland, and as determined by the Board of Election Judges. 
§ 37-4. Notice of election. 
The Board of Election Judges shall give four weeks' notice of the time and place of every election by advertisement published in at least onenewspaper of general circulation in the Town and by posting notice thereofat the Town office. 
§ 37-5. Registration and qualification of voters. 
A. 	Qualifications. The voters' qualifications shall be as detailed in ArticleV, Section 501 of the Charter of the Town of Bel Air. 
B. 	Registration. 
(1) 	
Registration of the voters of the Town of Bel Air shall be conductedby the Harford County Board of Elections as provided through an agreement between the Town of Bel Air and Harford County and inaccordance with Title 3, Subtitle 2 of the Election Law, Annotated Code of Maryland. 

(2) 	
To be eligible to vote in any general or special election, personsqualified to vote but not previously registered to vote may registerat any time with the Harford County Board of Elections on regular business days during regular business hours, and other placesas shall be authorized by Title 3, Subtitle 2 of the Election Law,Annotated Code of Maryland, or determined by the Bel Air Board of Town Commissioners. Registration will be closed in accordancewith those dates as set by the Harford County Board of Elections asprovided in Title 3, Subtitle 3 of the Election Law, Annotated Code of Maryland. 

(3) 	
The Town Clerk shall publish a weekly notice of the expirationdate of the time within which qualified voters may register for any election for at least two weeks prior to such expiration date in anewspaper with circulation within the Town. A person registered inthe Town of Bel Air on January 1, 1978, or at any time thereafter is a qualified voter in the Town of Bel Air and shall not be required 


1:40 

to register again unless such registration shall be cancelled due tohis/her not meeting the voter qualifications in Article V, Section 501 of the Town Charter. 
§ 37-6. General elections. 
A. 	Nonpartisan elections. Elections in the Town of Bel Air are nonpartisan so that each candidate in any election runs without official partydesignation or affiliation, and no mention of party affiliation shall bedesignated on any ballots in the general or special elections in the Town of Bel Air. 
B. 	Qualifications for candidates for Commissioner of Bel Air. A person shallbe eligible for election as a Commissioner of Bel Air provided that he meets the qualifications as set forth in Article III, Section 302 of theCharter of the Town of Bel Air. 
C. 	Filing of certificate of candidacy. 
(1) 	
Candidates must file in person and complete a written certificateof candidacy with the Town Clerk of their intention to run forthe office of Commissioner at least 30 days before the scheduled election. The hours for filing on the final file date are 9:00 a.m. to

7:00 p.m. 

(2) 	
A certificate of candidacy may be filed by certified mail, personal messenger, or other delivery service designated by the Town Clerkif the individual filing the certificate is unable to do so in personbecause of illness or temporary absence from the state and the certificate is accompanied by an affidavit signed by the individualfiling the certificate setting forth fully the facts that prevent thatindividual from filing the certificate in person. A certificate of candidacy may not be filed by facsimile service or other electronictransmission. 

(3) 	
The use of nicknames, titles, degrees, or other professional designations on the certificate of candidacy is prohibited. The names of candidates shall be arranged alphabetically on the ballots. 

(4) 	
Candidates may withdraw prior to the filing deadline only. The filing fee is not refundable, except as stated in Subsection C(5)(c)below. 

(5) 	
Filing fee. 


(a) 	In order to help defray the costs of election, each candidate forthe office of Commissioner of Bel Air shall pay a nonrefundable fee as set by resolution of the Board of Town Commissioners.Each candidate shall pay such sum to the Town Clerk at thetime his written intention to run is filed. Such filing fees shall be used to defray the cost of the election for which they are 
1:41 

collected, including the moneys paid the Board of ElectionJudges for administering such election and the costs of renting voting machines for such election.18 
(b) 	
The filing fee shall be waived if the candidate establishes hisinability to pay at the time and place of filing the certificate. A sworn statement of inability to pay shall set forth the nature, extent and liquidity of the candidate's assets and the disposable net income of the candidate. 

(c) 	
In the event that any candidate who has paid a filing fee entersinto active duty with the armed services of the United Statesin the period between the last date allowed for withdrawal of his name as a candidate and the printing of the ballotsor the preparation of the voting units, he shall be entitledupon withdrawing as such a candidate and upon his request to receive a return of the filing fee. 


D. 	Campaigning and electioneering. In no event shall any campaigning beallowed within 100 feet of the entrance door of the Town Hall or any other polling place selected by the Board of Election Judges within theTown on election day. 
§ 37-7. Special election or referendum. 
Special elections shall be called and carried out in accordance with thefollowing procedures: 
A. 	Special elections for any purpose shall be called by a resolution passed by a majority of the Board of Town Commissioners of Bel Air then inoffice. Any resolution calling a special election shall fix the date for thesame, which date shall be a sufficient time after the passage of such resolution to enable notice thereof to be given by publishing a copy ofsuch resolution, or a fair summary thereof, in a newspaper of generalcirculation in the Town of Bel Air not less than once in each of four weeks immediately preceding the election, or for such other length oftime as may be required by law other than this chapter for publicationof such notice if a longer time is so required. A complete and exact copy of each such resolution shall be retained in the Town Hall and shall be open to public inspection and the notice published in the newspapershall so state. The election once called shall be conducted by the Board of Election Judges in every respect as is provided in the case of generalelections. 
B. 	When there shall be fewer than three Commissioners in office, the remaining Commissioner or Commissioners shall call a special electionfor the purpose of filling the vacancies in the office of Commissionerof Bel Air which shall be held no less than 45 days and no more than 
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:42 
60 days from the date when the third vacancy occurred in the office ofCommissioner. In the event that there are no remaining Commissioners, the Town Administrator shall be required to hold a special electionwithin such forty-five-day to sixty-day period. 
C. 	Special tie or runoff election. When there is a tie vote in an election for the office of Commissioner, resulting in a vacancy on the Board,Commissioners duly elected to serve on the Board as newly constitutedafter the election shall call a special runoff election between the tied candidates to be held as soon as practicable after the election producing the tie. 
D. 	If newly enacted legislation is subject to referendum in accordance with the provisions of Article V, Section 504 of the Charter of the Townof Bel Air, the referendum shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures of Article V, Section 504 of the Charter of the Town of Bel Air. 
§ 37-8. Emergencies. 
A. 	In the event of a state of emergency declared by the Governor in accordance with the provisions of law that interferes with the electoralprocess, an emergency proclamation passed by the Bel Air Board ofTown Commissioners may: 
(1) 	
Provide for the postponement until a specific date of the election; 

(2) 	
Specify alternate voting locations; or 

(3) 	
Specify alternate voting systems. 


B. 	If emergency circumstances, not constituting a declared state of emergency, interfere with the electoral process, the Board of ElectionJudges, after conferring with the State Board of Elections, may petition a circuit court to take any action the court considers necessary toprovide a remedy that is in the public interest and protects the integrityof the electoral process. 
§ 37-9. Sample ballots. 
Four weeks before an election, the Board of Election Judges shall prepare a sample ballot listing the names of all persons who are qualified as candidates for the office of Commissioner, in accordance with Article III, Section 302 of the Charter of the Town of Bel Air, and who have filed in writing with the Town Clerk their intention to run for said office within 30 days before said election in accordance with this chapter, in alphabeticalorder according to their surnames. Also upon said ballot shall appear acondensed statement in understandable language of every Charter amendment or other question to be submitted to the vote of the peopleat said election. The Board of Election Judges, in preparation of ballots,shall follow the titling order for Charter amendments or other questions designated by the Town Administrator and certified by Town Counsel and 
1:43 

shall always place the proposed Charter amendments and other questions,if any, in numerical order as indicated. 
§ 37-10. General provisions for voting. 
A. 	Policing. The Board of Election Judges has the authority to keep thepeace and to cause any person to be removed from the polling place for any breach of the peace or for any breach of the Election Code or forany interference with the progress of an election or canvass of ballotsor the ascertainment and transcription of the votes (recorded on voting machines). 
B. 	Identification of voters. To establish the identity of the voter, the votershall be asked to state the month and day of the voter's birth and verify his/her address of residence, and the Election Judge shall compare theresponse to the information listed in the poll book or a voting authoritycard. The voter shall give any change of address in the presence of the Board of Election Judges, which change shall be entered on the votingauthority card or on a change of address form by the voter. 
C. 	When using the State of Maryland's approved electronic voting system, a voter access card will be given to each voter after he/she has appliedhis/her signature as required. The voter access card permits the voterto vote on the voting unit. 
D. 	Disposition of voting authority cards at close of polls. If voting authoritycards are used, at the close of the polls, the Election Judges shall account for all voting authority cards surrendered to them by comparing the number of signed voter authority cards with the numberof voters recorded in the poll book and/or precinct register. A form provided by the Harford County Board of Elections will be signed by an Election Judge verifying that the number of signed voting authoritycards equals the number of names recorded in the poll book and/orprecinct register and those two total the number of recorded ballots on the voting unit. 
E. 	If the Bel Air Board of Town Commissioners approves the use of a pollbook in place of the voter authority cards, the number of signed voters entered into the poll book shall be compared to the number of votescast on the voting unit. A form provided by the Harford County Board ofElections will be signed by an Election Judge verifying that the number of recorded voter signatures equals the number of registered ballots onthe voting unit. 
F. 	The Board of Town Commissioners authorizes the election Judges to administer provisional voting and canvass the provisional ballots,pursuant to state laws and regulations, providing the provisional voting does not conflict with the Town Election Code. [Added 3-2-2009 by Ord. No. 719-09] 
1:44 

§ 37-11. Time allowed for voting. 
No voter shall remain within the voting booth or unit longer than four minutes if there are other voters awaiting an opportunity to register theirvote, except that an additional three minutes shall be allowed if there areCharter amendments or referenda to be voted on. 
§ 37-12. Instructions and assistance in voting. 
A. 	Instructions. With the aid of the diagrams or other electronic equipment authorized by the Harford County Board of Elections, the Board of Election Judges, if requested by a voter, shall instruct eachvoter before he enters the voting unit or booth. 
B. 	Assisting disabled persons in voting. No assistance in marking ballots or operating the voting unit in use shall be given except to voterswho request assistance because of a physical disability or an inability to read or write English. The voter has the option to: [Amended9-21-2009 by Ord. No. 724-09] 
(1) 	
Select anyone to assist the voter, except: 

(a) 	
The voter's employer; 

(b) 	
The voter's union representative; 

(c) 	
An officer or agent of the voter's employer or union; or 

(d) 	
A candidate for office of Bel Air Commissioner. 



(2) 	
Select two Election Judges to assist. 


C. 	Voter assistance record. The Election Judges shall enter the voter'sname and address on a voter assistance record, in the form prescribed by the State of Maryland. If the voter has selected someone to assistthe voter, the individual selected by the voter shall: 
(1) 	
Enter his/her name and address on the voter assistance record. 

(2) 	
Sign the record to affirm that she or he has been asked by the voterto assist in casting the voter's ballot or in filling out the applicationfor a ballot. 

(3) 	
Assist the voter only by reading instructions, reading the contentof the ballot or application form to the voter, operating the votingmachine, or completing an application form as directed by the voter. 

(4) 	
Not attempt to influence the voter or suggest in any way how thevoter should vote in any contest or question. 


D. 	The voter assistant must be over the age of 17. 
1:45 

E. 	Voter requesting assistance after entering the voting booth (unit). Twoof the Election Judges shall give him/her instructions concerning the manner of voting. No such Election Judge shall, in any manner, requestor suggest or speak or persuade or induce any such voter to vote forany particular candidate or for or against any particular question. After such instructions, the Election Judges shall retire and the voter shallforthwith vote. 
§ 37-13. Challenging right to vote. 
A. 	An individual may not be removed from the voter registry unless theindividual's ineligibility is substantiated by affirmative proof. In the absence of such proof, the presumption shall be that the individual is properly registered. 
B. 	The ground for challenge. No person's right to vote shall be challengedat the polls on any ground but identity or failure to meet the minimum age requirement. If the right of any person to vote is challenged, thechallenge shall be made by the Election Judge before or after suchperson receives a voting authority card or enters his/her name in the voter signature book and before the challenged voter enters the votingbooth (unit) to cast his ballot. 
C. 	Procedure for a challenge regarding voter registration. 
(1) 	
Name of registered voter missing from voter registry on electionday: An Election Judge will determine if the name of the registeredvoter is missing from the Town's voter registry because of a clerical error by contacting the Harford County Board of Elections to verifythe voter is registered in the county and meets the minimumresidency requirement to vote in the Town of Bel Air. Unless a majority of the Election Judges is of the opinion that the challengedvoter is entitled to vote, his vote shall not be received and the word "Rejected" shall be written on his voting authority card or over his signature in the voter signature book. 

(2) 	
If the individual feels aggrieved because he has been removedor refused registration from the Town's voter registry because he failed to meet the qualifications of a voter set forth in Article V, Section 501 of the Town Charter, he may file a challenge bycompleting a challenge form (supplied by Harford County Board of Elections) stating under oath the basis for the challenge. Achallenge filed after voter registration has been closed prior toan election may not be heard until after that election. Within five days of a challenge being filed the Election Judges will schedule ahearing that shall be held no sooner than 10 days and no later than15 days after the receipt of a challenge. 

(3) 	
A notice shall be sent by certified mail to the challenger of thehearing date and to advise the challenger of the requirement to 


1:46 

appear at the hearing to substantiate his/her challenge by affirmative proof. 
(4) 	All challenges shall be decided promptly after the hearing. 
§ 37-14. Use of electronic voting system. 
A. 	The Board of Town Commissioners shall not approve, rent or purchase an electronic voting system for use in a Town election without a voter-verified paper audit trail (VVPAT) after November 30, 2005. 
B. 	In accordance with Title 9 of the Election Law, Annotated Code of Maryland, the State Board of Elections has certified a uniform votingsystem for use in polling places throughout the state and a uniformvoting system for absentee voting. 
C. 	If the voting system to be used in the scheduled election is not thevoting system approved by the State of Maryland, the Bel Air Board ofTown Commissioners will indicate to the Board of Election Judges 120 days before any Town election the type of voting system to be used inthe election. 
§ 37-15. Use of electronically tabulated ballot. 
If the Bel Air Board of Town Commissioners elects not to use the State of Maryland's approved electronic election system, the use of another electronically tabulated ballot voting system shall be governed by general rules and regulations authorized by resolution of the Board of TownCommissioners of Bel Air and as stated in this chapter. The rules, regulations and conditions shall include a description of the voting system, specifications for equipment required to implement the system, proceduresfor the use of the system in the polling places on election day and forthe canvass of votes following the election, and provisions to ensure the following: 
A. 	The secrecy of the ballot, in both the voting and tabulating processes. 
B. 	A process whereby each voter is permitted to vote at any election for all persons for which he is entitled to vote; to vote for as many personsfor an office as he is entitled to vote for; and to vote for or against anyquestion upon which he is entitled to vote. 
C. 	Rejection of all votes for any office or measure when the number ofvotes cast by a voter exceeds the number that voter is entitled to cast. 
D. 	Correct counting of votes on ballots on which the proper number of votes has been indicated. 
E. 	A process whereby each voter is permitted to vote by one punch ormark for more than one candidate, if this method of election is required by law. 
1:47 

F. 	The casting and counting of write-in votes, if this method of voting ispermitted by law. 
G. 	The tabulating and recording of votes for or against any candidate,candidates, or question. 
§ 37-16. Use of paper ballot. 
If in any extreme emergency the Board of Town Commissioners of Bel Airshall by resolution authorize an election to be conducted by paper ballot, itshall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of Title 9, Subtitle 2 of the Election Law, Annotated Code of Maryland, or with such other laws ofthe State of Maryland which may supersede Title 9, Subtitle 2 in the future. 
§ 37-17. Write-in ballots. 
A. 	Any voter in any general election or special election held in the Townof Bel Air may write or mark on a ballot or in an appropriate blankprovided on a voting machine in the proper place the name of any person other than those already printed for whom he may desire to votefor any office in such election. Such write-in votes shall be counted thesame as if the name of such person had been printed upon the ballot and marked by such voter. 
B. 	The Board of Election Judges shall establish standards for clarity: eachname written on a ballot in place of those already printed thereon shall include the first name, middle initial, and surname of the person whosename is written and such other identifying characteristics as may berequired by the Board of Election Judges in cases where there are two or more persons with the same first, middle and surname who arequalified voters of the Town of Bel Air, Harford County, Maryland. 
§ 37-18. Absentee voting. 
Absentee voting shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions ofTitle 9, Subtitle 3 of the Election Law, Annotated Code of Maryland, orwith such other laws of the State of Maryland which may supersede Title 9, Subtitle 3 in the future. Absentee ballots must be received and date stamped prior to the closing of the polls. If an absentee vote is receivedafter the closing of the polls, it shall remain sealed in the envelope and filed with the Town Clerk for a minimum period of one year after the electiondate. 
§ 37-19. Voting units. 
A. 	Use authorized. When the Board of Town Commissioners of Bel Air shall authorize by resolution alternate voting units, the Board of ElectionJudges shall provide for the use of voting units in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and under such rules and regulations as theBoard of Election Judges may deem advisable. 
1:48 

B. 

C. 

D. 

Acquiring voting units. The Bel Air Board of Town Commissioners maypurchase, rent, lease, or otherwise acquire such number of voting units as may be required to equip the polling place. At least one unit shallbe furnished for each unit of 1,500 registered voters and an additionalunit for each fractional part of such unit; however, the Board of Election Judges, in its discretion, may determine the number of units to befurnished. The Board of Election Judges shall use the powers conferredupon it for the acquisition of voting units and shall acquire and have available the necessary number of voting units for use at all elections.The Board of Town Commissioners shall provide for the payment ofsuch units. 
State-required insurance for voting units. When using the state-certified voting units, the Town of Bel Air must provide property andcasualty insurance with limits sufficient to replace any system components destroyed, damaged, lost, or stolen while the voting unitsare in the Town's custody. The State of Maryland must be named as anadditional insured and the Town must provide to the Harford County Board of Elections, for transmission to the State Board of Elections, certificates evidencing the required coverage. 
Mechanical requirements. 
(1) 	
Every voting machine acquired or used in accordance with thischapter shall: 

(a) 	
Provide facilities for voting for such candidates as may be nominated and upon such questions as may be submitted. 

(b) 	
Preclude each voter from voting for more persons for any officethan he is entitled to vote for and from voting for any candidate for the same office or any questions more than once. 

(c) 	
Permit each voter to change his vote for any candidate or uponany question appearing on the ballot labels after the time he begins the final operation to cast his votes. 

(d) 	
Permit and require voting in absolute secrecy and shall be soconstructed that no person can see or know for whom any other voter has voted or is voting, save a voter whom he hasassisted or is assisting in voting as prescribed by law. 



(2) 	
Each voting unit shall have a visible public counter. The public counter shall be set at zero at the beginning of each election andregister once each time a voter casts a ballot during that election. 

(3) 	
Each voting unit shall have a visible system counter. The system counter shall be incapable of being reset and register once eachtime a voter casts a ballot during any election. 

(4) 	
When properly operated, each voting unit shall register or record correctly and accurately every vote cast. 


1:49 

(5) 	
Each voting unit shall be so constructed that a voter may readilylearn the method of operating it. 

(6) 	
Each voting unit shall be so constructed and controlled that duringthe process of voting it shall preclude every person from seeing orknowing the number of votes recorded for any candidate and from tampering with any of the registering mechanisms. 

(7) 	
Each voting unit shall automatically tabulate and print out the totalvotes cast on the voting unit for each candidate and for or against each ballot question. 


§ 37-20. Voting unit custody. 
A. 	The Town Administrator may contract with the Harford County Board of Elections to provide voting units and software necessary for conductingeach election and to provide transportation of system hardware components from the storage location to the polling place. 
B. 	When using the state-approved touch screen system, prior to a scheduled election, each of the touch screen units must be thoroughlytested for accuracy. Under the Town's contract, the Harford County Board of Elections staff will perform the testing at its warehousefacility, and the Bel Air Election Judges shall be afforded the opportunity to witness or participate in that testing. The final step in the testing shall be to place a numbered seal on each voting unit.Each voting unit shall remain sealed until the Board of Election Judgesverifies the seal numbers as part of the opening procedure on election morning. 
§ 37-21. Delivery of units and equipment; preparation for use. 
A. 	Where the use of voting units is authorized, at least one hour prior to the opening of the polls the Board of Election Judges shall cause to bedelivered to designated polling places proper voting units with ballotsand all necessary supplies for the conduct of the election. Each unit shall then remain sealed until examination immediately preceding theopening of the polls. 
B. 	The Board of Election Judges shall provide ample protection against tampering with or damage to the voting units. For that purpose, theBoard of Election Judges, or any of its members, may call upon anypolice officer to furnish such assistance as may be necessary. It shall be the duty of the police officer to furnish such assistance when requestedto do so by any member of the Board of Election Judges. 
C. 	Location of each machine. The voting unit and every part of the polling place shall be in plain view of the Board of Election Judges. Each votingunit shall be located in a polling place in such a position that the votingunit can be plainly seen by the Board of Election Judges when the unit is not occupied by a voter. The Board of Election Judges shall not 
1:50 

itself be nor allow any other person to be in any position which willpermit anyone to see or ascertain how a voter votes or how he has voted, except as provided in § 37-12 of this chapter. Election Judgesshall inspect the face of each unit at frequent intervals to see that theunit has not been damaged or tampered with. 
D. 	Other equipment. The Board of Election Judges shall furnish, at theexpense of the Town, and shall deliver up to the polling place a sufficient number of general return sheets. The general return sheets shall list the names of the candidates in the same order and context as the ballot. The designated number and letter, if any, on the counter foreach candidate shall be printed on the general return sheet opposite the candidate's name. 
E. 	Preparation and opening the polls. When voting units are authorized,the Board of Election Judges shall inspect and verify the numbered seal on each unit. If, after such inspection, the Board of Election Judges shallsign a certificate to that effect, after signing such certificate, the Boardof Election Judges shall remove the seal on each unit. 
(1) 	
When the voting unit is open, the Board of Election Judges shallverify that the public counter registers zero. If the public counterdoes not register zero, the Board of Election Judges shall immediately notify the Harford County Board of Elections whichshall cause the counter to be adjusted to zero; if it is impractical forthe Harford County Board of Elections to adjust the counter before the time set for opening the polls, the Board of Election Judgesshall immediately make a written record of the number registeredon the counter and shall sign and post the same on the voting unit with a statement that the unit is out of order, and the unit shall remain in that status until the polls are closed or when the HarfordCounty Board of Elections adjusts the counter of the voting unit to zero. 

(2) 	
At the opening of the polls on election day each voting unit willprint a zero report tape, which is to be signed by the Board of Election Judges. 

(3) 	
Voting unit counters may not be exposed, repaired or adjustedduring an election. The Board of Election Judges may authorize the Harford County Board of Elections to repair or adjust a votingunit as detailed above. Except as provided in this subsection or inSubsection E(1) above, all Board of Election Judges must agree that good cause exists prior to the repair or adjustment of a voting unit,and a statement of good cause shall be made in writing and signedby the Election Judges. The statement shall contain the information as to the repairs made, the reason for the malfunction of the unit,the duration of the period that the unit was out of order and theidentity of the person who opened the unit and repaired it, and the statement shall be filed as a permanent record with the Board ofElection Judges. 


1:51 

F. Keys. 

(1) 	
Where the use of voting units is authorized, the Harford County Board of Elections shall deliver the key which unlocks the operating mechanism compartment of each voting unit to theBoard of Election Judges at designated polling places at least 1/2 hour before the time set for the opening of the polls in a sealedenvelope on which shall be written the number of each voting unit,the number of the seal and the number registered on the protective counter or device as reported by the Harford County Board ofElections for each machine. 

(2) 	
Immediately upon the setup of the voting units, the Board of Election Judges shall open the envelope containing the key for thevoting units and shall determine whether the numbered seal on theoperating voting unit is unbroken and that the number thereon is identical with the number certified on the envelope containing saidkey. 

(3) 	
The key for the authorized voting units fits all units. The key opens a control panel where the power button and the memory cardreside and it unlocks the printer compartment on each unit. Oncethe control panel has been opened to activate the power button on all units, an Election Judge shall secure the key until the close ofthe polls. 


§ 37-22. Closing of polls; tabulation of votes. 
A. 	Time of closing. The polls shall be officially closed at 8:00 p.m., exceptthat all qualified voters who are then waiting in line to vote shall bepermitted to do so by the Board of Election Judges. 
B. 	Where voting units are authorized for an election, when the last suchvoter in the polling place has voted, the Board of Election Judges shallprompt each voting unit for the voting results. A tape will print showing the election results and the number of ballots cast for that unit. 
C. 	After the total for each unit has been printed, the number of votes asshown on each unit's public counter will be recorded and certified by an Election Judge who shall sign the certification. After the certificationshave been completed, the personal computer (PC) memory cards of allvoting units are to be removed and reinserted into a single voting unit where all the individual totals will be accumulated; PC memory cardsshall be removed, sealed in a locked container and transported back tothe Harford County Board of Elections. 
D. 	In the event of a mechanical failure in a voting unit before promptingelection results, the PC memory card for that unit shall be inserted intoa spare voting unit provided by the Harford County Board of Elections. 
1:52 

E. 
F. 
G. 
H. 

The Board of Election Judges shall compare the total number of voters(combination of all voting unit totals) with the number of those who have voted as shown by the voting authority cards (poll book). 
Counting of absentee ballots. After the tasks have been completed asstated above, the Board of Election Judges shall open the absentee ballot envelopes that were received prior to the closing of the polls.One Election Judge will read the vote cast for each office and a secondElection Judge shall manually record each vote with another Election Judge witnessing the recording of the vote. 
Preparation of the general return sheet. 
(1) 	
When the canvass of all voting units in the polling place has been completed, the Board of Election Judges shall then prepare in inka general return sheet reporting the votes registered on each unit,the votes registered by absentee ballots, the votes cast for each candidate, the votes cast for and against each question, the totalnumber of votes and voters who have voted, as shown by the listof voters, and the number who have voted on each unit as shown by the public counters, and also the number registered on theprotective counter or device on each unit immediately prior to theopening of the polls and immediately after the closing there of, and the sealing of the units. The number or other designation for eachunit used shall also be entered thereon and then all members of the Board of Election Judges shall sign the general return sheet. 

(2) 	
If any Judge shall decline to sign a general return sheet, he shallstate his reason therefor in writing, and a copy thereof signed byhimself shall be enclosed with the general return sheet. 

(3) 	
A duplicate of the general return sheet shall be directed to theCircuit Court of Harford County and to the Bel Air Board of TownCommissioners. The general return sheet shall be kept by the Board of Election Judges. The registering counters of the votingunit shall remain exposed to view until said returns and all otherreports have been fully completed. 


Each voting unit is to be sealed. The number of the seal which hasbeen placed upon each voting unit is to be recorded and certified bythe Board of Election Judges. The seal number is to be kept in the Town Clerk's office. The Board of Election Judges shall promptly deliver thekey of the voting unit or voting units, as the case may be, enclosedin a sealed envelope to the Harford County Board of Elections. Said envelope shall have endorsed thereon a certificate of the Board ofElection Judges. The voting units are to be returned to the HarfordCounty Board of Elections warehouse. The units are to remain sealed until the final counts have been duly recorded with the Clerk of theHarford County Circuit Court office and verification of that recordinghas been received by the Town Clerk's office. 
1:53 

§ 37-23. Proclamation of results. 
A. 	Before the general return sheet has been signed, in the presence of any candidates and any person appointed by an absent candidate torepresent him in his absence, the Board of Election Judges shall, afterclosing of the polls as provided in § 37-22 herein, proceed as follows to proclaim the voting results:19 
(1) 	
An Election Judge of the Board of Election Judges or the TownClerk, if designated by the Board of Election Judges, shall read and announce in distinct tones the results of the election in the presence of all candidates or their duly designate challengers. 

(2) 	
The vote count for each question or referendum on the ballot shall be read. 


B. 	After such proclamation ample opportunity shall be given to any personlawfully present to compare the results so announced with the counter dials of the units, or the printed or photographic record thereof in thecase of the units so constructed as to furnish a printed or photographicrecord of the setting of the counters and the numbers registered thereon and with the absentee ballots, and any necessary correctionsshall then and there by made by the Board of Election Judges, afterwhich the door or other cover of the unit shall be closed and locked. 
§ 37-24. Contested elections. 
A. 	If, within 10 days after an election, the Board of Election Judges shallreceive notice in writing of any contest over the result of an election, then such Board of Election Judges, within five days from the receipt ofsuch notice and in the presence of the principals involved in any suchcontest or their authorized representative, shall proceed to inspect and examine the voting units containing the votes cast for such contestedoffice and shall make a record of the votes for such office upon eachsuch unit. Such record shall be received as evidence as fully as if proved by the oral testimony of the person who shall sign the same orby the production of said voting units in court. After such inspection,examination and recording of the results thereof, the voting units shall be released and made available for use in any succeeding election. 
B. 	All cases of contested election shall be decided by the Circuit Court ofHarford County. The Circuit Court may adopt such modes of proceeding and adjudging costs in the case of contested elections as to it may seemmost satisfactory. Each party shall have the right to appeal to the Courtof Special Appeals as in other cases, said appeal to be taken within 30 days from the date of the decision complained of. The appeal should beheard and decided by the Court of Special Appeals as part of the record. 
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:54 
§ 37-25. Violations and penalties. 
A. 	Offenses for improper registration, voting or ballot tampering, improper operation of the polling place, or destruction or tamperingwith the voting equipment shall be determined in accordance with Title16 of the Election Law, Annotated Code of Maryland. 
B. 	As provided for misdemeanors under Section 1104, Article XI of theCharter of the Town of Bel Air, the fine for violation of the provisions ofthis chapter shall be as set by the Board of Town Commissioners.20 
Chapter 43 
ETHICS, CODE OF 
GENERAL REFERENCS 
Personnel — See Ch. 82. 


§ 43-1. Applicability. [Amended 11-5-2012 by Ord. No. 755-12] 
The provisions of this chapter apply to all officials, candidates, employees,and appointees to boards and commissions of the Town of Bel Air. 
§ 43-2. Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall havethe meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
BUSINESS ENTITY — Any partnership, association, corporation, firm, institution, trust, foundation, sole proprietor, or other organization (exceptthe state and the Town of Bel Air or any agency thereof), whether or notoperated for profit. 
CANDIDATE — A person filing for election to a municipal office. 
COMPENSATION — Money or any other valuable thing, regardless of form,received or to be received by a person from an employer for services rendered. 
FINANCIAL INTEREST — Ownership of an interest as the result of whichthe owner has received within the past three years, is currently receiving, or in the future is entitled to receive, more than $1,000 per year; or an official,employee or spouse of an official or employee has ownership of more than3% of a business entity. 
GIFT — The transfer of anything of economic value, regardless of form,without adequate and lawful consideration. A gift does not include thesolicitation, acceptance, receipt, or regulation of a political contribution 
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:55 
that is regulated in accordance with the Election Law Article of theAnnotated Code of Maryland or any other state law regulating the conduct of elections or the receipt of political contributions. 
INTEREST — Any legal or equitable economic interest that is owned orheld, in whole or in part, jointly or severally, directly or indirectly, whether or not the economic interest is subject to an encumbrance or condition.However, "interest" shall not include an interest held in the capacity of anagent, custodian, fiduciary, personal representative, or trustee, unless the holder has an equitable interest in the subject matter; an interest in a timeor demand deposit in a financial institution; an interest in an insurancepolicy, endowment policy, or annuity contract by which an insurer promises to pay a fixed amount of money in a lump sum or periodically for life or someother specified period; or a common trust fund or a trust that forms part ofa pension or a profit-sharing plan that has more than 25 participants and is determined by the IRS to be a qualified trust or college savings plan underthe Internal Revenue Code. 
OFFICIAL or EMPLOYEE — Any Town Commissioner of the Town of Bel Air or person employed by and receiving compensation from the Town of BelAir in any capacity; or on boards or commissions of the Town.[Amended11-5-2012 by Ord. No. 755-12] 
QUALIFYING RELATIVE — A spouse, parent, child or sibling. 
REAL PROPERTY — Land owned, leasehold interest, or option to purchase. 
TOWN AGENCY — Any Town office, department, institution, board, commission or corporation which is recognized as a branch or segmentof Town government, either by the Town Charter or by any ordinance or resolution of the Town.[Amended 11-5-2012 by Ord. No. 755-12] 
TRANSACTION INVOLVING THE TOWN OF BEL AIR — Any proceeding, application, submission, request for filing or other determination, any contract, claim or case, any sale or purchase, any computer transfer ofmoneys or information, or other such matter that the Town of Bel Air orany of the agencies, boards, commissions and offices thereof may be a party to or in which the Town of Bel Air may reasonably be expected to be a party.[Amended 11-5-2012 by Ord. No. 755-12] 
§ 43-3. Board of Ethics. 
A. 	The Board of Ethics is hereby established for the purpose of administering this Code of Ethics and recommending necessarychanges to the Board of Town Commissioners from time to time. TheBoard of Ethics shall consist of five Town of Bel Air residents, not less than 21 years of age, who shall be appointed by the Board of TownCommissioners of Bel Air. Members shall serve staggered four-yearterms and shall be removed only for cause. No member of the Board shall be otherwise an official or employee of the Town of Bel Air, norshall any member receive compensation. 
B. The Board of Ethics of Bel Air shall: 

1:56 

(1) 
Devise, receive, and maintain all forms required by this chapter. 


(a) 	
Forms include: 

[1] 	Conflict of interest form. 
[2] 	Financial disclosure form. 
[3] 	Gifts disclosure form. 
[4] 	Lobbying registration form. 

(b) 	
Completed forms will be received by the Town Clerk and forwarded to the Board of Ethics within 10 days of receipt. 

(c) 	
All completed forms will be maintained on file at the TownClerk's office for a period of four years. 



(2) 	
Develop procedures and policies for advisory opinion requests and provide published advisory opinions to persons subject to thischapter regarding the applicability of the provisions of this chapterto them. 

(3) 	
Develop procedures and policies for the processing of complaintsto make appropriate determinations regarding complaints filed byany person alleging violations of this chapter. 

(4) 	
Conduct a public information program regarding the purposes andapplication of this chapter. 


C. 	The Town Attorney shall advise the Board of Ethics. 
D. 	The Board of Ethics shall certify to the State Ethics Commission, onor before October 1 of each year, that the Town is in compliance withthe requirements of State Government Article, Title 15, Subtitle 8, Annotated Code of Maryland, for elected local officials. 
E. 	The Board of Ethics shall determine if changes to this chapter arerequired to be in compliance with the requirement of State Government Article, Title 15, of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and shall forwardany recommended changes and amendments to the Bel Air Board ofTown Commissioners for enactment. 
F. 	The Board of Ethics may adopt other policies and procedures to assistin the implementation of the programs established in this chapter. 
§ 43-4. Conflicts of interest. 
A. 	Participation prohibitions. 
(1) 	
Except as permitted by the regulations or opinion of the Boardof Ethics of the Town of Bel Air, an official or employee may not participate in: 

1:57 

(a) 

(b) 


Any matter in which, to the knowledge of the official or employee, the official or employee, or a qualified relative of the official or employee, has an interest, except in the exercise ofan administrative or ministerial duty that does not affect thedisposition or decision of the matter. 
Any matter in which any of the following is a party, exceptin the exercise of an administrative or ministerial duty thatdoes not affect the disposition or decision with respect to the matter: 
[1] 	A business entity in which the official or employee has adirect financial interest of which the official or employee may reasonably be expected to know; 
[2] 	A business entity for which the official, employee, or aqualified relative of the official or employee is an officer, director, trustee, partner, or employee; 
[3] 	A business entity with which the official or employee or,to the knowledge of the official or employee, a qualified relative of the official or employee is negotiatingemployment or has any arrangement concerningprospective employment; 
[4] 	A business entity that is a party to an existing contractwith the official or employee, or which, to the knowledgeof the official or employee, is a party to a contract with a qualified relative, if the contract reasonably could beexpected to result in a conflict between the privateinterests of the official or employee and the official duties of the official or employee; 
[5] 	A business entity doing business with the Town in whicha direct financial interest is owned by another entity in which the official or employee has a direct financial interest, if the official or employee may be reasonablyexpected to know of both direct financial interests; or 
[6] 	A business entity: 
[a] 	Which the official or employee knows is a creditor orobligee of the official or employee or of a qualified relative of the official or employee with respect to athing of economic value; and 
[b] 	In which a creditor or obligee of the official or employee or of a qualified relative of the official oremployee is in a position to directly and substantiallyaffect the interest of the official or employee or of a qualified relative of the official or employee. 
1:58 

(2) 	
A person who is disqualified from participating under SubsectionA(1)(a) and (b) shall disclose the nature and circumstances of the conflict using a conflict of interest form sufficiently in advance ofthe action and may participate or act if: 

(a) 	
The disqualification leaves a body with less than a quorum capable of acting; 

(b) 	
The disqualified official or employee is required by law to act; or 

(c) 	
The disqualified official or employee is the only personauthorized to act. 



(3) 	
The prohibitions of Subsection A(1)(a) and (b) do not apply if participation is allowed by regulation or opinion of the Board ofEthics. 


B. 	Employment and financial interest restrictions. 
(1) 	Except as permitted by regulation of the Board of Ethics, when theinterest is disclosed or when the employment does not create aconflict of interest or appearance of conflict, an official or employee may not: 
(a) 	Be employed by or have a financial interest in an entity:

[Amended 11-5-2012 by Ord. No. 755-12] 
[1] 	Subject to the authority of the official or employee or theTown agency, board or commission with which the officialor employee is affiliated; or 
[2] 	Which is negotiating or has entered a contract with theagency, board or commission with which the official oremployee is affiliated; or 
(b) 	Hold any other employment or relationship which would impairthe impartiality or independence of judgment of the official oremployee. 
(2) 	This prohibition does not apply to: 
(a) 	
An official or employee who is appointed to a regulatory orlicensing authority pursuant to a statutory requirement that persons subject to the jurisdiction of the authority be represented in appointments to the authority; 

(b) 	
Subject to other provisions of law, a member of a board or commission in regard to a financial interest or employmentheld at the time of appointment, provided the financial interestor employment is publicly disclosed to the appointing authority and the Board of Ethics; [Amended 11-5-2012 by Ord. No. 755-12] 


1:59 

C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
(c) 	
An official or employee whose duties are ministerial, if theprivate employment or financial interest does not create a conflict of interest or the appearance of a conflict of interest,as permitted by and in accordance with regulations adopted bythe Board of Ethics; or 

(d) 	
Employment or financial interests allowed by regulation of theBoard of Ethics if the employment does not create a conflictof interest or the appearance of a conflict of interest or the financial interest is disclosed. 


Post-employment limitations and restrictions. 
(1) 	
A former official or employee may not assist or represent any party other than the Town for compensation in a case, contract, or otherspecific matter involving the Town if that matter is one in which theformer official or employee significantly participated as an official or employee. 

(2) 	
Until the conclusion of the next regularly scheduled meeting of theBoard of Town Commissioners that begins after the elected official leaves office, a former official or member of the Bel Air Board of Town Commissioners may not assist or represent another party forcompensation in a matter that is the subject of legislative action. 


Contingent compensation. Except in a judicial or quasi-judicialproceeding, an official or employee may not assist or represent a partyfor contingent compensation (i.e., dependent or conditioned by something happening) in any matter before or involving the Town. 
Use of prestige of office. 
(1) 	
An official or employee may not intentionally use the prestige of the office or public position for the private gain of that official oremployee or the private gain of another. 

(2) 	
This subsection does not prohibit the performance of usual and customary constituent services by an elected official without additional compensation. 

Solicitation and acceptance of gifts. 

(1) 	
An official or employee may not solicit any gift. 

(2) 	
An official or employee may not directly solicit or facilitate thesolicitation of a gift, on behalf of another person, from an individual regulated lobbyist. 

(3) 	
An official or employee may not knowingly accept a gift, directly orindirectly, from a person that the official or employee knows or has the reason to know: 


1:60 

(a) 	
Is doing business with or seeking to do business with the Townoffice, agency, board or commission with which the official or employee is affiliated; [Amended 11-5-2012 by Ord. No. 755-12] 

(b) 	
Has financial interests that may be substantially and materially affected, in a manner distinguishable from the public generally,by the performance or nonperformance of the official duties ofthe official or employee; 

(c) 	
Is engaged in an activity regulated or controlled by the official's or employee's governmental unit; or 

(d) 	
Is a lobbyist with respect to matters within the jurisdiction of the official or employee. 


(4) 	
Notwithstanding Subsection F(3) of this subsection, an official oremployee may accept the following: 

(a) 	
Meals and beverages consumed in the presence of the donoror sponsoring entity; 

(b) 	
Ceremonial gifts or awards that have insignificant monetary value; 

(c) 	
Unsolicited gifts of nominal value that do not exceed $20 incost or trivial items of informational value; 

(d) 	
Reasonable expenses for food, travel, lodging, and scheduledentertainment of the official or the employee at a meetingwhich is given in return for the participation of the official or employee in a panel or speaking engagement at the meeting; 

(e) 	
Gifts or tickets or free admission extended to an elected official to attend a charitable, cultural, or political event, if the purpose of this gift or admission is a courtesy or ceremonyextended to the elected official's office; 

(f) 	
A specific gift or class of gifts that the Board of Ethics exempts from the operation of this subsection upon a finding, in writing,that acceptance of the gift or class of gifts would not bedetrimental to the impartial conduct of the business of the Town and that the gift is purely personal and private in nature; 

(g) 	
Gifts from a person related to the official or employee by bloodor marriage, or any other individual who is a member of the household of the official or employee; or 

(h) 	
Honoraria for speaking to or participating in a meeting,provided that the offering of the honorarium is not related in any way to the official's or employee's official position. 



(5) 
Subsection F(4) does not apply to a gift: 


1:61 


(a) 	
That would tend to impair the impartiality and the independence of judgment of the official or employee receiving the gift; 

(b) 	
Of significant value that would give the appearance of impairing the impartiality and independence of judgment of the official or employee; or 

(c) 	
Of significant value that the recipient official or employeebelieves or has reason to believe is designed to impair the impartiality and independence of judgment of the official oremployee. 


G. 	Disclosure of confidential information. Other than in the discharge of official duties, an official or employee may not disclose or use confidential information that the official or employee acquired byreason of the official's or employee's public position and that is not available to the public, for the economic benefit of the official or employee or that of another person. 
H. 	Participation in procurement. 
(1) 	
An individual or a person that employs an individual who assistsa Town agency in the drafting of specifications, an invitation forbids, or a request for proposals for a procurement may not submit a bid or proposal for that procurement or assist or represent anotherperson, directly or indirectly, who is submitting a bid or proposalfor the procurement. 

(2) 	
The Board of Ethics may establish exemptions from the requirements of this section for providing descriptive literature,sole-source procurements, and written comments solicited by the procuring agency. 


§ 43-5. Financial disclosure: elected officials (incumbents) andcandidates to be elected officials. 
This section applies to all elected officials and candidates to be electedofficials. 
A. 	Except as provided in Subsection C of this section, an elected official or a candidate to be an elected official shall file the financial disclosure form, provided by the Board of Ethics, required under this section: 
(1) 	
Under oath or affirmation; and 

(2) 	
With the Board of Ethics. 


B. 	Deadlines for filing financial disclosure forms. 
(1) 	
An incumbent elected official shall file a financial disclosure form annually, no later than April 30 of each year for the precedingcalendar year. 

1:62 

(2) 	
An individual who is appointed to fill a vacancy in an office forwhich a financial disclosure form is required and who has not already filed the form shall file a financial disclosure form for thepreceding calendar year within 30 days after appointment. 

(3) 	
An individual who, other than by reason of death, leaves an office for which a financial disclosure form is required shall file thecomplete form within 60 days after leaving the office. 



C. 	
The statement shall cover: 

(1) 	
The calendar year immediately preceding the year in which theindividual left office, unless a statement covering that year hasalready been filed by the individual; and 

(2) 	
The portion of the current calendar year during which the individual held the office. 



D. 	
Candidates to be elected officials. 

(1) 	
Except for an official who has filed a financial disclosure formunder another provision of this section for the reporting period, acandidate to be an elected official shall file a financial disclosure form each year beginning with the year in which the certificate ofcandidacy is filed through the year of the election. 

(2) 	
A candidate to be an elected official shall file a financial disclosure form required under this section: 

(a) 	
In the year the certificate of candidacy is filed, no later thanthe filing of the certificate of candidacy; or 

(b) 	
If the year of the election if different from the year thecertificate of candidacy was filed, on or before April 30; and 

(c) 	
In all other years for which a statement is required, on or before April 30. 



(3) 	
A candidate to be an elected official: 

(a) 	
May file the required financial disclosure form under Subsection D(2)(a) of this section with the Town Clerk or Boardof Ethics with the certificate of candidacy or prior to filing thecertificate of candidacy; and 

(b) 	
Shall file the financial disclosure form required under Subsection D(2)(b) and (c) of this section with the Board ofEthics. 



(4) 	
If a candidate fails to file a financial disclosure form required bythis section after written notice is provided by the Town Clerk orBoard of Ethics, the candidate is deemed to have withdrawn the candidacy. 


1:63 


(5) 	
The Town Clerk and Board of Ethics may not accept any certificateof candidacy unless a financial disclosure form has been filed in proper form. 

(6) 	
Within 10 days of the receipt of a financial disclosure form requiredunder this section, the Town Clerk shall forward the statement to the Board of Ethics. 


E. 	Public record. 
(1) 	
The Town Clerk's office shall maintain all completed financial disclosure forms filed under this section. 

(2) 	
Financial disclosure form shall be made available during normaloffice hours for examination and copying by the public, subject to administrative procedures and reasonable fees, as establishedin the Town's Fee Schedule passed by the Board of Town Commissioners. 

(3) 	
If an individual examines or copies a financial disclosure form, theTown Clerk shall record: 

(a) 	
The name and home address of the individual reviewing or copying the statement; and 

(b) 	
The name of the person whose financial disclosure form wasexamined or copied. 



(4) 	
Upon request by the official or employee whose financial disclosureform was examined or copied, the Board of Ethics shall provide theofficial with a copy of the name and home address of the person who reviewed the official's financial disclosure form. 

(5) 	
Retention requirements. The Town Clerk's office shall retain financial disclosure forms for four years from the date of receipt. 


F. 	Contents of financial disclosure forms from incumbents and elected officials. 
(1) 	
Interests in real property. A financial disclosure form filed under this section shall include a schedule of all interests in real property,wherever located. For each interest in real property, this scheduleshall include: 

(a) 	
The nature of the property and the location, by street address,mailing address or legal description, of the property. 

(b) 	
The nature and extent of the interest held, including any conditions and encumbrances on the interest; 

(c) 	
The date when, the manner in which, and the identity of theperson from whom the interest was acquired; 

1:64 

(d) 	
The nature and amount of the consideration given in exchangefor the interest or, if acquired other than by purchase, the fair market value of the interest at the time acquired; 

(e) 	
If any interest was transferred, in whole or in part, at anytime during the reporting period, a description of the interest transferred, the nature and amount of the consideration received for the interest, and the identity of the person towhom the interest was transferred; and 

(f) 	
The identity of any other person with an interest in the property. 



(2) 	
Interest in corporations and partnerships. A financial disclosure form filed under this section shall include a schedule of all interests in any corporation, partnership, limited liability partnership, orlimited liability corporation, regardless of whether the corporation or partnership does business with the Town. 

(a) 	
For each interest reported under this subsection, the scheduleshall include: 

[1] 	The name and address of the principal office of thecorporation, partnership, limited liability partnership, orlimited liability corporation; 
[2] 	The nature and amount of the interest held, including anyconditions and encumbrances on the interest; 
[3] 	With respect to any interest transferred, in whole or in part, at any time during the reporting period, a descriptionof the interest transferred, the nature and amount of the consideration received for the interest and, if known, the identity of the person to whom the interest was transferred; and 
[4] 	With respect to any interest acquired during the reporting period: 
[a] 	The date when, the manner in which and the identityof the person from whom the interest was acquired; and 
[b] 	The nature and the amount of the consideration givenin exchange for the interest or, if acquired other than by purchase, the fair market value of the interest atthe time acquired. 

(b) 	
An individual may satisfy the requirement to report the amount of the interest held by reporting, instead of a dollar amount: 




1:65 

(3) 


(4) 


(5) 



[1] 	For an equity interest in a corporation, the number ofshares held and, unless the corporation's stock is publicly traded, the percentage of equity interest held; or 
[2] 	For an equity interest in a partnership, the percentage ofequity interest held. 
Interests in business entities doing business with the Town. A financial disclosure form filed under this section shall include a schedule of all interests in any business entity that does business with the Town, other than interests reported under SubsectionF(2). For each interest reported under this subsection, the scheduleshall include: 
(a) 	
The name and address of the principal office of the businessentity; 

(b) 	
The nature and amount of the interest held, including any conditions to and encumbrances in the interest; 

(c) 	
With respect to any interest transferred, in whole or in part,at any time during the reporting period, a description of the interest transferred, the nature and amount of the consideration received in exchange for the interest, and, ifknown, the identity of the person to whom the interest was transferred; and 

(d) 	
With respect to any interest acquired during the reportingperiod: 


[1] 	The date when, the manner in which, and the identity ofthe person from whom the interest was acquired; and 
[2] 	The nature and the amount of the consideration given in exchange for the interest or, if acquired other than bypurchase, the fair market value of the interest at the timeacquired. 
Gifts. A gift disclosure form filed annually under this section shallinclude a schedule of each gift in excess of $20 in value or a seriesof gifts totaling $100 or more received on or before April 30 of each year from or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, any one personwho does business with or is regulated by the Town. For each giftreported, the schedule shall include: 
(a) 	
A description of the nature and value of the gift; and 

(b) 	
The identity of the person from whom, or on behalf of whom,directly or indirectly, the gift was received. 


Employment with or interests in entities doing business with theTown. A financial disclosure form filed under this section shall include a schedule of all offices, directorships, and salaried 
1:66 

(6) 
(7) 

(8) 

(9) 


employment by the individual or member of the immediate familyof the individual held at any time during the reporting period with entities doing business with the Town. For each position reportedunder this subsection, the schedule shall include: 
(a) 	
The name and address of the principal office of the entity; 

(b) 	
The title and nature of the office, directorship, or salariedemployment held and the date it commenced; and 

(c) 	
The name of each Town agency with which the entity is involved. 

Indebtedness to entities doing business with the Town. A financialdisclosure form filed under this section shall include a schedule of all liabilities, excluding retail credit accounts, to persons doingbusiness with the Town owed at any time during the reportingperiod: 

(a) 	
By the individual; or 

(b) 	
By a member of the immediate family of the individual if theindividual was involved in the transaction giving rise to the liability. 

For each liability reported under this subsection, the financialdisclosure form shall include: 

(a) 	
The identity of the person to whom the liability was owed andthe date the liability was incurred; 

(b) 	
The amount of the liability owed as of the end of the reporting period; 

(c) 	
The terms of payment of the liability and the extent to whichthe principal amount of the liability was increased or reduced during the year; and 

(d) 	
The security given, if any, for the liability. 


A financial disclosure form filed under this section shall include a schedule of the immediate family members of the individualemployed by the Town in any capacity at any time during thereporting period. 
Sources of earned income. 
(a) 	A financial disclosure form filed under this section shall include a schedule of: 
[1] 	The name and address of each place of employment and ofeach business entity of which the individual or a memberof the individual's immediate family was sole or partial owner and from which the individual or a member of the 
1:67 

individual's immediate family received earned income, atany time during the reporting period. 
(b) 	A minor child's employment or business ownership need notbe disclosed if the Town does not regulate, exercise authorityover, or contract with the place of employment or business entity of the minor child. 
(10)A financial disclosure form filed under this section may also includea schedule of additional interests or information that the individual making the statement wishes to disclose. 
§ 43-6. Financial disclosure: employees and appointed officials. 
A. 	This section applies to the following employees: [Amended 11-5-2012 by Ord. No. 755-12] 
(1) 	
Town Administrator. 

(2) 	
All department heads. 

(3) 	
All deputy department heads. 

(4) 	
All information technology personnel. 

(5) 	
Armory Facilities Manager. 

(6) 	
Financial Officer. 

(7) 	
All planners. 

(8) 	
Chief of Operations. 

(9) 	
Facilities Manager. 


(10)Assistant Chief of Operations. 
(11)Shop Supervisor. 
(12)Sanitation Supervisor. 
B. 	A financial disclosure form under this section shall be filed with the Board of Ethics under oath or affirmation. 
C. 	On or before April 30 of each year during which an official or employeeholds office, an official or employee shall file a gift disclosure formdisclosing gifts, as defined in § 43-4, that were received during the preceding calendar year from any person that contracts with or isregulated by the Town, including the name of the donor of the gift andthe approximate retail value at the time of receipt. 
D. 	Submitting a conflict of interest form to the Board of Ethics, an officialor employee shall disclose employment and interests that raise conflictsof interest or potential conflicts of interest in connection with a specific 
1:68 

proposed action by the employee or official sufficiently in advance ofthe action to provide adequate disclosure to the public. 
E. 	The Board of Ethics shall maintain all financial disclosure forms filed under this section as public records available for public inspectionand copying as provided in § 43-5E, entitled "Public Records," and § 43-5E(5), entitled Retention Requirements, of this chapter. 
F. 	For the purpose of § 43-5F of this chapter, the following interests areconsidered to be the interests of the individual completing the financial disclosure form: 
(1) 	
An interest held by a member of the individual's immediate family,if the interest was, at any time during the reporting period, directly or indirectly controlled by the individual. 

(2) 	
An interest held by a business entity in which the individual held a30% or greater interest at any time during the reporting period. 

(3) 	
An interest held by a trust or an estate in which, at any time duringthe reporting period: 


(a) 	The individual held a reversionary interest or was a beneficiary; or if a revocable trust, the individual was a settlor. 
G. 	The Board of Ethics shall review the financial disclosure forms submitted under this section for compliance with the provisions of this section and shall notify an individual submitting the form of anyomissions or deficiencies. 
H. 	The Town Board of Ethics may take appropriate enforcement action to ensure compliance with this section. 
§ 43-7. Lobbying. 
A. 	A lobbyist shall file a lobbying registration form with the Board of Ethics on or before the later of January 15 of the calendar year or withinfive days after first performing an act that requires registration in thecalendar year with the Board of Ethics if the person: 
(1) 	
Personally appears before a Town official or employee with theintent to influence that person in the performance of the officialduties of the official or employee; and 

(2) 	
In connection with the intent to influence, expends or reasonablyexpects to expend in a given calendar year in excess of $100 onfood, entertainment, or other gifts for officials or employees of the Town. 


B. 	The lobbying registration form covers a defined registration period, notto exceed one calendar year, and shall identify: 
(1) 	The registrant; 
1:69 

(2) 	
Any other person on whose behalf the registrant acts; and 

(3) 	
The subject matter on which the registrant proposes to make appearances specified in this section. 


C. 	Within 30 days after the end of any calendar year during which a personwas registered under this section, the person shall file a written report with the Board of Ethics disclosing: 
(1) 	
The value, date, and nature of any food, entertainment or other giftprovided to a Town official or employee; and 

(2) 	
If a gift or series of gifts to a single official or employee exceeds$100 in value, the identity of the official or employee. 


D. 	The Board of Ethics shall maintain the registrations and reports filed under this section as public records available for public inspection andcopying at the Town Clerk's office for four years after receipt by theBoard of Ethics. 
§ 43-8. Exemptions and modifications. [Amended 11-5-2012 by Ord.No. 755-12] 
The Board of Ethics may grant exemptions and modifications to the provisions of §§ 43-4 and 43-6 of this chapter to employees and to appointedmembers of the Town Board and commissions when the Board of Ethics finds that an exemption or modification would not be contrary to the purposes of this chapter and the application of this chapter would: 
A. 	Constitute an unreasonable invasion of privacy; and 
B. 	Significantly reduce the availability of qualified persons for public service. 
§ 43-9. Enforcement. 
A. 	The Board of Ethics may issue a cease-and-desist order against any person found to be in violation of this chapter. 
B. 	Upon a finding of a violation of any provision of this chapter, the Boardof Ethics may: 
(1) 	
Issue an order of compliance directing the respondent to cease anddesist from the violation; 

(2) 	
Issue a reprimand; or 

(3) 	
Recommend to the appropriate authority other appropriatediscipline of the respondent, including censure or removal if thatdiscipline is authorized by law. 


C. If the Board of Ethics finds that a respondent has violated § 43-7 of thischapter, the Board of Ethics may: 
1:70 

D. 
E. 
F. 
G. 
H. 
I. 
J. 
K. 
(1) 	
Require a respondent who is a registered lobbyist to file anyadditional reports or information that reasonably related to the information that is required under § 43-7 of this chapter; 

(2) 	
Suspend the registration of an individual registered lobbyist if theBoard of Ethics finds that the lobbyist has knowingly and willfully violated § 43-7 of this chapter or has been convicted of a criminaloffense arising from lobbying activities. 


Upon request of the Board of Ethics, the Town Attorney may file a petition for injunctive or other relief in the Circuit Court of HarfordCounty, or in any other court having proper venue, for the purpose ofrequiring compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
The court may: 
(1) 	
Issue an order to cease and desist from the violation; 

(2) 	
Void an official action taken by an official or employee with a conflict of interest prohibited by this chapter when the actionarises from or concerns the subject matter of the conflict and ifthe legal action is brought within 90 days of the occurrence of the official action, if the court deems voiding the action to be in thebest interest of the public. 


The court may not void any official action appropriating public funds, levying taxes, or providing for the issuance of bonds, notes, or otherevidences of public obligations. 
In addition to any other enforcement provisions in this chapter, a person who the Board of Ethics or a court finds has violated this chapter: 
(1) 	
Is subject to termination or other disciplinary action; and 

(2) 	
May be suspended from receiving payment of salary or other compensation pending full compliance with the terms of an orderof the Board of Ethics or a court. 


The Town official or employee found to have violated this chapter issubject to disciplinary or other appropriate personnel action, includingremoval from office, disciplinary action, suspension of salary, or other sanction. 
Violation of § 43-7 of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor. 
Fines of § 43-5, 43-6, or 43-7 shall be approved by a resolution that is passed by the Board of Town Commissioners. 
A finding of a violation of this chapter by the Board of Ethics is publicinformation. 


Chapter 50 

1:71 

FINANCE AND TAXATION 

1:72 

ARTICLE I 
Financial Matters 
§ 50-1. Fiscal year.21 
The fiscal year of the Town of Bel Air shall begin on the first day of July of a calendar year and end on the last day of June of the next calendar year. 
§ 50-2. Date for submission of budget. 
The Town Administrator shall prepare and submit to the Board of Town Commissioners a proposed budget in accordance with the provisions ofArticle VII, Section 702(a) of the Charter of the Town of Bel Air. 
§ 50-3. Assessments for services and improvements and abatementof nuisances. [Amended 3-3-2008 by Ord. No. 705-08] 
Whenever the Town shall provide any special service, benefit or improvement to or for any real property within the Town, shall abate any nuisances existing on real property at the Town's expense or shall removeprohibited objects from such real property or from any street, road, alleyor sidewalk on which such property abuts at the Town's expense, then the value of such service, benefit, or improvement or the cost of such abatementor removal may be charged to the owner of such real property, or both theowner and occupant if such property is not owner-occupied, and shall be a lien upon such real property until paid, to be collected in the same manneras municipal taxes are collected. Liens hereby established shall be subjectonly to liens for state, county, and municipal real estate taxes. 
§ 50-4. Tax credit for historic restoration and preservation. 
A. 	Subject to the provisions of this section, there shall be allowed a taxcredit on Town real property taxes based upon the amount expended by a private owner-taxpayer for restoration and preservation of anystructure having historic or architectural value which is located withinany historic district and/or site designated by the Historic Preservation Commission.22 The tax credit shall be limited to those expenses having to do with exterior features of a structure only, which include appurtenances and environmental settings, and not to expenses relating to the interior of a structure which are not subject to thejurisdiction of the Historic Preservation Commission. The tax creditshall be in an amount equal to 10% of the owner's expense for such restoration and preservation, as indicated by properly documented receipts. 
B. 	There shall be allowed a tax credit on Town real property taxes based upon the amount expended by an owner-taxpayer for new construction 
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
22.Editor's Note: See Ch. 246, Historic Preservation. 
1:73 C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
G. 
adjacent to and architecturally compatible with any structure havinghistoric or architectural value which is located within any historic district and/or site designated by the Historic Preservation Commission. The tax credit shall be in an amount equal to 5% ofthe owner's expense of the cost of construction of an architecturally compatible new structure, as indicated by properly documented receipts. 
The tax credits referred to herein shall be allowed for the Town tax year immediately subsequent to the year in which the restoration orpreservation work is completed, and any unused portion of this taxcredit may be carried forward to subsequent tax years, not to exceed five tax years. 
Application for the tax credit referred to in this section shall be submitted with the certificate of approval application and shall be made at the time that the application is made for the building permit. Atthe time the Historic Preservation Commission takes action on the application for the certificate of approval for the work to be done it shall also make a determination whether the proposed work is eligible for thetax credit provided for in this section and shall also determine whetherthe structure has historic or architectural value within the meaning of § 9-204 of the Tax-Property Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland,as amended. It is the intent of this section that the Historic Preservation Commission be liberal in such determination. The tax credit application shall not be finally approved until final inspection and approval ofthe work by the Historic Preservation Commission or its designatedstaff and until the receipts required by this section have been filed with the Historic Preservation Commission, accompanied by the oathor affirmation of the owner-taxpayer, on such forms prescribed by theCommission, that the receipts are those for the actual expenditures in connection with the restoration and preservation of the structure. 
Notwithstanding any provision in this section to the contrary, no taxcredit shall be allowed for any restoration or preservation work which has not been reviewed and approved in advance by the HistoricPreservation Commission. 
The Historic Preservation Commission shall deny the credit if any aspect of the restoration and preservation work or new construction isnot done in accordance with the Town of Bel Air Historic Preservation Commission Design Guidelines for Rehabilitation, Maintenance and New Construction. 
The approved application in the amount determined by the HistoricPreservation Commission shall be forwarded to the Town Finance Department to be acted upon. 
1:74 

§ 50-5. Salaries of Commissioners. 
The salaries of the Commissioners and Chair of the Board of Town Commissioners shall be $4,800 and $6,000 per year, respectively. 
§ 50-6. Fees for special events on Town property. 
The Board of Town Commissioners shall exercise its authority to designate, by resolution, fees for special events held on Town property. Exemptions tothe fees shall also be designated by resolution. 
1:75 

ARTICLE II 


Parking Fund 
§ 50-7. Establishment. 
A. 	A fund titled "Parking Fund"23 is hereby established for the purpose of receiving and aggregating funds which shall be used for the development and management of off-street parking in the downtownarea. The fund shall be accounted for in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles as applicable to enterprise funds. 
B. 	The Bel Air Board of Town Commissioners shall be the Trustees of the Parking Fund. 
§ 50-8. Purpose and function of specific accounts.24 
The Parking Fund's equity shall consist of three separate reserve accountseach of which shall serve a specific purpose and function as follows: 
A. 	Development Account. 
(1) 	
Purpose. This account shall be expended exclusively for capitalimprovements to Town-owned off-street parking lots or structures, including but not limited to the purchase of land, paving, drainage,parking meters, safety and control devices, maintenance and operation and multi-deck construction. 

(2) 	
Allocation of moneys. The Board of Town Commissioners shall havethe authority to allocate moneys to the Development Account fromTown of Bel Air revenue sources, including but not limited to real property taxes, grants, special assessments, gifts, donations,revenue surpluses and proceeds from the sale of Town obligations. 

(3) 	
Bond proceeds. All moneys derived from the sale of general obligation bonds, revenue bonds, bond anticipation notes or otherobligations of the Town of Bel Air shall be placed in the Development Account to the extent that such moneys have been appropriated for the purpose of said account. 

(4) 	
Investment of moneys. Moneys allocated to the DevelopmentAccount may be invested only in obligations of the United States or State of Maryland or in interest-bearing accounts of financialinstitutions insured by the United States or the State of Maryland,and all income derived from such investments shall be added to said account and shall be used for no other purpose, except that allinterest from the temporary investment of money derived from thesale of bonds, bond anticipation notes or other obligations of the 


23.Editor's Note: Throughout this chapter, references to the "Parking Projects Fund" wereamended to "Parking Fund" at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,Art. III). 
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:77 
Town shall be placed in the Debt Service Account as establishedherein. 
B. 	Debt Service Account. 
(1) 	
Purpose. This account shall be expended exclusively for debtservice on bonds or obligations of the Town issued for development of off-street parking so long as the interest and principal of suchobligations shall be outstanding. 

(2) 	
Allocation of moneys. There shall be paid into the Debt Service Account the following moneys: 

(a) 	
All interest earned by the temporary investment of moneyderived from the sale of bonds or obligations of the Town issued for the development of off-street parking. 

(b) 	
All parking revenues of the Town, whether derived from parking meters, fines, leases, fees or any other source. 

(c) 	
General tax revenues of the Town intended to be expended fordebt service on bonds or obligations of the Town issued for thedevelopment of off-street parking. 



(3) 	
Investment of moneys. Moneys allocated to the Debt Service Account may be invested only in obligations of the United Statesor State of Maryland or in interest-bearing accounts of financial institutions insured by the United States or the State of Maryland,and all income derived from such investments shall be added to said account. 

(4) 	
Nonarbitrage. In all events, at least once a year the amounts in theDebt Service Account will be depleted to an amount not greaterthan 1/12 of annual debt service on the bonds, any money deposited in the Debt Service Account will be spent within a thirteen-month period beginning on the date of deposit, and anyamount received from investment of moneys held in the Debt Service Account will be spent within a one-year period beginningon the date of receipt. In the event that amounts in excess of thosepermitted in the immediately preceding sentence shall remain in the Debt Service Account, such excess amounts will be transferred to the general fund of the Town where such amounts will be commingled with tax and other revenues of the Town. 


C. 	Parking Impact Fees Account. 
(1) 	Purpose. This account shall contain moneys, to be known as "in­lieu-of fees," collected from property owners in the Town Center Overlay District, defined in the Town of Bel Air, Maryland,Development Regulations. These fees are paid by the property owners in lieu of providing off-street parking required by the Development Regulations. 
1:78 

(2) 	
Establishment of fees. The amount of the in-lieu-of fee shall be established by resolution of the Board of Town Commissioners and shall be changed at such time as the Board deems necessary. 

(3) 	
Use and investment of funds. Moneys deposited in this accountshall be invested only in interest-bearing accounts of financial institutions insured by the United States or the State of Maryland.Separate subaccounts shall be maintained in the name of eachdepositor to facilitate the accounting of interest. All income derived from such investments shall be deposited in this account. Theproceeds of this account shall be used exclusively to developparking improvements which serve properties located in the Town Center Overlay District. 

(4) 	
Collection of fees. In-lieu-of parking fees shall be collected fromproperty owners located in the Town Center Overlay District only if buildings are expanded or a use is changed so as to requireadditional parking. In that event, fees will be collected at the timeof building permit application and only for those parking spaces required for expansion or change of use. Fees may be paid in lumpsum or in annual payments over a ten-year period. 

(5) 	
Refund of fees. If fees deposited in this account are not used for the designated purpose within 10 years of collection, such fees areto be refunded to the person or persons who actually contributedthem or to that person's successors, heirs or assigns. Any refunds shall include interest actually received by the Town on moneyscontributed and invested over the ten-year period. 


1:79 

ARTICLE III 
Sewer Fund 

§ 50-9. Establishment; purpose; administration. 
A. 	A fund titled "Sewer Fund" is hereby established for the purpose of receiving and aggregating funds which shall be used to defray all sewersystem operation, maintenance, replacement and capital improvementcosts presently recorded in the general fund at this time and all other necessary costs which may be incurred in the future. 
B. 	The Bel Air Board of Town Commissioners shall be the governing bodyof the Sewer Fund and shall periodically review and establish the revenues, expenses and/or net income as appropriate for accountability,capital maintenance, public policy, management control and otherpurposes. All accounts shall be maintained in accordance with the generally accepted accounting principles of enterprise fund accounting.25 
§ 50-10. Revenues, expenses and working capital.26 
A. 	The Board of Town Commissioners shall establish the type of revenues necessary to meet the established sewer service operational,maintenance and capital improvements and replacement costs. Types of revenues shall include, but not be limited to, sewer service user charges, sanitary sewer connection charges and other charges as deemed necessary. All rates, charges and fees shall be established by ordinance, except those which are a pass-thru to Harford County. 
B. 	The Board of Town Commissioners shall have the authority to appropriate moneys collected from the above-listed revenues for the purpose of meeting sewer service expenses, including but not limited to salaries, sewage treatment costs, utility charges, miscellaneoussupplies, equipment maintenance, computer and water data expenses, overhead and contingency expenses, allocated administrative and public works salaries, related payroll burdens, related sewer serviceexpenses allocated from the general fund, capital outlay expenses and all sanitary sewer capital improvement expenses, as well as the annualequivalent area connection charge payments to Harford County percontractual obligation. With the exception of the allocated salaries, payroll burden and expenses related to sewer fund services, no othergeneral fund expenditure will be funded by the Sewer Fund. 
25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:81 
§ 50-11. Sanitary Sewage Capital Reserve Account. [Added11-17-2008 by Ord. No. 715-08] 
The Treasurer of the Town of Bel Air shall deposit funds collected fromthe sanitary sewer capital contribution charges in a special account titled"Sanitary Sewage Capital Reserve Account." The funds shall be used only for the extension, enlargement, expansion and maintenance of the seweragesystem of the Town, including the necessary cost of issuing bonds or suchother means of financing the same as may be proper. 
1:82 

ARTICLE IV 
Investments 

§ 50-12. Participation in state program. 
The Board of Town Commissioners grants the authorization for the Town's participation in the Maryland Local Government Investment Pool as analternative to the Town's investment program. 
1:83 

ARTICLE V 
Admissions and Amusement Tax § 50-13. Tax imposed. 
A. 	Pursuant to the authorization of § 4-102(b)(1) of the Tax-General Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, as amended or recodified fromtime to time, a tax is imposed on the gross receipts derived from anyadmissions and amusement charge as defined in § 4-101(b) of the Tax-General Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, as amended orrecodified from time to time, at the rate of 10%, except as this ratemay be limited pursuant to § 4-105(b) of the Tax-General Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, as amended or recodified from time totime. 
B. 	Pursuant to the authorization of § 4-102(b)(2) of the Tax-General Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, as amended or recodified fromtime to time, an additional tax is imposed on reduced charges or freeadmissions as set forth in § 4-105(f) of the Tax-General Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, as amended or recodified from time totime. 
C. 	Pursuant to the authorization of § 4-104 of the Tax General Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, as amended or recodified from timeto time, gross receipts from the following sources shall be exempt from the admissions and amusement tax: [Added 5-18-2009 by Ord. No. 721-09] 
(1) 	
Gross receipts from any charge for admission or for merchandise,refreshments or a service if the gross receipts are used exclusively for community or civic improvement by a not-for-profit communityassociation that is organized and operated to promote the generalwelfare of the community that the association serves and the net earnings of which do not inure to the benefit of any stockholder ormember of the association. 

(2) 	
Gross receipts from any charge for admission to a concert or theatrical event of a not-for-profit organization that is organized topresent or offer any of the performing arts. 

(3) 	
Gross receipts from any charge from any municipal government operated or controlled function, event or activity. 

(4) 	
Gross receipts from the operation or use of any municipalgovernment facility that are used exclusively for community or civic improvement. 


1:85 

ARTICLE VI 

Property Tax Credit for Spouse of Fallen Law Enforcement Officer or
Rescue Worker 

[Adopted 5-5-2008 by Ord. No. 709-08] 
§ 50-14. Definitions. 
In this article the following words have the meanings indicated: 
DWELLING — Real property located in the incorporated limits of the Townof Bel Air that is the legal residence of a surviving spouse, including the lot or curtilage and structures necessary to use the real property as aresidence, provided that the dwelling is occupied by not more than twofamilies. 
FALLEN RESCUE WORKER — An individual who dies while as a result of or in the course of employment as a law enforcement officer or while inthe active service of fire, rescue, or emergency medical service, unless the death was the result of the individual's own willful misconduct or abuse of alcohol or drugs. 
SURVIVING SPOUSE — A surviving spouse, who has not remarried, of a fallen law enforcement officer or rescue worker. 
§ 50-15. Authority; property tax credit established. 
In accordance with the provisions of the Tax-Property Article, Title 9, § 9-210 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, there is hereby established thefollowing property tax credit: 
A. 	A one-hundred-percent exemption for a dwelling located in the municipal boundaries of the Town of Bel Air that is owned by a survivingspouse of a fallen law enforcement officer or rescue worker at the timeof the fallen law enforcement officer's or rescue worker's death if: 
(1) 	
The dwelling was owned by the fallen law enforcement officer orrescue worker at the time of the fallen law enforcement officer's or rescue worker's death; 

(2) 	
The fallen law enforcement officer or rescue worker or the surviving spouse was domiciled in the incorporated limits of theTown of Bel Air as of the date of the fallen law enforcement officer's or rescue worker's death and the dwelling was acquired by thesurviving spouse within two years of the fallen law enforcementofficer's or rescue worker's death; or 

(3) 	
The dwelling was acquired after the surviving spouse qualified fora credit for a former dwelling under Subsection A(1) or (2) of thissection, to the extent of the previous credit. 


1:87 

§ 50-16. Certification. 
To receive a credit under this article, the surviving spouse shall provide certification that states that the fallen law enforcement officer or rescue worker died while in active service of a fire, rescue, law enforcement or emergency medical service and that the fallen law enforcement officer or rescue worker's death was not the result of the individual's own willful misconduct or abuse of alcohol or drugs. 
§ 50-17. Continued eligibility. 
After initial eligibility is determined by the Town of Bel Air Director ofFinance, to continue to receive the tax credit, prior to June 1 of each yearthe surviving spouse shall provide certification to the Director that: 
A. 	The surviving spouse has not remarried. 
B. 	The property is still owned and the legal residence of the survivingspouse, including the lot or curtilage and structures necessary to use the real property as a residence. 
C. 	The dwelling is occupied by no more than two families. 
1:88 

§ 50-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS 	§ 82-2 
Chapter 82 
PERSONNEL 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 28. Code of Ethics — See Ch. 43 

§ 82-1. Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall havethe meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
CLASS — A group of positions sufficiently similar as to the duties performed, degree of supervision exercised or received, minimum requirements of education, experience or skill and such other characteristics that the same title, the same tests of fitness and the same schedule of compensation can be applied to each position in the group. 
CLASSIFICATION PLAN — A formal means of identifying the duties and responsibilities of the Town's classified positions, based upon studies of thevarious jobs and offices. 
CLASSIFIED EMPLOYEE — An employee who works in a classified position. 
CLASSIFIED POSITION — A job designated for inclusion within the classification plan. 
COMPENSATION PLAN — A written statement providing the rate or range of pay received by each classified employee. 
EXEMPT EMPLOYEE — The Town Administrator whose position is governedby the Town Charter. 
EXEMPT POSITION — A job or office authorized by the Board of TownCommissioners that is not designated for inclusion in the classification plan. 
OBJECTIVE METHOD — An impartial way of making a personnel-related decision. 
OFFICE — An appointive position of authority, trust or advisory nature. 
POSITION — Those duties and responsibilities constituting a single job or jobs. 
PROBATIONARY PERIOD — Period of time given to a new employee orpromoted employee to demonstrate that he or she can perform the duties of the position in a satisfactory manner. 
§ 82-2. Scope. 
A. 	All offices and positions of the Town are divided into exempt and classified positions. 
B. 	Exempt positions shall include the following: 
1:89 
(1) 	
All elected officials and members of boards and commissions. 

(2) 	
Persons employed as consultants or counsel, rendering temporary professional services. 

(3) 	
Personnel employed on nonrecurring projects of limited duration. 

(4) 	
Volunteer personnel and personnel appointed to serve without pay. 

(5) 	
Town Administrator. 


C. 	Classified positions shall include all other employees who are not specifically placed in exempt positions by this chapter or future resolutions. 
D. 	All personnel actions shall be made without regard to race, sex, color,religion, national origin, political affiliation, age or disability and shall be based on objective measurements of merit and fitness.27 
§ 82-3. Administration. 
A. 	The Board of Town Commissioners shall: 
(1) 	
Establish conditions of work such as duration of workweek, holidays, leave, compensation, fringe benefits and retirement plans. 

(2) 	
Establish qualification standards for all exempt positions. 

(3) 	
Adopt all other resolutions necessary for the regulation of personnel matters in conformity with the furtherance of this chapter. 


B. 	The Town Administrator shall: 
(1) 	
Advise the Board of Town Commissioners of personnel strength levels and on the efficient utilization of the Town's employees. 

(2) 	
Recommend to the Board of Town Commissioners for its approvalrules governing the establishment and change of the classification and compensation plans. 

(3) 	
Supervise and direct the operation and maintenance of the classification and compensation plans. 

(4) 	
Establish qualification standards for each class in the classificationplan. 

(5) 	
Establish objective methods determining the relative qualifications of all job applicants, develop selection and appointment proceduresand make appointments to the Town's classified positions. He shall 


27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:90 
appoint department heads only with the approval of the Board ofTown Commissioners. 
(6) 	
Establish probationary periods and requirements for newlyappointed or newly promoted employees in classified positions. 

(7) 	
Establish and maintain an employment record system. 

(8) 	
Establish a plan for resolving employee grievances and complaints. 

(9) 	
Appoint, suspend or remove for sufficient cause any Town employee other than a department head. He shall appoint, suspend or remove for sufficient cause a department head only with theapproval of the Board of Town Commissioners. 


(10)Establish employee disciplinary action procedures, which shall provide a means of presenting such charges, hearing rights andappeals procedures. 
(11)Adopt all other rules necessary for the regulation of personnel matters in conformity with the furtherance of this chapter and theCharter of the Town. 
§ 82-4. Political activities. 
A. 	No employee shall hold an elected office in the Town government. 
B. 	No employee, official or person shall solicit any assessment, contributions or services for any individual who is a candidate for office or for any political party from any employee. 
C. 	Nothing herein contained shall affect the right of the employee tohold membership in and support a political party, to vote, to express publicly or privately opinions on all political subjects and candidates,to maintain political neutrality or to actively participate in politicalmeetings. The employee has the right to engage in all such activities as a private citizen and shall not engage in these activities while onTown premises, during working hours or while performing official Townduties. 
§ 82-5. Unlawful acts. 
A. 	No person shall make any false statement, mark, rating or reportwith regard to any examination to a classified position or attempt to commit any fraud preventing the impartial execution of this chapterand policies. 
B. 	No person shall, directly or indirectly, give, render, pay, offer, solicit and accept any money, service or other valuable consideration for anyappointment, proposed appointment, promotion or proposed promotionto or any advantage in a classified position. 
1:91 

C. 	No employee of the Town or other person shall defeat, deceive orobstruct any person in his right to examination, eligibility or appointment under this chapter or furnish to any person any specialor privileged information for the purpose of affecting the rights orprospects of any person with respect to employment in the Town's classified positions. 
§ 82-6. Dismissal; appeals. 
A. 	Violation of any provision of § 82-4 or 82-5 may constitute grounds for dismissal. 
B. 	Employees of the Town shall have the right to appeal a dismissal under§ 82-4 or 82-5 to the Circuit Court for Harford County pursuant to the provisions outlined in the Maryland Rules of Procedure at the time thatthe dismissal is made effective. 
Part II: General Legislation 
Chapter 115 


ADDRESS NUMBERS 
§ 115-1. Purpose. 
This chapter sets forth provisions for regulation of address numbers onimproved property within the corporate limits of the Town of Bel Air. Provisions set forth within this chapter establish standards governing thesize, location and types of acceptable numerals. 
§ 115-2. Definitions. 
In this chapter, the following terms have the meanings indicated: 
OWNER — The individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation orother entity whose name appears on the tax records of the Town for any property subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
SUPERVISORY EMPLOYEE — Any employee of the Town Department ofPlanning and Community Development and the Town Department of Public Works. 
TOWN REPRESENTATIVE — Any sworn member of the Bel Air Police Department. 
§ 115-3. Display of address numbers required. 
A. 	The owner of improved real property within the corporate limits of theTown shall display Arabic numerals indicating the numerical address assigned to the property. 
1:92 

B. 	The owner is responsible for the attachment of such numerals to theoutside of the main portion of the improved property so that they are plainly visible from the public roadway on which the property fronts. 
C. 	The owner shall use numerals at least three inches high and of acolor which contrasts with the surface on which they are mounted; the numerals may include a letter only if the letter is part of the addressassigned to the property. The owner may use a numeral 1.5 inches highif displayed within 10 feet of the public roadway. 
D. 	The owner of an improved property shall display a second set of numerals on the rear of the principal improvement if the improvementis used for commercial purposes. 
E. 	If the numerals are not clearly visible from the roadway named in theaddress of the property or if the property is located more than 150 feetfrom the roadway, the owner shall post a second set of numerals clearly visible from the roadway. Numerals shall be mounted on a contrastingsurface at least three feet above the ground and located at the drivewayor entrance lane within 10 feet of the public roadway. 
F. 	Numerals displayed on a mailbox may qualify only if the mailbox islocated on the same side of the public roadway as the improvedproperty and the numerals are clearly visible when approaching from either direction along the roadway. In the case of multiple improvedproperties served by a single lane or driveway, the numerals assigned toeach property shall be displayed at the entrance to the lane or driveway within 10 feet of the public roadway. 
§ 115-4. Warning of violation. 
A Town representative who observes a violation of this chapter may issue a written warning to the owner of the property involved. The warning shallbe issued by certified mail originating from the Police Department. Thewarning shall notify the owner: 
A. 	Of the requirements of this chapter. 
B. 	Of the nature of the violation and what must be done to comply with theregulations of this chapter. 
C. 	That failure to comply with the warning within 30 days will result in theissuance of a municipal infraction citation.28 
§ 115-5. Enforcement.29 
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:93 
A. 	When an owner fails to comply with a warning issued under § 115-4 ofthis chapter, a municipal infraction citation will be issued by a member of the Police Department. 
B. 	Whenever, in the judgment of the Chief of Police or his designatedrepresentative, violation of the provisions of this chapter seriously threatens or endangers the health, safety or welfare of Bel Air citizens,the Chief or his designated representative is authorized to issue amunicipal infraction citation immediately. 
§ 115-6. Exemptions. 
Exemptions to the foregoing provisions of this chapter may be granted bythe Board of Town Commissioners. Request should be made in writing by the owner, accompanied by such information and data as may be requiredby the Commissioners in each case. 
§ 115-7. Violations and penalties.30 
A violation of this chapter shall be declared to be a municipal infraction andthe violator shall be subject to a fine as provided in Chapter 1, Article II ofthis Code. 
Chapter 122 
ALARM SYSTEMS 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Fire prevention — See Ch. 204. 
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:94 ARTICLE I 
Burglar Alarms
[Adopted 3-11-1980 by Ord. No. 310 as Ch. 11, Art. 4 of the 1980
Code] 

§ 122-1. Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
ALARM DEVICE — Any device which, when activated, is intended to transmit a signal directly or indirectly to request police services to respond on an emergency basis. Such devices include any device which emits anaudible signal at or near the exterior of the protected premises, or whichtransmits a request for police services to a private or government-operated central alarm station for the purpose of relaying a request for such services,or which transmits a request for emergency services directly to a policeagency. This definition does not include any alarm device installed in any motor vehicle. 
ALARM USER — Any business, commercial entity, partnership, public/private institution, or government upon whose premises an alarm device is installed within the Town of Bel Air. 
BOARD OF TOWN COMMISSIONERS — The governing body of the Town ofBel Air. 
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Town of Bel Air. 
FALSE ALARM — The activation of an alarm device that results in the response by police personnel to any alarm user's premises within the Town of Bel Air where no police emergency services are required, as determinedby such police personnel after investigation. A false alarm shall not includealarm signals that result from hurricane, gale, tornado or other violent weather condition, earthquake or any major disruption of electric, telephone or other public utility transmission. In addition, if an alarm company notifies the police before an officer arrives on the premises that the alarm is sounding in error, it shall not be designated as a false alarm. 
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Town of Bel Air Police Department. 
§ 122-2. Alarm user registration required. 
A. 	All alarm users in the Town of Bel Air, as defined above, shall obtain an alarm application from the Bel Air Police Department. Each individualalarm user within the same address site of a multi-tenant building must complete an alarm application. Applications forms, as prescribed by theChief of Police, shall provide the following information: 
(1) 	
The name, address and telephone number of the intended alarm user. 

(2) 	
The location of the alarm device. 

(3) 	
A description of the type of alarm device to be installed. 


1:95 
(4) 
The address to which notices required under this article shall be sent. 

(5) 	
The name, address and telephone number of two persons that maybe contacted at any time of the day or night and who are authorizedby the alarm user to enter the premises. 


B. 	All information provided by an applicant shall be treated as confidential, shall not be deemed a public record, and shall not be usedfor any purpose other than to carry out the provisions of this article or to provide emergency services to alarm users. 
§ 122-3. Terms of registration. 
An alarm user registration shall not be transferable. The registration shall be kept on file in the alarm user's premises and shall be made availablefor inspection upon demand by any Bel Air Police Department personnel.All registrations shall be deemed terminated upon the relocation, sale or transfer of possession of the affected premises to a new owner or occupant. 
§ 122-4. Written permission for forced entry. 
In addition to any other requirements, an applicant for any business, commercial entity, partnership, public/private institution, or governmentalarm device which shall have the capability to transmit a request foremergency services on any urgent basis in the event of medical emergency, crime in progress or other extreme emergency shall provide writtenpermission authorizing police personnel to forcibly enter the premiseswithout notice to the alarm user whenever the alarm is activated. 
§ 122-5. False alarm investigation and report. 
Wherever a responding police official shall determine that a false alarm hasbeen transmitted, a written report shall be submitted by such officer to the Bel Air Chief of Police stating the name of the business, commercial entity,partnership, public/private institution or government, address, telephonenumber, and registration number, if any, of the alarm user, together with a statement of the circumstances surrounding such alarm and the officer'sopinion as to the likely cause. 
§ 122-6. Deactivation of audible alarms. 
No alarm user registration shall be issued for any alarm device whichshall emit an uninterrupted audible signal for a period longer than 15minutes. Police or fire personnel responding to audible alarms are hereby authorized to disable the same without liability for any damage to suchdevice if the audible signal shall sound for more than 15 minutes withoutinterruption. Any such alarm device which has a mechanism to reset such alarm shall be equipped so that successive sounding of the alarm deviceshall be limited to no more than three fifteen-minute intervals. The soundingof such alarm device for more than 15 minutes or for more than three 
1:96 

fifteen-minute intervals shall be considered a false alarm whether or not an actual emergency triggered such device. 
§ 122-7. Other requirements for alarm user registration. 
No alarm user registration shall be issued unless the followingrequirements are met: 
A. 	The alarm user's premises shall display a building number or namesufficiently sized or illuminated by street or other lighting so as to beclearly visible from the street frontage. 
B. 	All alarm devices shall be equipped with a standby power source sufficient to maintain the device in an armed state for at least eighthours in the event of a power failure. 
C. 	No direct connection with the Bel Air Police Department shall bepermitted unless authorized by the Chief of Police. 
§ 122-8. False alarm fines. [Amended 11-17-2008 by Ord. No.715-08] 
A. 	If the Police Department responds to more than two false alarms atthe premises of an alarm user, that alarm user shall be charged a fine. The fine is based on the number of false alarms at that alarm user's premises during each calendar year and is as follows: for eachcalendar year, each alarm user shall receive a written warning for the first and second false alarm; the fines thereafter for the remainder of each calendar year shall be set by resolution of the Board of TownCommissioners. 
B. 	Any alarm user who shall install or have installed an alarm device inthe Town of Bel Air without completing an alarm application shall besubject to an additional fine in the amount as set by resolution of the Board of Town Commissioners per activation (over the fine stated inSubsection A) after the first alarm notice. The additional fine will beimposed per activation until an alarm application has been received by the Bel Air Police Department. All new alarm users have 30 days fromthe time of initial installation of an alarm system to complete an alarmapplication with the Town of Bel Air. 
C. 	The Chief of Police or his designee shall determine whether a falsealarm has occurred and the frequency of such false alarms. The alarmuser will be notified by the police communication section each time an alarm occurs. The Director of Finance or her designee shall notifythe alarm user of amounts owed to the Town and shall make demand therefor, pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
D. 	Invoices for false alarm fines are to be paid within 30 days of the invoicedate and deemed delinquent if not paid. Delinquent false alarm finesshall bear interest at the rate of 1.5% per month until paid. 
1:97 

E. 	False alarm fines for alarm users who are owners of the premises onwhich a false alarm occurs shall be treated in the same manner as property taxes for enforcement of payments as provided in Chapter 50,§ 50-3 of the Town Code. Any administrative costs or legal fines theTown incurs in the collection of the fines shall be the responsibility of the alarm user. 
F. 	Tenants who have installed alarm systems shall be responsible for falsealarm fines. Nonpayment of fines (90 days in arrears) by tenants shall be a municipal infraction and any violator shall be fined the amount ofthe unpaid false alarm fines, including interest, plus any administrativecosts or legal fees the Town incurs in the collection of the fines. 
G. 	The Town may proceed by a suit in a court of competent jurisdiction tocollect said fines after demand therefor has been made by the Town andpayment thereof refused by the alarm user. 
H. 	Fines will be deposited to the general fund. 
§ 122-9. Revocation of alarm user registration. [Amended11-17-2008 by Ord. No. 715-08] 
The Chief of Police shall have the authority to revoke or refuse to issue or renew any alarm user's registration if the alarm user fails to payoutstanding fines. Fines that are outstanding for 90 days shall be grounds for revocation of registration. Once the account has been paid, in full, theChief of Police shall issue the alarm user's registration within 15 days ofreceiving an application. 
§ 122-10. Affirmative defense. 
It shall be an affirmative defense to any prosecution for maintaining analarm device without registration if the alarm user charged has submitted a duly completed application to the Chief of Police within 30 days from thedate when served with such violation notice. 
§ 122-11. Alarm devices required by law. 
The Chief of Police shall have no authority to revoke or refuse to issue anyalarm user registration to any alarm user which is required by any federal,state or local law to maintain an alarm device in premises within the Town of Bel Air. However, all other provisions of this article shall be applicablewith respect to any civil or criminal penalty which may apply. 
1:98 

ARTICLE II 
Fire Alarms 
[Adopted 3-11-1980 by Ord. No. 310 as § 11-302 of the 1980 Code] 

§ 122-12. County regulations to apply. 
Fire alarm systems within the Town are hereby regulated under the provisions of Harford County Code Chapter 84, Article II, titled "Fire AlarmSystems," §§ 84-2 through 84-6, which shall be enforced within the Townin the same manner, by the same officials and with the same effect as in unincorporated areas of Harford County, and all persons within the Townshall be required to abide by said provisions in the manner provided in saidCounty Code. 
1:99 

Chapter 128 
AMUSEMENTS 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Admissions and amusement tax — See Ch. 50, Fireworks — See Ch. 198. Art. V. 
Fortune-telling — See Ch. 223. 
§ 128-1. Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT MACHINE — Any machine, device, or appliance, except a music machine, offered for use by the public as a game, entertainment, or amusement, whether or not the element of skill in the operation thereof predominates over the element of chance or luck, whichmay be operated or caused to operate by the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disk. 
§ 128-2. Gambling devices prohibited. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize, license or permit the display or use of any gambling device whatsoever or any mechanismwhich has been or may be judicially determined to be a gambling device. 
§ 128-3. Hours of operation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association, or corporation whoor which conducts a business operating bowling alleys, skating rinks, poolhalls, and other similar type of amusement centers and establishments using pool or billiard tables, pinball machines, mechanical amusementmachines, and other similar types of devices to remain open between thehours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on secular days of the week and between 
2:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. on Sundays. 
§ 128-4. Operation by minors restricted. 
No person, firm, association or corporation offering any mechanical amusement machine or billiard or pool table for public use shall knowinglypermit any person between the ages of six years and 16 years to operateany such machine between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. on any day on which the public schools of Harford County are in session during theregular school year, nor shall any person under the age of 18 operate anypinball machine at any time. 
1:100 

§ 128-5. Violations and penalties.31 
Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a municipal infraction and a violator shall be fined as provided in Chapter 1, Article II of this Code. 
Chapter 134 
ANIMALS 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 334. 
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:101 
ARTICLE I 
General Regulations 

§ 134-1. Raising and selling of poultry. 
A. 	No owner, lessee or tenant shall erect or maintain any building, coop or pen upon any property in the Town within 200 feet of the propertyof adjoining owners of property in the Town for the purpose of raising,fattening, maintaining or selling any poultry or the eggs produced therefrom. 
B. 	No owner, lessee or tenant of any property in the Town shall have onhis premises any poultry for sale or for any other commercial purpose whatsoever within 200 feet of the property of adjoining owners of property in the Town.32 
§ 134-2. Animals running at large. 
It shall be unlawful for swine, horses, mules, goats, milk cows, cattle, sheepand geese to go at large on the streets, alleys or avenues of the Town. 
§ 134-3. Impoundment and sale of animals.33 
Harford Animal Control shall take up and impound any swine, horse, mule,cattle, sheep, goats and geese found running at large, and on its failure totake up and impound any swine, horses, mules, goats, sheep, geese or cattle as aforesaid it shall and may be lawful for any citizen of the Town to do so.Any person so taking up and impounding anything prohibited from goingat large shall give five days' notice thereof, by advertisement set up at a designated place within the courthouse and two other conspicuous placesin the Town, describing the stock so impounded and that the same will besold at public sale at some public place in the Town. The owner of any stock so impounded shall pay a fee as set by resolution of the Board ofTown Commissioners for taking up each of such stock and all expenses ofkeeping and advertising the same, and Harford Animal Control shall deliver the property to the owner or his agent. 
§ 134-4. Disposition of proceeds of sale. 
In case of a sale of any stock impounded under this article, the money arising therefrom shall go to pay all costs and expenses, including thepoundage fee for taking up each of the stock so impounded, and the balance, if any, to the owner of the stock. 
32.Editor's Note: Original § 7-101, Fast or immoderate driving of animals, which immediatelypreceded this section, and §§ 7-103, 7-104 and 7-105, which immediately followed thissection and dealt with keeping swine, were deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,General Provisions, Art. III). 
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:103 
§ 134-5. Violations and penalties.34 
Any violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be a municipal infraction and a violator shall be fined as provided in Chapter 1, Article IIof this Code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day orfraction of a day in which or during which a violation occurs or continues. 
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:104 ARTICLE II 
Dogs 

§ 134-6. County regulations to apply. 
Dogs within the Town are hereby regulated under the provisions of Harford County Code Chapter 64, titled "Animals," which shall be enforced withinthe Town in the same manner, by the same officials and with the sameeffect as in unincorporated areas of Harford County, and all persons within the Town shall be required to abide by said provisions and to pay requiredlicensing fees to Harford County in the manner provided in said chapter. 
1:105 

Chapter 145 
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Address numbers — See Ch. 115.  Impact fees — See Ch. 265.  
Development regulations — See Ch. 165.  Minimum Livability Code — See Ch. 301.  
Electrical standards — See Ch. 180.  Plumbing and gas fitting standards — See Ch.353.  
Fire prevention — See Ch. 204.  Sediment control — See Ch. 390.  
Floodplain management — See Ch. 210.  Sewers — See Ch. 397.  
Historic preservation — See Ch. 246.  Stormwater management — See Ch. 405.  

§ 145-1. Office of Building Official. 
A. 	The office of Building Official is hereby created and the executiveofficial in charge shall be known as the "Building Official." 
B. 	The Building Official shall be appointed by the Commissioners. 
C. 	During temporary absence or disability of the Building Official, theappointing authority shall designate an Acting Building Official. 
§ 145-2. General duties of Building Official. 
A. 	The Building Official shall receive applications required by the BuildingCode, issue permits and furnish the prescribed certificates. The Building Official shall examine premises for which permits have beenissued and shall make necessary inspections to see that the provisionsof law are complied with and that construction is practiced safely. The Building Official shall enforce all provisions of the Building Code. TheBuilding Official shall, when requested by proper authority, or whenthe public interest so requires, make investigations in connection with matters referred to in the Building Code and render written reports onthe same. To enforce compliance with law, to remove illegal or unsafeconditions, to secure the necessary safeguards during construction or to require adequate exit facilities in buildings and structures, theBuilding Official shall issue such notices or orders as may be necessary. 
B. 	Inspections required under the provisions of the Building Code shall be made by the Building Official or his/her duly appointed assistant.The Building Official may accept reports of inspectors of recognizedinspection services after investigation of their qualifications and reliability. No certificate called for by any provision in the Building Codeshall be issued on such reports unless the same are in writing andcertified to by a responsible officer of such service. 
1:106 

C. 	The Building Official shall keep comprehensive records of applications,of permits issued, of certificates issued, of inspections made, of reports rendered and of notices or orders issued. The Building Official shallretain on file copies of required plans and all documents relating tobuilding work so long as any part of the building or structure to which they relate may be in existence. 
D. 	All such records shall be open to public inspection for good andsufficient reasons at the stated office hours but shall not be removed from the office of the Building Official without his written consent. 
E. 	Written reports shall be made to the Building Official's immediatesuperior once each month, or more often if requested, including statements of permits and certificates issued and orders promulgated. 
§ 145-3. Right of entry of Building Official. 
The Building Official, in the discharge of official duties, and upon proper identification, shall have authority to enter any building, structure, or premises at any reasonable hours. 
§ 145-4. Review of proposed construction in flood-prone areas. 
The Director of Planning and Community Development of the Town of BelAir or his/her designee shall be the agent of the Town Building Officialfor the purpose of reviewing all subdivision proposals, new development proposals and building permit applications for new construction or substantial improvements to determine whether the proposed building siteis subject to the Town's flood management requirements as specified in Chapter 210 of the Town Code. 
§ 145-5. Adoption of Building Code. [Amended 3-17-2008 by Ord.No. 707-08; 11-17-2008 by Ord. No. 715-08; 2-22-2011 by Ord. No.739-11; 6-18-2012 by Ord. No. 751-12; 10-5-2015 by Ord. No.772-15] 
For the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction, alteration, removal, demolition, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of buildings and structures within the Town of Bel Air, including but not limited to the granting and revocation of permits and the fixing of penalties and fees, the Town of Bel Air hereby adopts the2015 International Building Code, the 2015 International Residential Codeand the 2015 International Mechanical Code (hereinafter referred to as the "Building Code" or "code") published by the International Code Council,Inc., and by reference thereto such codes are made a part of this chapterwith the same force and effect as though set out in full herein, save and except as such changes, amendments, revisions, deletions, subsections and/or additions are specified in this chapter. If conflicts with this Code or withchanges, amendments, revisions, deletions, subsections and/or additions to that code are found elsewhere in the code, the most restrictive provisionsshall govern. 
1:107 

§ 145-6. Definitions. [Amended 3-17-2008 by Ord. No. 707-08;2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 739-11; 6-18-2012 by Ord. No. 751-12;10-5-2015 by Ord. No. 772-15] 
As used in this code, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 

BUILDING OFFICIAL — The Director of the Department of Public Works or 
his/her designee. 
DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING SAFETY — The Department of Public Works. 
ICC ELECTRICAL CODE — The electrical standards and regulations 

(Chapter 180 of the Bel Air Town Code). 

ICC/ANSI 117.1 — Maryland Accessibility Code set forth in Code of 
Maryland Regulations, Title 5, Subtitle 05.02.02. 
INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE — The plumbing standards and 

regulations (Chapter 353 of the Bel Air Town Code). 

§ 145-7. Changes and additions to International Building Code.[Amended 3-17-2008 by Ord. No. 707-08; 11-17-2008 by Ord. No.715-08; 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 739-11; 6-18-2012 by Ord. No.751-12; 10-5-2015 by Ord. No. 772-15] 
A. 	The following subsections are changes or additions to certain sectionsof the 2015 International Building Code: 
(1) 	
Subsection 101.1 is hereby amended by substituting "Town of Bel Air" for "name of jurisdiction" in the second line. 

(2) 	
Subsection 101.2.1 is deleted and the following is inserted in lieuthereof: 

101.2.1 Appendices. Provisions in Appendix C, Group U ­Agricultural Buildings; Appendix F, Rodent Proofing; and Appendix I, Patio Covers, are adopted as part of the Town of Bel Air BuildingCode. 

(3) 	
Subsection 101.4.4 is deleted. 

(4) 	
Subsection 101.4.7 is amended by adding "or the MarylandRehabilitation Code (MBRC) set forth in COMAR 05.16.01 through

05.16.08 between the words "code" and "shall" in the second line and by adding "The provisions of the International ExistingBuilding Code shall be applicable to all structures where construction commenced prior to March 1, 1968 and legally existing structures permitted on or after March 1, 1968" at the endof this section. 

(5) 	
Subsection 102.6 is amended by deleting "The International Property Maintenance Code" starting in the fourth line. 

(6) 	
Subsection 102.6.2 is amended by deleting "or International Property Maintenance Code" starting in the fifth line. 


1:108 

(7) 	
Subsection 103.3 is amended by deleting the last sentence: "Forthe maintenance of existing properties, see the International Property Code." 

(8) 	
Subsection 104.6 is amended by adding a new sentence at theend of the subsection: "Nothing in this section shall be deemed to restrict or otherwise limit the provisions of any other section of theTown of Bel Air Code." 

(9) 	
Subsection 105.1.1 is deleted. 


(10)Subsection 105.1.2 is deleted. 
(11)Subsection 105.2 is amended by deleting the subheadings"Electrical" and "Plumbing" and by amending the subheading "Building" by adding and modifying the following sub-items: 
1. 	The provisions of this code shall not apply to structures notmore than one story in height and that are 200 square feetor less in area and are not classified as Use Group H, High Hazard. 
15.One-story detached accessory structures to Use Group R-3, provided the floor area does not exceed 200 square feet. 
16.Construction 	trailers as defined in Chapter 2 of the International Building Code as adopted. 
(12)Subsection 105.5 is amended by deleting "180 days" in the thirdline and inserting "12 months" in lieu thereof. 
(13)New Subsection 105.6.1 is added as follows: 
105.6.1 Withholding permits. The Building Official may withholdthe issuance of any permit and/or place a hold on inspections if theapplicant, the owner or any individual listed on the application as a responsible officer (if the applicant is a business entity) has failedto remedy or correct any existing/alleged violation of the TownCode on any construction projects in Bel Air, Maryland, for which the applicant has been cited by any state, county or municipal agency. 
(14)New Subsection 105.8 is added as follows: 
105.8 Transfer of permits. When a change of ownership occursfor a property for which a building permit application has been made or a permit has been issued, the application or permit maybe transferred to the new property owner after submission to theTown of evidence of the transfer of ownership. 
(15)Section 106 is deleted in its entirety. 
(16)Subsection 109.2 is deleted and the following is inserted in lieuthereof: 
1:109 

(17) 

(18) 

(19) 

(20) 

(21) 

(22) 


109.2 Schedule of permit fees. On buildings, structures, mechanical systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for eachpermit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the currentTown of Bel Air Fee Schedule. 
Subsection 109.6 is deleted and the following is inserted in lieuthereof: 
109.6 Refunds. Refunds shall be made in accordance with the Town Code. 
New Subsection 110.1.1 is added as follows: 
110.1.1 Purpose of inspections. All inspections conducted by the Town are performed for the protection and promotion of publicsafety, health and welfare. The inspections are made solely forthe public benefit and are not to be construed as providing any warranty of construction to individual members of the public. 
New Subsection 110.3.8.1 is added as follows: 
110.3.8.1 Hazardous material inspections. As deemed necessary by the Building Official, approval from the Harford County Hazardous Materials Team may be required prior to a certificate of occupancy being issued. 
New Subsection 110.7 is added as follows: 
110.7 Standards. All buildings, structures and appurtenancesthereto shall be constructed strictly in compliance with accepted engineering practice. All members and components of the structure shall be installed, fitted or fastened, moved or stored in such a manner that the full structural capabilities of the members are obtained. Improper alignment (level and square), fitting,fastening or methods of construction shall be considered a violationof this code. 
Subsection 111.3 is amended by adding the following at the endof the subsection: "Any person, firm or corporation engaged inthe process of selling property in which a temporary certificate of occupancy is issued shall at the time of settlement present to thebuyer a copy of the temporary certificate of occupancy, which mustinclude a list of deficiencies that remain to be corrected." 
Subsection 113.2 is amended by adding the following between thewords "apply" and "or" in the fifth line: "The Department of PublicWorks has made an incorrect determination that a structure or equipment within a structure is unsafe in accordance with Section116 of this code". 
(23)Subsection 113.3 is deleted and replaced as follows: 

1:110 

(24) 
(25) 

(26) 

(27) 


113.3 Qualifications. The Board of Building Appeals is established under Chapter 10, Article VIII, of the Bel Air TownCode. 
Subsection 114.4 is amended by deleting the phrase "shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law" in the last line andinserting the following in lieu thereof: "shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, of the Bel Air Town Code. Each day that a violation continues shall bedeemed a separate offense." 
Subsection 116.3 is deleted and the following is inserted in lieu thereof: 
116.3 Notice. If an unsafe condition is found, the Building Officialshall serve on the owner, agent or person in control of the structurea written notice of violation that describes the condition deemed unsafe and specifies the required repairs or improvements to bemade to abate the unsafe condition or to demolish the unsafe structure within a (specified period of) stipulated time. Unless the person served with an order makes a timely request for a hearingpursuant to Subsection 116.7, the order becomes a final order onthe 11th day after service. If a person who has been issued an order under this section makes a timely request for a hearing, i.e.,requests a hearing within 10 days from service in accordance withSubsection 116.7, the order becomes a final corrective order if the Town Administrator affirms the order following the hearing. 
Subsection 116.4 is amended by inserting the phrase, "first class"in third line after the word "certified." 
New Subsection 116.6 is added as follows: 
116.6 Abatement. If a person who has been issued an order under this section fails, within the time limit specified in a noticeof violation or order, to abate the unsafe condition as directed, the Building Official may take whatever abatement action may be necessary by use of Town employees and equipment and/or bycontract with private contractors. The cost and expense of abatingthe unsafe condition shall be submitted by the Building Official to the Director of Finance together with the name of the owner of theproperty on which the violation occurred as determined from theproperty tax assessment records. These charges shall constitute a lien upon the real property and shall be collectable in the samemanner as real property taxes with the same priority, interest andpenalties. Initiation of abatement action shall not preclude the issuance of any other action or legal proceedings authorized orpermitted under this code, the laws of the State of Maryland andthe common law. 
(28)New Subsection 116.6.1 is added as follows: 

1:111 

116.6.1 Notice of abatement action. The Building Official, before or within 10 days after commencement of any abatementaction, shall issue a notice of abatement action to the owner of the property on which the abatement action has been or will be commenced. The notice shall describe the abatement action to be undertaken and shall specify that the costs for the action shallconstitute a lien on the real property of the owner. The notice of abatement action issued by the Building Official shall be served asprovided for by Subsection 116.4 of this code. 
(29)New Subsection 116.7 is added as follows: 
116.7 Hearing. The property owner or agent receiving a notice of violation issued under Subsection 116.3, a notice of abatement issued under Subsection 116.6.1 or a lien upon the real propertymay request a hearing within 10 days from the receipt or posting of such notice or lien issued by the Building Official. The request mustbe in writing and served personally on the Town Administratoror by certified mail, return receipt requested, bearing a postmark from the United States Postal Service. The Town Administrator maysubpoena anyone having any connection with a hearing under thissection as a witness or to give evidence relating to a notice of violation. 
(30)New Subsection 116.8 is added as follows: 
116.8 Finality of lien. Unless a person served with a notice of abatement makes a timely request for a hearing pursuant toSubsection 116.7, the lien shall become final on the property upon completion of the work. If a person makes a timely request for a hearing, any lien on the property shall become final aftercompletion of all the work the Town Administrator determines was properly conducted by way of abatement action. 
(31)New Subsection 116.9 is added as follows: 
116.9 Unauthorized tampering. Signs, placards, notices or otherpostings affixed by the Building Official or his/her assignee under Section 116 shall not be mutilated, destroyed or tampered with, orremoved without authorization from the Building Official or his/herassignee. 
(32)New Section 117 is added as follows: 
1:112 

SECTION 117 
EMERGENCY MEASURES 

117.1 Imminent danger. When, in the opinion of the Building Official, there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure or any part thereof which endangers life,or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the building or structure, theBuilding Official is hereby authorized and empowered to order andrequire the occupants to vacate the same forthwith. The Building Official shall post at each entrance of such structure a noticereading as follows: "This structure is unsafe and its occupancyhas been prohibited by the Building Official. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for the purpose ofmaking the required repairs or of demolishing the same." 
117.2 Temporary safeguards. When, in the opinion of the Building Official, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the Building Official shall cause the necessary work tobe done to render such structure temporarily safe, whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted. 
117.3 Closing streets. When necessary for public safety, theBuilding Official shall temporarily close structures and close, or order the authority having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets,public ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures and prohibitthe same from being used. 
117.4 Emergency repairs. For the purposes of this section, theBuilding Official shall employ the necessary labor and materials toperform the required work as expeditiously as possible. 
117.5 Cost of emergency repairs. Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid from the treasuryof the jurisdiction on approval of the Building Official. The legal counsel of the jurisdiction shall institute appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is orwas located. 
117.6 Unsafe equipment. Equipment deemed unsafe by theBuilding Official shall not be operated after the date stated inthe written notice unless the required repairs or changes have been made and the equipment has been approved or unless anextension of time has been secured from the Building Official inwriting. 
117.6.1 Authority to seal equipment. In the case of an emergency, the Building Official shall have the authority toimmediately seal out of service any unsafe device or equipment regulated by this code. 
1:113 

(33) 
(34) 

(35) 

(36) 


117.6.2 Unlawful to remove seal. Any device or equipmentsealed out of service by the Building Official shall be plainly identified in an approved manner. The identification shall notbe tampered with, defaced or removed except by the BuildingOfficial and shall indicate the reason for such sealing. 
Section 202 is amended by adding the following definition betweenthe terms "construction documents" and "construction types": 
CONSTRUCTION TRAILER — A single-unit industrialized 
building that meets all of the following criteria: 
1. 	
Has a body width of no more than 12 feet and has a bodylength not to exceed 60 feet; and 

2. 	
The unit must be placed on an active construction site andremoved within 30 days of completion of the construction; and 

3. 	
The unit shall not be open to the public and shall be for theexclusive use of the on-site contractors to conduct necessary business or to store construction materials related to the construction project; and 

4. 	
All applicable electrical and plumbing installations have approved temporay permits and have received appropriateinspections and occupancy approvals. 


Section 202 is amended by adding the following definition betweenthe terms "potable water" and "precast concrete"; 
POWER SAFETY COVER. A pool cover that is placed over thewater area and is opened and closed with a motorized mechanismactivated by control switch. 
Section 202 is amended by adding the following definition betweenthe terms "public sewer" and "public water main": 
PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL. A pool, other than a residential pool,that is intended to be used for swimming or bathing and is operated by an ower, lessee, operator, licensee or concessionaire, regardlessof whether a fee is charged for use. 
Section 202 is amended by adding the following definition between the terms "reroofing" and "return air": 
RESIDENTIAL. For the purposes of this code, "residential" applies to detached one-and two-family dwellings and townhomes notmore than three stories in height. 
RESIDENTIAL SWIMMING POOL. A pool intended for use which is accessory to a residential setting and available only to the household and its guests. All other pools shall be considered publicpools for the purpose of this code. 
1:114 

(37) 

(38) 

(39) 

(40) 

(41) 

(42) 


Section 202 is amended by adding the following definition betweenthe terms "solid masonry" and "spline": 
SPA. A product intended for the immersion of persons in temperature-controlled water circulated in a closed system, and not intended to be drained and filled with each use. A spa usuallyincludes a filter, an electric, solar or gas heater, a pump or pumpsand a control, and can also include other equipment such as lights, blowers and water-sanitizing equipment. 
Subsection 406.3.4 is amended by deleting in Item 1 "1/2 inch (12.7mm)" and inserting in lieu thereof "5/8 inch (15.9 mm)" in the third line. 
Subsection 501.2 is deleted and the following is inserted in lieuthereof: 
501.2 Premises identification. Address numbers shall be provided on new or renovated buildings as required by Town CodeChapter 115. 
New Section 916 is added as follows: 
SECTION 916 
CARBON MONOXIDE ALARMS 
916.1 Carbon monoxide alarms. For new construction, an approved carbon monoxide alarm shall be installed outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedroomsin dwelling units within which fuel-fired appliances are installedand in dwelling units that have attached garages. 
916.2 Where required in existing dwellings. Where work requiring a permit occurs in existing dwellings that have attachedgarages or in existing dwellings within which fuel-fired appliances exist, carbon monoxide alarms shall be provided in accordancewith Section 916.1. 
916.3 Alarm requirements. Single-station carbon monoxide alarms shall be listed as complying with UL 2034 and shall beinstalled in accordance with this code and the manufacturer's installation instructions. 
Subsection 1020.1 is amended by adding the following exception: 
6. corridors contained within a single tenant space. 
Subsection 1101.2 is deleted and the following is inserted in lieuthereof: 
1101.2 Design. Buildings and facilities shall be designed and constructed to be accessible in accordance with COMAR 05.02.02. 
1:115 

(43) 

(44) 

(45) 

(46) 

(47) 

(48) 

(49) 

(50) 

(51) 


Exception: The design of covered multifamily dwellings as set forthin COMAR 05.02.02.05B(9) shall be in accordance with this chapter and ICC A117.1. 
New Subsection 1106.8 is added as follows: 
1106.8 Identification. Each accessible parking space providedshall be identified as set forth in COMAR 05.02.02.07D. 
Subsection 1301.1.1 is hereby deleted and the following is inserted in lieu thereof: 
1301.1.1 Criteria. Any building or structure required to complywith the International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) for whichan application for permit was received prior to July 1, 2012, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the 2009 IECC. Anybuilding or structure required to comply with the IECC for whichan application for permit is made on or after July 1, 2012, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the 2012 IECC. 
Figure 1608.2 is amended by adding the following note: 1.-Theground snow load, Pg, for the Town of Bel Air, Maryland, shall be 30 psf. 
Subsection 1612.3 is amended by deleting "[Insert name of jurisdiction]" in the seventh line and inserting in lieu thereof "Town of Bel Air" and by deleting "[Insert date of issuance]" starting in theseventh line and inserting in lieu thereof "January 7, 2000." 
Subsection 1809.5 is amended by deleting method 1 and inserting in lieu thereof: 
1.-Extending below the frost line established as 30 inches belowfinished grade. 
Chapter 29 is deleted. Chapter 353 of the Bel Air Town Code applies (plumbing standards and regulations). 
New Subsection 3001.1.1 is added as follows: 
3001.1.1 Maryland State Elevator Code. The provisions of thiscode are in addition to the requirements in the Maryland State Elevator Code. If a conflict between this code and the state code exists, the requirements in the state code shall apply. 
Subsection 3103.1 is amended by adding "within any 365 consecutive-day period or, with the approval of the building official,multiple periods equaling fewer than 180 days within any 365consecutive-day period" after the word "days" in the third line. 
Subsection 3103.1.1 is amended by deleting "120 square feet 
(11.16 m2)" in the second line and inserting in lieu thereof "400 
1:116 

(52) 
(53) 

(54) 

(55) 


square feet (32.55 m2)" and by deleting "10" in the fifth line andinserting in lieu thereof "50." 
SECTION 3109 

SWIMMING POOL ENCLOSURES AND SAFETY DEVICES 
Subsection 3109.1 is hereby deleted and the following is inserted in lieu thereof: 
3109.1 General. The provisions of this section shall apply tothe design of barriers for pools and spas. No property owner orcontractor shall fill a new swimming pool or spa with water until a permanent or temporary barrier has been approved by theDepartment of Building Safety. A temporary barrier may remainin place no more than 30 days unless approved by the Building Official. 
Subsection 3109.4 is amended by deleting "3109.4.3" in the thirdline and replacing it with "3109.4.15." 
Subsection 3109.4 is amended by deleting the exception in itsentirety. 
Subsections 3109.4.1 through 3109.5 are hereby deleted and the following is inserted in lieu thereof: 
3109.4.1 Barrier height and clearances. Barrier heights and
clearances shall be in accordance with all of the following: 
1. 	
The top of the barrier shall be not less than 48 inches (1,219 mm) above grade where measured on the side of the barrierthat faces away from the pool or spa. Such height shall existaround the entire perimeter of the barrier and for a distance of three feet (914 mm) measured horizontally from the outsideof the required barrier. 

2. 	
The vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of thebarrier shall not exceed two inches (51 mm) for grade surfacesthat are not solid, such as grass or gravel, measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the pool or spa. 

3. 	
The vertical clearance between the bottom of the barrier and the solid surface below the barrier, such as concrete, shall not exceed four inches (102 mm) measured on the side of the required barrier that faces away from the pool or spa. 

4. 	
Where the top of the pool or spa structure is above grade, the barrier shall be installed on grade or shall be mounted on thetop of the pool or spa structure. Where the barrier is mountedon the top of the pool or spa, the vertical clearance between the top of the pool or spa and the bottom of the barrier shallnot exceed four inches (102 mm). 


1:117 

3109.4.2 Openings. Openings in the barrier shall not allowpassage of a four-inch-diameter (102 mm) sphere. 
3109.4.3 Solid barrier surfaces. Solid barriers that do not have openings shall not contain indentations or protrusions that formhandholds and footholds, except for normal construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints. 
3109.4.4 Mesh fence as a barrier. Mesh fences, other than chain-link fences in accordance with Subsection 3109.4.7, shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and shall comply with the following: 
1. 	
The bottom of the mesh fence shall be not more than one inch (25 mm) above the deck or installed surface or grade. 

2. 	
The maximum vertical clearance from the bottom of the mesh fence and the solid surface shall not permit the fence to be lifted more than four inches (102 mm) from grade of decking. 

3. 	
The fence shall be designed and constructed so that it does notallow passage of a four inch (102 mm) sphere under any meshpanel. The maximum vertical clearance from the bottom of the mesh fence and the solid surface shall not be more than four inches (102 mm) from grade or decking. 

4. 	
An attachment device shall attach each barrier section at a height not lower than 45 inches (1,143 mm) above grade.Common attachment devices include, but are not limited to, devices that provide security equal to or greater than thatof a hook-and-eye type latch incorporating a spring-actuatedretaining lever such as a safety gate hook. 

5. 	
Where a hinged gate is used with a mesh fence, the gate shall comply with Subsection 3109.4.11. 

6. 	
Patio deck sleeves such as vertical post receptacles that are placed inside the patio surface shall be of a nonconductivematerial. 

7. 	
Mesh fences shall not be installed on top of on-groundresidential pools. 


3109.4.5 Closely spaced horizontal members. Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and thedistance between the tops of the horizontal members is less than 45 inches (1,143 mm), the horizontal members shall be locatedon the pool or spa side of the fence. Spacing between verticalmembers shall not exceed 1 3/4 inches (44 mm) in width. Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacingwithin the cutouts shall not exceed 1 3/4 inches (44 mm). 
1:118 

3109.4.6 Widely spaced horizontal members. Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is 45 inches(1,143 mm) or more, spacing between vertical members shallexceed four inches (102 mm). Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, the interior width of the cutouts shall not exceed 1 3/4 inches (44 mm). 
3109.4.7 Chain-link dimensions. The maximum opening formed by a chain-link fence shall be not more than 1 3/4 inches(44 mm). Where the fence is provided with slats fastened at thetop and bottom which reduce the openings, such openings shall be not more than 1 3/4 inches (44 mm). 
3109.4.8 Diagonal members. Where the barrier is composed ofdiagonal members, the maximum opening formed by the diagonal members shall be not more than 1 3/4 inches (44 mm). The angleof diagonal members shall be not greater than 45° (0.79 rad) fromvertical. 
3109.4.9 Clear zone. There shall be a clear zone of not less than 36 inches (914 mm) between the exterior of the barrier and anypermanent structures or equipment such as pumps, filters and heaters that can be used to climb the barrier. 
3109.4.10 Poolside barrier setbacks. The pool or spa side ofthe required barrier shall be not less than 20 inches (508 mm) from the water's edge. 
3109.4.11 Gates. Access gates shall comply with the requirements of Subsections 3109.4.1 through 3109.4.3 and shall be equipped to accommodate a locking device. Pedestrian accessgates shall open outward away from the pool or spa, shall be self-closing and shall have a self-latching device. 
3109.4.11.1 Utility or service gates. Gates not intended for pedestrian use, such as utility or service gates, shall remain lockedwhen not in use. 
3109.4.11.2 Double or multiple gates. Double gates or multiple gates shall have at least one leaf secured in place, and theadjacent leaf shall be secured with a self-latching device. The gate and barrier shall not have openings larger than 1/2 inch (12.7mm)within 18 inches (457 mm) of the latch release mechanism. Theself-latching device shall comply with the requirements of Subsection 3109.4.11.3. 
3109.4.11.3 Latches. Where the release mechanism of the self-latching device is located less than 54 inches (1,372 mm) from grade, the release mechanism shall be located on the pool or spaside of the gate not less than three inches (76 mm) below the top ofthe gate, and the gate and barrier shall not have openings greater than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) within 18 inches (457 mm) of the releasemechanism. 
1:119 

3109.4.12 Structure wall as a barrier. Where a wall of a dwelling or structure serves as part of the barrier and where doors or windows provide direct access to the pool or spa through thatwall, one of the following shall be required: 
1. 	
Operable windows having a sill height of less than 48 inches(1,219 mm) above the indoor finished floor and doors shall have an alarm that produces an audible warning when thewindow, door or their screens are opened. The alarm shallbe listed and labeled as a water hazard entrance alarm in accordance with UL 2017. In dwellings or structures not required to be accessible units, Type A units or Type B units,the operable parts of the alarm deactivation switches shall be located 54 inches (1,372 mm) or more above the finished floor.In dwellings or structures required to be accessible units,Type A units or Type B units, the operable parts of the alarm deactivation switches shall be located not greater than 54inches (1,372 mm) and not less than 48 inches (1,219 mm)above the finished floor. 

2. 	
A safety cover that is listed and labeled in accordance withASTM 1346 is installed for the pools and spas. 

3. 	
An approved means of protection, such as self-closing doors with self-latching devices, is provided. Such means of protection shall provide a degree of protection that is not lessthan the protection afforded by Item 1 or 2. 



3109.4.13 On-ground residential pool structure as a barrier.
An on-ground residential pool wall structure or barrier mountedon top of an on-ground residential pool wall structure shall serve as a barrier where all of the following conditions are present: 
1. 	
Where only the pool wall serves as the barrier, the bottom of the wall is on grade, the top of the wall is not less than 48inches (1,219 mm) above grade for the entire perimeter of thepool, the wall complies with the requirements of Subsection 3109.4 and the pool manufacturer allows the wall to serve asa barrier. 

2. 	
Where a barrier is mounted on top of the pool wall, the topof the barrier is not less than 48 inches (1,219 mm) above grade for the entire perimeter of the pool, and the wall andthe barrier on top of the wall comply with the requirements ofSubsection 3109.4. 

3. 	
Ladders or steps used as means of access to the pool arecapable of being secured, locked or removed to prevent access except where the ladder or steps are surrounded by a barrierthat meets the rouirements of Section 3109. 

4. 	
Openings created by the securing, locking or removal of ladders and steps do not allow the passage of a four inch (102 mm) diameter sphere. 


1:120 

(56) 
(57) 

(58) 


5. 	Barriers that are mounted on top of on-ground residential poolwalls are installed in accordance with the pool manufacturer'sinstructions. 
3109.4.14 Natural barriers. In the case where the pool or spaarea abuts the edge of a lake or other natural body of water,public access is not permitted or allowed along the shoreline, and required barriers extend to and beyond the water's edge not lessthan 18 inches (457 mm). A barrier is not required between thenatural body of water shoreline and the pool and spa. 
3109.4.15 Natural topography. Natural topography that prevents direct access to the pool or spa area shall include, but notbe limited to, mountains and natural rock formations. A natural barrier approved by the Building Official shall be acceptable,provided that a degree of protection is not less than the protectionafforded by the requirements of Subsections 3109.4 through 3109.14. 

3109.5 Indoor swimming pools. Walls surrounding indoor 
swimming pools shall not be required to comply with Subsection 
3109.4.12. 
3109.6 Entrapment avoidance. Suction outlets shall be designed and installed in accordance with ANSI/APSP-7. 
New Subsection 3301.3 is added as follows: 
3301.3 Housekeeping. Rubbish and trash shall not be allowed to accumulate on construction sites and shall be removed as soon as conditions warrant. Combustible rubbish shall be removed promptly and shall not be disposed of by burning on the premises, and the area adjoining around the operation shall be kept in a safeand sanitary condition. 
New Subsection 3301.4 is added as follows: 
3301.4 Drainage nuisance. Any surface or roof drainage which iscollected by man-made means on a property shall not be channeled onto the property of another. Any channeling or collection of watermust be dissipated and dispersed on the collecting property tonot cause damage to the property of another. Sump pumps and drainspouts shall not be discharged closer than 10 feet to theproperty line. Discharge shall not be into the Town sanitary sewer system. 
New Subsection 3304.2 is added as follows: 
3304.2 Driveway aprons and driveways. Driveways and aprons on public ways shall extend from street or alley pavements tothe property lines and shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of the standard specifications as required by theDepartment of Public Works. 
1:121 

(59)Subsection 3401.3 is amended by deleting "International PropertyMaintenance Code, International Private Sewage Disposal Code" starting in the sixth line. 
(60)Subsection 3401.6 is amended by adding "or the MarylandRehabilitation Code (MBRC) set forth in COMAR 05.16.01 through 
05.16.08 between the words "code" and "shall" in the second line. 
(61)Subsection 3412.2 is amended by deleting "[Date to be inserted bythe jurisdiction.]" and inserting in lieu thereof "March 1, 1968." 
(62)Subsection H105.1 is amended by adding the following to the firstsentence: "and shall be in accordance with the provisions of theTown of Bel Air Sign Regulations. See Article 9 of the Bel Air Development Regulations." 
§ 145-8. Changes and additions to International Residential Code.[Amended 3-17-2008 by Ord. No. 707-08; 11-17-2008 by Ord. No.715-08; 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 739-11; 6-18-2012 by Ord. No.751-12; 10-5-2015 by Ord. No. 772-15] 
A. 	The following sections are changes or additions to certain sections of the 2015 International Residential Code: 
(1) 	
Subsection R101.1 is amended by deleting "[Name of Jurisdiction]"and inserting in lieu thereof "Town of Bel Air." 

(2) 	
New Subsection R101.4 is added as follows: 

R101.4 Safeguards during construction. The provisions of Chapter 33 of the 2015 International Building Code as adopted inthis chapter shall be applicable to all construction sites possessinga valid building permit. 

(3) 	
Subsection R102.5 is deleted and the following is inserted in lieuthereof: 

R102.5 Appendices. Provisions in Appendix A, Sizing and Capacities of Gas Piping; Appendix B, Sizing of Venting Systems Serving Appliances Equipped with Draft Hoods, Category I Appliances, and Appliances Listed for Use and Type B Vents;Appendix C, Exit Terminals of Mechanical Draft and Direct-Vent Venting Systems; Appendix D, Recommended Procedures for SafetyInspection of an Existing Appliance Installation; Appendix E,Manufactured Housing Used as Dwellings; Appendix G, Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs; Appendix H, Patio Covers; AppendixJ, Existing Buildings and Structures; and Appendix K, SoundTransmission, shall be deemed as part of this code. 

(4) 	
Sections R103 through R114 of the 2015 International ResidentialCode are deleted and Sections 102 through 117 of the 2015International Building Code, as amended, shall be applicable. 


1:122 

(5) 

(6) 

(7) 

(8) 


Section R202 is amended by deleting the definition of "fire separation distance" and inserting in lieu thereof: 
FIRE SEPARATION DISTANCE. The distance measured from 
the building face to one of the following: 
1. 
To the closest interior lot line. 

2. 
To the center line of a street, an alley or public way. 

3. 
To an imaginary line between two buildings on the lot. 

4. 
To an exclusive use easement line. 


The distance shall be measured at a right angle from the face of the wall. 
Section R202 is amended by deleting the definition of "manufactured home" and inserting in lieu thereof: 
Manufactured Home. "Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling modeis eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feetand which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to beused as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing,heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems contained therein.Calculations used to determine the number of square feet in a structure will be based on the structure's exterior dimensions measured at the largest horizontal projections when erected onsite. These dimensions will include all expandable room, cabinets and other projections containing interior spaces but do not includebay windows. This term includes all structures which meet theabove requirements except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification pursuantto Subsection 3282.13 and complies with the standards set forthin Part 3280. 
Note: For mobile homes built prior to June 15, 1976, a labelcertifying compliance with the standard for mobile homes, NFPA501, ANSI 119.1, in effect at the time of manufacture is required. For the purpose of these provisions, a mobile home shall be considered a manufactured home. 
Table R301.2(1) is amended by adding the following design values:roof snow load: 30 psf; wind: 90 mph; seismic design category: B; weathering: severe; frost line depth: 30 inches (762 mm); termite:moderate to heavy; decay: slight to moderate; winter designtemperature: 13° F.; ice shield underlayment required: no; flood hazards: July 16, 1981, and January 7, 2000; air freezing index:554; and mean annual temperature: 31° F. 
New Subsection R302.1.1 is added as follows: 
1:123 

R302.1.1 Balconies and decks on townhomes. All portions of balconies and decks on townhomes constructed of combustible materials shall not be located closer than 24 inches (609.6 mm) toany property line. 
(9) 	Table R302.1(1) is amended by adding the following line at the bottom of the table: 

(10)Table R302.1(2) is amended by adding the following line at thebottom of the table: 

(11)New Subsection R312.1.1 is added as follows: 
R312.1.1 Areaway guards. A guardrail or other approved barriershall be installed on areaway walls with a grade level elevationdifference of greater than 48 inches (1,219.2 mm). Guards shall be constructed in accordance with Subsection R312. 
(12)Subsection R313.1.1 is amended by adding "or NFPA 13D" at theend of the subsection. 
(13)Subsection R313.2 is amended by deleting the exceptions andadding the following: 
1:124 

1. 	
An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not berequired for additions or alterations to existing buildings that are not already provided with an automatic residential sprinkler system. 

2. 	
An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required for a new one-or two-family dwelling constructed ona lot served by an existing service line from a water main tothe property line that is less than a nominal one-inch size or a lot subject to a valid, unexpired public works agreement thatwas executed prior to March 1, 2011. For a property to qualifyfor an exemption due to an undersized existing water service line, the water service line must be (1) approved and ownedby the public or private water system that owns the mains,


(2) installed prior to March 1, 2011, and (3) fully operational from the public or private water main to a curb stop or meterpit located at the property line. 
(14)Subsection R321.1 is deleted and the following is inserted in lieu thereof: 
R321.1 Premises identification. Address numbers shall be provided on new or renovated buildings as required by the Bel AirTown Code Chapter 115. 
(15)Subsection R405.1 is amended by adding "In accordance with the Town of Bel Air Plumbing Code" after the word "system" in theeighth line. 
(16)Subsection R405.1 is amended by deleting the exception at the end of the subsection. 
(17)Subsection R506.2.2 is amended by deleting the exception at theend of the subsection. 
(18)New Subsection R703.9.3 is added as follows: 
R703.9.3 Special inspections. Special inspections shall be required for all EIFS (exterior insulation finish system)applications. 
Exceptions: 
1. 	
Special inspections shall not be required for EIFS applicationsinstalled over a water-resistive barrier with a means of draining moisture to the exterior. 

2. 	
Special inspections shall not be required for EIFS applicationsinstalled over masonry or concrete walls. 


(19)New Subsection R903.2.3 is added as follows: 
R903.2.3 Drip edge. Provide drip edge at eaves and gables ofshingle roofs. Overlap to be a minimum of two inches (51 mm). 
1:125 

Eave drip edges shall extend 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) below sheathingand extend back on the roof a minimum of two inches (51 mm). Drip edge shall be mechanically fastened a maximum of 12 inches (305mm) on center. 
(20)New Subsection R903.4.2 is added as follows: 
R903.4.2 Gutters and leaders. Gutters and leaders shall be installed in accordance with the Town of Bel Air Plumbing Code. All rain leaders or extensions shall not discharge closer than 10 feet toany lot line so as not to be a nuisance to surrounding properties. 
(21)Chapter 11 is deleted in its entirety and the 2015 International Energy Conservation Code is inserted in lieu thereof. 
(22)Part VII, Chapters 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32 and 33 are deletedand the Town of Bel Air Plumbing Code is inserted in lieu thereof except for Subsection P2904, Dwelling unit fire sprinkler systems,which shall remain as part of this code. 
(23)Part VIII, Chapters 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 42 and 43 are deleted and the Town of Bel Air Electrical Code is inserted in lieu thereof. 
(24)Subsection AE101.1 is amended by deleting the sentence: "Theseprovisions shall be applicable only to a manufactured home used as a single dwelling unit installed on privately owned (non-rental)lots and shall apply to the following:"; and inserting the followingsentence in lieu thereof: "These provisions shall be applicable only to a manufactured home used as a single dwelling unit installed onprivate and rental lots and shall apply to the following:" 
(25)Subsection AE201.1 is amended by deleting the definition of "manufactured home" and inserting the following in lieu thereof: 
1:126 

(26) 
(27) 

(28) 


MANUFACTURED HOME. "Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feetor more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more squarefeet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation whenconnected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing,heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. Calculations used to determine the number of square feet in astructure will be based on the structure's exterior dimensions measured at the largest horizontal projections when erected on site. These dimensions will include all expandable rooms, cabinetsand other projections containing interior spaces but do not includebay windows. This term includes all structures which meet the above requirements except the size requirements and with respectto which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification pursuantto Subsection 3282.13 and complies with the standards set forth in Part 3280. 
Note: For mobile homes built prior to June 15, 1976, a labelcertifying compliance with the standard for mobile homes, NFPA 501, ANSI 119.1, in effect at the time of manufacture is required.For the purpose of these provisions, a mobile home shall be considered a manufactured home. 
Subsection AE201.1 is amended by deleting the definition of"Privately Owned (Non-Rental) Lot" and inserting the following inlieu thereof: 
PRIVATELY OWNED (NON-RENTAL) LOT. A parcel of realestate outside of a manufactured home rental community (park) where the land and the manufactured home to be installed thereon are held in common ownership. 
Subsection AE201.1 is amended by adding the following definition: 
RENTAL LOT. A lot or space that is rented in an approved manufactured home community or park. 
Subsection AE201.1 is amended by adding the following definition: 
INDUSTRIALIZED BUILDING. As defined by § 12-301(d) of the Public Safety Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland,"industrialized building" means a building assembly or system of building subassemblies manufactured in its entirety, or in substantial part, off site and transported to the point of use forinstallation or erection, with or without other specified components, as a finished building or as a part of a finished building comprising two or more industrialized building units. Anindustrialized building need not have electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating, insulation or other service systems, but when such 
1:127 

systems are installed at the off-site manufacture or assembly pointthey shall be deemed a part of such building assembly or system of building assemblies. "Industrialized building" does not includeopen frame construction, which can be completely inspected onsite. "Industrialized building" does not include a mobile home. 
(29)Section AE301 is deleted in its entirety. 
(30)Section AE302 is deleted in its entirety. 
(31)Section AE303 is deleted in its entirety. 
(32)Section AE304 is deleted in its entirety. 
(33)Subsection AE602.1 is amended by adding the phrase "or ANSIA225.1-1994" in the last line of the last paragraph after the word "designer." 
§ 145-9. Adoption of International Mechanical Code by reference.[Added 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 739-1135; amended 6-18-2012 by Ord.No. 751-12; 10-5-2015 by Ord. No. 772-15] 
The 2015 International Mechanical Code published by the InternationalCode Council, Inc., is hereby adopted and by reference thereto is made a part of this chapter with the same force and effect as though set out in fullherein, save and except such changes, amendments, revisions, deletions,subsections and/or additions as specified in this chapter. If conflicts with this code, or with changes, amendments, revisions, deletions, subsectionsand/or additions to that code are found elsewhere in the Town Code, themost restrictive provisions shall govern. 
A. 	Registration. 
(1) 	
As used in this code, the term "provide heating, ventilation, air-conditioning or refrigeration services" shall mean "to install, maintain, alter, remodel or repair heating systems, coolingsystems, refrigeration systems, ventilation systems or hydronicsystems." 

(2) 	
All persons that intend to install maintain, alter, remodel or repairheating systems, cooling systems, refrigeration systems,ventilation systems or hydronic systems in Harford County shall be registered with the Harford County Division of Plumbing Servicesand shall have a current certificate of registration. 


B. 	Permit applicants. 
(1) 	No work regulated by this code shall be commenced without apermit being issued by the Harford County Department of Inspections, Licenses and Permits. 
35.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former § 145-9 as § 145-10. 
1:128 
(2) 	A mechanical permit issued in accordance with this Code may beissued to the owner of a single-family dwelling occupied exclusively by the owner upon the following conditions: 
(a) 	
All work must be done in accordance with this code. 

(b) 	
The owner shall be tested and qualified by the Department of Inspections, Licenses and Permits in accordance with requirements established by the Mechanical Board. 

(c) 	
The owner shall sign an affidavit agreeing to comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter and attesting that thelocation in which the work will be performed is the applicant'sprimary residence. 


C. 	Plans and specifications. Plans and specifications for the installation ofall heating, ventilation, air-conditioning or refrigeration systems shall: 
(1) 	
Be approved by a licensed Maryland HVACR master, HVACR master restricted licensed for the system being installed, or a Maryland licensed professional engineer or architect; and 

(2) 	
Have affixed to them the name and license number of the Maryland HVACR master, HVACR master restricted licensed for the systembeing installed, or Maryland licensed professional engineer or architect. 

(3) 	
For installations other than one-family and two-family dwellings,adequate details of mechanical and electrical work, includingcomputations, diagrams and other essential technical data, shall be filed. 


D. 	The following sections are changes or additions to certain sections ofthe 2015 International Mechanical Code: 
(1) 	
Subsection 101.1 is amended by deleting "[name of jurisdiction]"and inserting in lieu thereof "Town of Bel Air, Maryland." 

(2) 	
Subsection 101.2.1 is deleted and the following is inserted in lieu thereof: 

101.2.1 Appendices. Provisions in Appendix A, Combustion Air Openings and Chimney Connector Pass-throughs, shall be deemedas part of this code. 

(3) 	
Section 103 is deleted in its entirety. 

(4) 	
Subsection 106.2 is amended by adding the following: "9. Repair,service and maintenance of existing equipment." 

(5) 	
New Subsection 106.3.4 is added as follows: 


1:129 

106.3.4 Applicants. Only an individual registered in accordance with this section shall be eligible to make application for permit todo work in accordance with this code. 
(6) 	
Subsection 106.4.3 is amended by deleting "180 days" in the fourth line and inserting "12 months" in lieu thereof. 

(7) 	
New Subsection 106.4.5.1 is added as follows: 

106.4.5.1 Withholding permits. The Code Official may withholdthe issuance of any permit and/or place a hold on inspections if the applicant, the owner or any individual listed on the application as aresponsible officer (if the applicant is a business entity) has failedto remedy or correct any existing/alleged violation of the building code on any construction projects for which the applicant has beencited. 

(8) 	
Subsection 108.4 is amended by deleting "[specify offense] punishable by a fine of not more than [amount] dollars or byimprisonment not exceeding [number of days], or both such fineand imprisonment" and replacing with "misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, of the Bel Air Town Code." 

(9) 	
Subsection 108.5 is amended by deleting "any person who shallcontinue any work on the system after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed toperform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liablefor a fine of not less than [amount] dollars or more than [amount] dollars" and replacing with "misdemeanor, punishable as providedin Chapter 1, Article II, of the Bel Air Town Code." 


(10)Subsection 202, General Definitions, is amended by adding the following definition between the definitions of "registered designprofessional" and "return air": 
REPAIR. To put back in good condition, fix, to renew parts, tomake existing systems function. Anything that can be made to workis repairable. The replacement of a system or a condenser unit, air-handling unit, furnace or boiler which make up a system shallconstitute altering or remodeling, not repair. 
(11)Subsection 301.11 is amended by adding "Temporary repairs may not be made to a damaged heat exchanger," at the end of thissubsection. 
§ 145-10. Effect on existing building permits. [Amended 3-17-2008by Ord. No. 707-08; 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 739-11] 
This chapter shall not apply to buildings for which a valid building permitwas applied for prior to the date of adoption of this chapter. 




Chapter 165 

1:130 


COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Amusements — See Ch. 128. 
Animals — See Ch. 134. 
Building construction — See Ch. 145. 
Electrical standards — See Ch. 180. 
Fees and costs — See Ch. 192. 
Fire prevention — See Ch. 204. 
Floodplain management — See Ch. 210. 
Forest conservation — See Ch. 216. 
Historic preservation — See Ch. 246. 
Hotels, motels and boardinghouses — See Ch.

252. 
Adequate public facilities — See Ch. 265. 
Massage parlors — See Ch. 312. 
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 334. 
Property maintenance — See Ch. 364. 
Sediment control — See Ch. 390. 
Sewers — See Ch. 397. 
Stormwater management — See Ch. 405. 
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 410. 
Trees — See Ch. 435. 
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 450. 

1:131 

Part 1 
[The Town Of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan 2016 Was Adopted On
Comprehensive Plan
June 20, 2016. A Copy Of The Comprehensive Plan Shall Be On File
And Open For Public Use, Examination And Inspection In The Office
Of The Director Of Administration And In The Office Of The 

Director Of Planning And Community Development.] § 165-0. Comprehensive Plan 2016. 
1:133 


Part 2 
Zoning 

ARTICLE I 

General Provisions 
§ 165-1. Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Town of Bel Air DevelopmentRegulations." 
§ 165-2. Legislative authority. 
A. 	This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in theAnnotated Code of Maryland (Volume 3, 2003 Replacement Volume, 2008 Supplement, Land Use Article). [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
B. 	When any provision of this chapter refers to or cites a section of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the most recent revision of the code shallbe referenced. 
C. 	The Official Town Zoning Map36 shall be the Comprehensive Town Zoning Map adopted by legislative action simultaneously herewith orsubsequent hereto. The Town of Bel Air Development Regulations andthe Official Town Zoning Map shall apply to all properties within the Bel Air corporate limits. These regulations include the Town's zoning,subdivision, signage and landscape requirements, as well as an outlineof associated procedures and the Zoning District Map. Titles, chapter and section headings are not regulatory. Copies of the Official TownZoning Map and Town of Bel Air Development Regulations are availableat the Bel Air Department of Planning and Community Development and the Bel Air Town Hall. 
§ 165-3. Jurisdiction. 
A. 	All requirements noted in this chapter shall be effective throughout the Town's incorporated limits. A map showing the current boundaries ofthe Town is available for review at the Town Department of Planningand Community Development and at the Bel Air Town Hall. 
B. 	Based on Chapter 268, Article IV, § 268-19C(1)(c), of the HarfordCounty Code, as amended, the county shall provide copies of plansfor all proposed major subdivisions or other large-scale developments within a one-mile radius of the Town. The Town may provide oralor written comments regarding the plan. Conversely, the Town shallprovide copies of all proposed major subdivisions and large-scale developments within the Town to the County Department of Planningand Zoning for oral or written comments. Such comments will be 
36.Editor's Note: Said map is included as an attachment to this chapter. 
1:135 
formally presented to the Planning Commission as part of its review process. 
§ 165-4. Effective date; repealer. 
The provisions of this chapter were adopted on July 12, 2010, and becameeffective on August 2, 2010. Ordinance No. 663-03, Town of Bel Air Development Regulations, and all amendments thereto shall, as of the effective date of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations, be of nofurther effect or validity, except as to the extent that specific continuing rights are granted by the terms of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. 
§ 165-5. Purpose. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
These regulations are adopted in accordance with the Annotated Codeof Maryland, Land Use Article. The purpose of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations is to: 
A. 	Carry out the policies of the Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan byclassifying and regulating the uses of land and structures within theTown. The Town of Bel Air Development Regulations are adopted to protect and promote the public health, safety, comfort, convenience,prosperity, and general welfare of residents and businesses in the Town. 
B. 	Implement the goals, objectives, policies and programs of the Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan, and to manage future growth anddevelopment in accordance with that plan. 
C. 	Provide standards for the orderly growth and development of the Town that will maintain the community's small-town characteristics in anincreasingly urban Harford County setting and provide logicalextension and integration with the surrounding communities that support the growth of the Town as an extension of the historic core. 
D. 	Require high-quality planning and design for development that enhances the visual character of the Town, avoids conflicts between land uses, provides adequate light and air for individual buildings, andpreserves the scenic and historic qualities of the Town. 
E. 	Conserve and protect the natural resources of the Town, its natural beauty and significant environmental amenities, while emphasizingcompact development that is sustainable and reduces the community'scarbon footprint. 
F. 	Create a comprehensive and stable pattern of land uses upon which toplan transportation, water supply, sewerage and other public facilitiesand utilities. 
G. 	Provide regulations for the subdivision of land that will ensure orderlygrowth and development, the proper arrangement of streets and 
1:136 

utilities, and satisfaction of the Town of Bel Air's Comprehensive Planland use goals and objectives. 
H. 	Regulate all exterior signs so as to protect property values and protectthe character of neighborhoods and avoid excessive competition andclutter among sign displays in their demand for public attention. 
I. 	Preserve structures and lands of archeological, historic and architectural value, together with their appurtenances and environmental settings. 
J. 	Promote efficient movement for all modes of transportation, controlcongestion, enhance environmental protection, increase access to nature and recreation and provide the community with needed amenities. 
K. 	Provide adequate transportation, water, sewer, schools, recreation andparks services and facilities, along with other public requirements needed to support new and existing development. 
§ 165-6. Effect of Comprehensive Plan. 
The Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan is the basis for the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. The Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Planwas adopted with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing thecoordinated and harmonious development of the Town. 
§ 165-7. Conformance. 
All uses, structures, modifications and establishments of lots must be in compliance with the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. No person may use, expand, convert, enlarge, alter, reconstruct, or occupy any land orbuildings, or authorize or permit the use or occupancy of land or buildingsunder his/her control, except in accordance with all of the applicable provisions of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. Provisions for nonconformance are specified in Article IX of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. Nonconforming structures and uses may continue in effect unless abandoned for one year or more. Permits underreview at the time of adoption of the Town of Bel Air DevelopmentRegulations shall comply with the Development Regulations in place at the time of permit submission. Subdivision approvals and building andzoning permits issued prior to adoption of the Town of Bel Air DevelopmentRegulations shall comply with the Development Regulations in effect at the time of approval. If such permits expire prior to construction or initiationof the proposed use, the applicant shall be required to comply with currentregulations. 
§ 165-8. Fees. 
Fees sufficient to cover the costs of administration, inspection and publication of notice shall be charged to applicants for any development 
1:137 

regulation activity. The amount of the fees charged shall be as establishedfrom time to time by resolution of the Board of Town Commissioners. 
§ 165-9. Interpretation; conflicting provisions; severability. 
A. 	In their interpretation and application, the provisions of the Town ofBel Air Development Regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements. More stringent provisions may be required if it isdemonstrated that different standards are necessary to promote thepublic health, safety and general welfare. The terms and provisions of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations shall be construed toeffectuate the general purposes of this chapter, as set forth in § 165-5of this Part 2. 
B. 	Wherever the regulations imposed by any of the provisions of theTown of Bel Air Development Regulations are either more restrictiveor less restrictive than corresponding regulations imposed by any other provisions of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations or of anyother applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of anykind, the regulations which are more restrictive and impose higher standards or requirements shall govern. Regulations do not annul anyeasements, covenants or private agreements. 
C. 	If any clause, sentence, part or parts of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations, or of any section thereof, shall be held unconstitutional, such unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity ofthe remaining parts of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations or of any section thereof. The legislative body hereby declares thatit would have passed the remaining parts of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations or any section thereof if it had known such clause, sentence, part or parts of any section thereof should be declaredunconstitutional. 
D. 	Uses not specifically listed, but similar in operational aspects and scale of listed uses, may be permitted in the same manner as the similar usesif approved by the Zoning Administrator. In interpreting zoning districtboundaries, the zoning district boundary lines shall run to the center line of adjoining roads and/or rights-of-way. 
E. 	In case of conflict between the text of the Town of Bel Air DevelopmentRegulations and any caption, illustration, summary table, or illustrative table, the text shall control. The word "person" includes an individual,sole proprietorship, corporation, partnership, limited-liability companyor incorporated association and any other recognized legal entity. 
F. 	The words "includes" and "including" do not limit a term to the specificexamples set forth, but are intended to extend the term's meaning to allother instances or circumstances of similar kind or character. The word "Town" means the Town of Bel Air, Maryland. 
1:138 

G. 	As used in the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations, wordsindicating the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter. 
H. 	Words used in the singular in the Town of Bel Air DevelopmentRegulations include the plural, and words used in the plural include thesingular. 
1:139 

ARTICLE II 
Administration and Enforcement 


§ 165-10. Purpose. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
This article delineates the boards, commissions and individuals involved in the administration of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations and,where appropriate, outlines the individual's and/or group's responsibilities.These groups and individuals ensure that development is consistent with state and local visions, as specified in the Land Use Article of the AnnotatedCode of Maryland and the 2016 Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan, andwith all applicable regulations. 
§ 165-11. Board of Town Commissioners. [Amended 4-3-2017 byOrd. No. 780-17] 
The Board of Town Commissioners, established pursuant to the Charter of the Town of Bel Air, is the five-member elected legislative body ultimatelyresponsible for the effectiveness of the Town of Bel Air DevelopmentRegulations. It establishes the regulations, approves amendments and gives final approval to other matters as defined in the Land Use Article of theAnnotated Code of Maryland and the Code of the Town of Bel Air. The Boardof Town Commissioners is charged with the following powers and duties: 
A. 	Approve a recommended Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan and/or amendments thereto as provided in the Land Use Article of theAnnotated Code of Maryland. 
B. 	Approve changes to the Town of Bel Air Development Regulationstext and map after due consideration of the recommendations of thePlanning Commission. 
C. 	Seek recommendations from the Planning Commission relative to zoning, traffic and annexation requests. 
D. 	Approve historic construction and rehabilitation design guidelines and approve designation of historic districts and sites. 
E. 	Appoint board and commission members in accordance with the LandUse Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland and the Code of the Town of Bel Air. 
§ 165-12. Board of Appeals. 
The Board of Appeals, as established by the Bel Air Town Code, consists of five Town citizens and one alternate, appointed by the Board of TownCommissioners for a term of three years each. The Chair is elected annuallyby the Board of Appeals members. The Board's operations are limited to the independent review of specific land use questions. The Board is chargedwith the following powers and duties: 
1:141 

A. 	Hear appeals from a decision or interpretation rendered by the ZoningAdministrator. 
B. 	Grant or deny special exceptions pursuant to Article XII of this chapter. 
C. 	Grant or deny variances pursuant to Article XII of this chapter. 
D. 	Grant authorization to expand or extend nonconforming uses and/or structures. 
E. 	Hear appeals and requests for variances from the requirements ofChapter 210, Floodplain Management, Article VII, Variances, of the Bel Air Town Code. 
F. 	Hear appeals from a decision rendered by the Historic PreservationCommission in accordance with the Land Use Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
§ 165-13. Concept Plan Review Committee. 
The Concept Plan Review Committee is an advisory committee createdby the Board of Town Commissioners and consisting of a minimum of five members: the Director of Planning and Community Development, the Director of Public Works, a Town Commissioner, a Planning Commissionmember, and an Economic and Community Development Commission member. Committee members shall serve on an ad hoc basis and may authorize a designee to act on their behalf as necessary. Depending onthe project, representatives from other local and state agencies may beincluded in the initial concept plan review process, i.e., the State Highway Administration, Fire Department, Health Department, etc. Concept planreview is a review process to help applicants identify applicabledevelopment regulation requirements before a project is submitted to the respective reviewing agency(ies) for consideration. The Committee's dutiesand responsibilities are as follows: 
A. 	Review concept plans and act as an advisory body for commercial, industrial and institutional development in excess of 5,000 square feet,residential development of 25 units or more, in order to encourage development that meets Town goals. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
B. 	Assist applicant(s) in identifying development requirements and understanding the development process. 
C. 	Provide guidance for current and planned projects, as delineated in theTown of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan, with respect to their effect onexisting and future development and infrastructure and on the Town's design standards, community character, enhancement of propertyvalues and long-term goals and objectives. 
D. Identify and seek informal comments on proposed developments, if deemed appropriate, from outside reviewing agencies, including, but 
1:142 

not limited to, the Health Department, Bel Air Volunteer Fire Company,State Highway Administration, the Board of Education, the State Fire Marshal's Office and Harford County Department of Planning andZoning. [Amended 11-25-2011 by Ord. No. 744-11] 
E. 	Prepare minutes of the concept plan meeting for the PlanningCommission's and, when applicable, Board of Town Commissioner's review and consideration. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
§ 165-14. Cultural Arts Commission. 
The Cultural Arts Commission, as established by the Bel Air Town Code,consists of nine members who serve as an advisory commission to the Boardof Town Commissioners on matters pertaining to the celebration and the promotion of the cultural arts in the Town of Bel Air. The term of each member shall be three years or until his/her successor takes office. TheChair is elected annually by the Cultural Arts Commission members. The Commission's duties and responsibilities include the following: 
A. 	Prepare an annual report for the Town Commissioners, detailing theCommission's activities during the previous year. 
B. 	Prepare reports and make recommendations upon special matters orquestions within its scope of work. 
C. 	Prepare an annual budget related to projects within the Commission's scope, outlining forthcoming events and the funds allocated to each event. 
D. 	Conduct fund-raising programs for the promotion of cultural arts programs and events for the Town of Bel Air. 
E. 	Review and make recommendations to the Planning Commission forapproval, denial or modifications of proposed art amenities as required in Part 4 of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. 
§ 165-15. Director of Planning and Community Development. 
The position of Director of Planning and Community Development is created by the Board of Town Commissioners and appointed by the Town Administrator. This official is charged with organizing the Department ofPlanning and Community Development staff, as necessary, to carry out the functions of the Department. The Director of Planning and CommunityDevelopment is also charged with carrying out the duties of the ZoningAdministrator in administration of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. The Director or authorized designee shall have, in administration of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations, the following powers, duties and rights: 
A. 	Perform duties necessary for the proper enforcement and administration of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations in therole of Zoning Administrator. 
1:143 

B. 	Render interpretations, upon written request of an interested personwhose property may be affected, as to the applicability of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations to particular uses and its applicationto the factual circumstances presented. 
C. 	Receive, review, recommend, approve or deny applications as specified under the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. 
D. 	Conduct inspections and surveys to determine whether a violation ofthe Town of Bel Air Development Regulations exists; in carrying out this duty, it is the right of the Zoning Administrator or authorizedagent to enter and inspect, with permission of the owner or occupant,any structure or land in order to verify compliance with provisions of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. Should the owner oroccupant deny such entry, the Zoning Administrator may seek relieffrom a court of competent jurisdiction to permit such rights. 
E. 	Seek criminal or civil enforcement for any provision of these Development Regulations and take any action on behalf of the Townto prevent or abate any violation of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. 
F. 	Design and distribute applications and forms required by the Townof Bel Air Development Regulations requesting information which is pertinent to the requested approval. 
G. 	Receive, investigate and determine as a matter of fact complaints ofviolations of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. 
H. 	Issue zoning approvals pursuant to the provisions of the Town of Bel AirDevelopment Regulations and recommend suspension or revocation ofany zoning approvals upon violation of any provisions of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. 
I. 	Decisions of the Zoning Administrator shall be in writing and shall besubject to appeal to the Board of Appeals by any aggrieved person within 30 days of the date of the decision. 
J. 	Receive, review, recommend, approve or deny requests for minorsetback variances through the administrative review process. 
K. 	Receive, review, recommend, approve or deny requests for waiversfor screening, landscaping, architectural treatments and fencingprovisions. 
§ 165-16. Director of Public Works. 
The position of Director of Public Works is created by the Board of TownCommissioners and appointed by the Town Administrator. This official acts as the Town Building Official. As such, the Director is charged with theadministration of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations in concertwith the Director of Planning and Community Development. In this capacity, 
1:144 

the Director functions to review development and planned development toensure conformance with provisions of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations and other Town regulations and standards. The BuildingOfficial is also responsible for enforcing the Town's Building Code37 and other related regulations. The Director or authorized designee shall have, in administration of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations, thefollowing powers, duties and rights: 
A. 	Perform duties necessary for the proper enforcement and administration of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations in hisrole as Building Official. 
B. 	Render interpretations, upon written request of any interested person whose property may be affected, as to the applicability of the Townof Bel Air Development Regulations to the factual circumstances presented regarding subdivision, public works improvements and issues in concert with the Director of Planning and CommunityDevelopment. 
C. 	Receive, review, approve or deny applications as specified under the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. 
D. 	In concert with the Director of Planning and Community Development,conduct inspections and surveys to determine whether a violation of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations, the Town's Building Codesand other related laws exists. 
E. 	Serve as the Floodplain Administrator as specified in Chapter 210, Floodplain Management, to interpret floodplain boundaries, reviewapplications for development, inspect structures in flood areas, and permit and enforce provisions of the Floodplain Management Chapter.
[Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 

§ 165-17. Economic and Community Development Commission. 
The Economic and Community Development Commission, as established by the Bel Air Town Code, consists of nine members who act as the Town's community development agency. The term of each member shall be threeyears or until his/her successor takes office. The Chair is elected annually by the Economic and Community Development Commission members. TheCommission's duties and responsibilities are as follows: 
A. 	Provide strategic planning for future economic development. 
B. 	Encourage business development and recruitment of new businesseswhich would benefit the area economy and retention of existingbusinesses in the community. 
C. 	Market, advertise and seek new business prospects for the Town. 
37.Editor's Note: See Ch. 145, Building Construction. 
1:145 
D. 	Promote a positive relationship between the business community, citizens and government. 
E. 	Develop revitalization activities directed toward preserving and promoting employment opportunities and maintaining an attractive environment throughout the Town. 
F. 	Promote government coordination with other jurisdictions. 
G. 	Provide preservation, improvement, or embellishment of historic structures or monuments. 
H. 	Promote the installation, construction or reconstruction of streets, utilities, parks, playgrounds and other improvements necessary forcarrying out the Town's economic and community development objectives. 
I. 	Act as an advisory group on commercial development projects. 
J. 	Institute demolition and removal of buildings and improvements. 
§ 165-18. Historic Preservation Commission. 
The Historic Preservation Commission, as established by the Bel Air TownCode, is composed of seven members. The majority are residents who have a demonstrated special interest, knowledge, or a professional or academictraining in architecture, history, architectural history, archeology, planning,anthropology, curation, conservation, landscape architecture, historic preservation, urban design or related disciplines. Commission membersserve for a term of three years or until his/her successor takes office.The Chair is elected annually by the Historic Preservation Commission members. The Commission's duties and responsibilities are as follows: 
A. 	Safeguard the heritage of the Town of Bel Air by preserving the sitesand districts therein which reflect elements of its cultural, social, economic, political, archeological or architectural history. 
B. 	Stabilize and improve property values in such districts. 
C. 	Foster civic beauty and safeguard the architectural legacy for residential and commercial buildings. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
D. 	Support education and awareness of the Town heritage through programs and activities. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
E. 	Promote the use and preservation of historic sites and districts for the education, welfare and pleasure of the residents of Bel Air. 
F. 	Review, approve, deny or make recommendations, as applicable, onplans for renovation or redevelopment of historic properties. 
1:146 

§ 165-19. Planning Commission. 
The Planning Commission, as established by the Bel Air Town Code, consists of five members and one alternate appointed by the Board of TownCommissioners. The term of each member shall be five years or until his successor takes office. The Chair is elected annually by the Planning Commission. After public hearing, members may be removed by the Boardof Town Commissioners for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance inoffice. The Planning Commission is charged with the following powers and duties: 
A. 	Prepare, approve and recommend to the Board of Town Commissionersadoption of the Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan. 
B. 	Prepare, approve and recommend Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plansfor major geographic sections or divisions of the Town to the Board ofTown Commissioners for adoption. 
C. 	Promote public interest in and understanding of the Town of Bel AirComprehensive Plan. 
D. 	Recommend to the Board of Town Commissioners programs for public structures, improvements and land acquisition and their financing. 
E. 	Consult public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic,educational, professional and other organizations and citizens, as deemed necessary, with relation to protection or execution of the plan. 
F. 	Recommend the boundaries of the various zoning districts and appropriate regulations to be enforced therein. Make a preliminary report and hold at least one public hearing before submitting proposedzoning districts and regulations to the Board of Town Commissionersfor approval. 
G. 	Advise the Board of Town Commissioners on changes in zoning, annexations and transportation plans. 
H. 	Review and take appropriate action on site plans, landscape plans and subdivision plats, along with other pertinent plans, plats and materials,based on compliance with the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations and standards herein. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
I. 	Prepare regulations governing subdivision of land within the Townlimits; approve or deny proposed subdivision plats and resubdivision of existing record lots. All plats must bear the signature of the Chairbefore legal recording among the land records of Harford County. 
J. 	Make, alter or rescind rules and forms for its procedures, consistent with the Land Use Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, as amended from time to time. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
1:147 

K. 	File its minutes, decisions and other records in the Planning Office ofthe Town and maintain them as public record. 
L. 	Make recommendations and an annual report to the Board of TownCommissioners and the Maryland Department of Planning, concerningoperation of the Commission and the status of planning in Bel Air. 
M. 	Prepare, publish and distribute reports, ordinances, and other materials related to its activities. 
§ 165-20. Enforcement; violations and penalties. 
A. 	Complaints regarding violations. Whenever the Zoning Administratorreceives a written or verbal complaint alleging a violation of this article,he/she shall investigate the complaint and take whatever action is warranted. 
B. 	Persons liable. The owner, tenant and/or occupant of any building,structure or land or part thereof who participates in, assists, directs, creates or maintains any situation that is contrary to the requirementsof the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations may be held responsible for the violation and suffer the penalties and be subject to the remedies herein provided. 
C. 	Violation notice procedures. 
(1) 	
Whenever the provisions of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations have been violated, the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee shall send a written notice to the owner and occupantof the property alleged to be in violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering corrective action within 15 days. Anadditional written notice shall be sent at the Zoning Administrator'sdiscretion. 

(2) 	
The notice shall state what action the Zoning Administrator intendsto take if the violation is not corrected and advise that the ZoningAdministrator's decision may be appealed to the Board of Appeals in accordance with Article XII of the Town of Bel Air DevelopmentRegulations. 

(3) 	
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in cases when delay would seriously threaten the effective enforcement of this article or pose a danger to the public health, safety or welfare, the ZoningAdministrator may seek enforcement without prior written notice by invoking any of the penalties or remedies authorized in Subsection D of this section. 


D. 	Penalties. 
(1) 	Any owner, tenant or occupant who uses or permits the use of land,buildings or structures contrary to the provisions of the Town of BelAir Development Regulations shall be subject to a fine of not more 
1:148 

than $400 for each offense, in accordance with Chapter 1, ArticleII, § 1-10, of the Town Code. Each day of a continuing violation shall be considered a separate municipal infraction. 
(2) 	
The Town may recover damages in a civil action for violation ofthe Town of Bel Air Development Regulations and may adopt procedures for the imposition of civil penalties as authorized bystate law. 

(3) 	
In the event of a violation of any of the provisions of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations or any amendment or supplementthereto, the Zoning Administrator, any adjacent or neighboringproperty owner or any person who would be specially damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies provided by law,may institute a suit for injunction, mandamus, abatement or otherappropriate action or other proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such unlawful activity or use. 


E. 	Approval/permit revocation. A zoning, sign, special development or special exception approval/permit may be revoked by the Board of Town Commissioners (in accordance with the provisions of this article)if the approval/permit recipient, or its successors or assigns, fails todevelop, use or maintain the subject property, building or structure in accordance with the approved plans, the requirements of this Part 2, orany additional requirements lawfully imposed by the approval body. 
(1) 	
Before a zoning, sign, special exception or special development approval/permit may be revoked, all notice and hearingrequirements provided herein shall be complied with. 

(a) 	
Before a zoning, sign, special development or special exception approval/permit may be revoked, the Zoning Administratorshall give the approval/permit recipient 10 days' prior writtennotice of intent to revoke the approval/permit. The notice shall state the reasons for the revocation and the right to obtainan informal hearing before the Zoning Administrator on theallegations, if a hearing is requested within 10 days of the notice date. 

(b) 	
Following a hearing, or if a hearing was not requested, theZoning Administrator shall make a written recommendation regarding revocation of the subject approval/permit to theBoard of Town Commissioners. 

(c) 	
If revocation is recommended by the Zoning Administrator, a hearing shall be held before the Board of Town Commissioners,which shall render a final decision on the issue. 

(d) 	
The burden of presenting evidence sufficient for the Board to conclude that an approval/permit should be revoked shall beupon the party advocating that position. 


1:149 


(e) 	
A final decision to revoke an approval/permit shall include,insofar as practicable, a statement of the specific reasons or findings of fact that support the decision. A written decisionshall be provided to the approval/permit holder. 


(2) 	No persons may continue to make use of any property, buildings or structure in the manner authorized by any zoning, sign, specialdevelopment or special exception approval/permit after such approval/permit has been revoked in accordance with this subsection. 
F. 	Judicial review. Any Board of Town Commissioners, PlanningCommission or Board of Appeals decision denying or granting a piecemeal rezoning request; designating an historic district or historicsite; revoking an approval of a permit; or granting or denying a specialdevelopment, preliminary plan, special exception, variance or ruling on an interpretation by the Zoning Administrator shall be subject toappeal. If such a decision is appealed, a petition for appeal shall be filedwith the Circuit Court of Harford County within 30 days of issuance of the written decision. 
§ 165-21. Annual growth report; adequacy standards. 
A. 	Annual growth report. 
(1) 	
A copy of the approved Harford County Annual Growth Report, asreferenced in § 267-126A(3)(a) and 267-126B(2)(b) of the HarfordCounty Development Regulations, shall be submitted by the Town's Director of Planning and Community Development to the Board ofTown Commissioners in July of each year. An amended version ofthe report will be submitted to the Board of Town Commissioners in January of each year, incorporating amendments to the annualgrowth report as adopted by the county. 

(2) 	
The report, as required by the Harford County Development Regulations, is prepared by the Harford County Department ofPlanning and Zoning and includes a specific analysis of the currentand future utilization and capacity of school facilities, including the following: 

(a) 	
Full-time enrollment for the schools serving the Town of Bel Airas of September 30, or as of any other official reporting date as set by the State Board of Education or the County Board ofEducation; 

(b) 	
Rated capacity and utilization percentage of each pertinent school facility, with capacity based on state-rated capacity; 

(c) 	
One-year, two-year and three-year, enrollment projections foreach pertinent facility, including a description of the method of projecting enrollment in each facility; [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 


1:150 

(d) 	
Pupil yield factor by school level for each type of dwelling unit; 

(e) 	
List of approved capital projects for new or expanded school facilities and the identified schools that will be relieved, including projected enrollment and opening date; 

(f) 	
School district maps for each level of school facilities; and 

(g) 	
Modified enrollment projections for each district, which include planned units remaining (recorded lots and unitsprojected from approved preliminary plans) and projected units from vacant land zoned for residential purposes. 



B. 	
Adequacy standards (minimum acceptable level of service). Upon acceptance of the annual growth report by the Board of Town Commissioners, all approvals of residential single-family subdivisionplans and site plans for multifamily development shall be subject tofindings of adequate school capacity based on the standards set in this subsection and the current and projected use level described in theannual growth report: 

(1) 	
Preliminary approval. Preliminary subdivision plans exceeding five lots and site plans for multifamily residential developmentsexceeding five dwelling units shall not be approved at locations where either of the following conditions exist: [Amended4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 

(a) 	
The enrollment at the elementary school which then serves thesite is greater than 110% of the rated capacity or is projected to be greater than 110% within three years; or 

(b) 	
The enrollment of either the middle school or high school which serves the site is greater than 110% of the rated capacity or is projected to be greater than 110% within three years. 



(2) 	
Conditional review. If Subsection B(1)(a) or (b) of this section prevents approval of a subdivision plan or a site plan, the PlanningCommission may proceed with conditional review of the plan andplace it on a waiting list arranged by the date of completion of the review. This section shall not extend subdivision plan or site planapproval beyond two years from the date of final decision. Recordplats, grading permits, and public works agreements for utilities or roads shall not be executed by the Town until the plan for theproject is removed from the waiting list and approval is granted.Removal from the waiting list shall occur only when the condition that prevented approval under Subsection B(1)(a) or (b) of thissection no longer exists. 

(3) 	
Exemptions. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to transient housing or fifty-five-and-over housing. 




1:151 

ARTICLE III 
Establishment and Regulation of Zoning Districts § 165-22. Purpose. 
A. 	This article establishes zoning districts within the incorporated boundary of Bel Air, Maryland, and outlines the associated standardsand regulations that govern each district. The intent of this article isto identify the appropriate locations for various uses; to protect and enhance the Town's quality of life; control congestion; secure publicsafety; promote health and the general welfare; provide adequate lightand air; promote conservation of natural resources; prevent environmental pollution; avoid undue concentration of population andto facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage,schools, recreation, parks and other public requirements through the established criteria and standards to ensure compatibility betweenmore intensive uses and lower intensity uses in adjacent districts; toimplement the land use, housing and economic development goals of the Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan; to implement the visionsnoted in the Land Use Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland; and to support the goals of the Maryland Smart Growth Act of 1997.


[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
B. 	The Town is hereby divided into the following zoning districts: 
R-1  Low-Density Residential  
R-2  Medium-Density Residential  
R-3  High-Density Residential  
R-O  Residential-Office District  
B-1  Limited Business District  
B-2  Central Business District  
B-2A  Central Business Gateway District  
B-3  General Business District  
B-3A  General Business Gateway District  
M-1  Industrial District  
§ 165-23. Boundaries. 


Transition Overlay District 
The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on thecurrent Official Town Zoning Map38 (hereinafter called the "Zoning Map") of the incorporated area of Bel Air, Maryland, hereby made a part of this Part
2. The Zoning Map and all notations, references and other matters shownthereon shall be and are hereby made part of this Part 2. The Zoning Map, 
38.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included as an attachment to this chapter. 
1:153 
properly attested, shall be on file in the office of the Zoning Administratorand at the Bel Air Town Hall. 
§ 165-24. General regulations. 
A. 	Delineation of zoning district boundaries shall be in accordance withthe following rules: 
(1) 	
Boundaries shown as following or approximately following theTown corporate limits shall be construed as following such limits. 

(2) 	
Boundaries shown as following or approximately following streets shall be construed to follow the center lines of such streets. 

(3) 	
Boundaries shown as following or approximately following plattedlot lines or other property lines as shown on the current Tax Maps shall be construed as following such lines. 

(4) 	
Boundaries shown as separated from, and parallel or approximately parallel to, any of the above-listed features shall be construed to be parallel to such features and at such distancestherefrom as scaled from the Zoning Map. 

(5) 	
Whenever any road, alley or other public way is abandoned by official action as provided by law, the zoning districts adjoiningthe side of such right-of-way shall be automatically extended,depending on the side or sides to which such lands revert, to include the right-of-way of the public way thus abandoned, whichshall thenceforth be subject to all regulations of the extendeddistrict. 

(6) 	
In all cases where property has not been specifically includedwithin a district, such property shall automatically be classified asR-1 District until otherwise classified. 

(7) 	
In cases of annexation of territory where the annexation proceeding provides a zoning classification for the territory to beannexed, such territory shall be so classified upon incorporation into the Town of Bel Air. 


B. 	Junkyards, as defined in Article XIV, are prohibited in all districts. 
C. 	Sustainable building methodology shall be incorporated in new construction, renovation and restoration projects to the maximum extent practicable. Sustainable building methodology may include, butis not limited to, such items as green roofs, capture and reuse of rainwater, high-efficiency lighting, recycled building components, theuse of environmentally friendly building materials, reuse of historicbuildings and building components, infill development and pedestrian-oriented design. Emphasis shall be placed on reducing the carbon footprint for new and existing development. 
1:154 

D. 	Proposed retail/service/industrial development projects in excess of 7,500 square feet shall be subject to the special development process specified in Article XII, Appeals, Variances, Special Exceptions andSpecial Developments, and to the architectural review process specified in Article XVI, Subdivision and Site Plan Review. [Amended11-25-2011 by Ord. No. 744-11] 
E. 	Infill development shall be designed to ensure sensitive integration ofnew development with historic structures and the architectural context in the neighborhood. 
F. 	Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the property principal use may be permitted by right or as a special exception.


[Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
G. 	Family child-care facilities may be permitted in accordance with all state and local requirements. [Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
H. 	Electric, communications antennae (in accordance with performancestandards set forth in Article VII), water, sewer, gas and fuel lines, but not including transmission lines carrying 50,000 volts or more, arepermitted. Transmission lines in excess of 50,000 volts require special exception approval. [Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
I. 	Satellite receiving dishes may be permitted subject to the provisions of Articles VII and X. [Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
J. 	Cemeteries may be permitted when accessory to a house of worship, provided that no graves or burial plots are located in the front yard.

[Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
K. 	Temporary structures for uses incidental to construction work shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of work. Construction/sales trailers may be permitted for no more than 18 months. If longer duration is necessary, special exception approval is required. [Added4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
L. 	A building height bonus of 10% or less may be approved by the PlanningCommission provided that structured parking on the order of 75% of the building footprint is incorporated as part of a proposeddevelopment. [Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
M. 	Requirements associated with the use of outdoor space, service ofrefuse and recycling, loading and unloading and exterior lighting in Article VII are applicable to all referenced uses. [Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
§ 165-25. R-1 Low-Density Residential District. 
A. 	Purpose. The Low-Density Residential District is designed primarily to accommodate single-family detached housing, ensure preservation ofexisting neighborhoods and retain the Town's small-town character as 
1:155 

identified in the Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan. Some communityservice uses, institutional uses, and home occupations may be permitted as provided for by this Part 2. 

B. 	General regulations. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
(1) 	
Cottage housing, as defined in Article XIV, shall be permitted as aspecial exception. This use is subject to performance standards asspecified in Article VII of this Part 2. 

(2) 	
Home occupations, as defined in Article XIV, are permitted,provided that not more than 300 square feet of area shall be used for such purpose and that only persons residing in the home shall be engaged in this activity. Home occupations or professionaloffices within the home may be permitted in accordance with theperformance standards as set forth in Article VII. A home occupation certificate shall be required. 

(3) 	
Conversion of dwellings or construction of buildings for business,personal and professional uses may be permitted as a special exception in the Transition Overlay District, subject to performancestandards as specified in Article VII of this Part 2. Buildings shallbe compatible in size and scale with properties located in the Transition Overlay District that are situated within 300 feet of theproperty in question. 

(4) 	
Professional office uses and bed-and-breakfast establishments may be permitted in the R-1 Transition Overlay District with specialexception approval. 


C. 	Specific regulations. Permitted uses are listed in the use classification charts located at the end of Article III.39 The applicable regulations contained in other articles shall apply in the R-1 Low-DensityResidential District. Certain uses are subject to the performance standards specified in Article VII of this Part 2. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
D. 	Density, lot area, width, height and yard requirements. Table 165-2540 outlines the minimum requirements that shall apply for uses in the R-1District, subject to the modifications provided under Article IX of this Part 2. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
§ 165-26. R-2 Medium-Density Residential District. [Amended4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
A. 	Purpose. The Medium-Density Residential District is designed primarily to accommodate single-family housing and attached units with appropriate design and buffering. This district is also intended to 
39.Editor's Note: See § 165-35, Permitted use tables. 
40.Editor's Note: See the Table of Lot Requirements for Specific Uses, included as anattachment to this chapter. 
1:156 ensure preservation of existing neighborhoods and to retain the Town'ssmall-town character as identified in the Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan. 
B. 	General regulations. 
(1) 	
The conversion of an existing (as of November 1959) single-family dwelling into a two-family dwelling is permitted, provided suchdwelling has a total finished floor area of at least 1,800 square feetprior to conversion and is located on a lot having an area of at least 15,000 square feet at the time of application. 

(2) 	
Cottage housing, as defined in Article XIV, shall be permitted,subject to performance standards as specified in Article VII of this Part 2. 

(3) 	
Home occupations, as defined in Article XIV, are permitted,provided that not more than 300 square feet of area shall be used for such purpose and that only persons residing in the homeshall be engaged in this activity. Home occupations or professionaloffices within the home may be permitted in accordance with the performance standards as set forth in Article VII. A home occupation certificate shall be required. 

(4) 	
Conversion of dwellings or construction of buildings for business, personal and professional uses may be permitted as a specialexception in the Transition Overlay District, subject to performancestandards as specified in Article VII of this chapter. Buildings shall be compatible in size and scale with properties located in theTransition Overlay District that are situated within 300 feet of theproperty in question. 

(5) 	
Professional service uses and bed-and-breakfast establishments may be permitted in the R-2 Transition Overlay District with aspecial exception approval. 


C. 	Specific regulations. Permitted uses are listed in the use classificationcharts located at the end of Article III.41 Applicable regulationscontained in other articles shall apply in the R-2 Medium-Density Residential District. Certain uses are subject to performance standardsspecified in Article VII of this Part 2. Exterior lighting for parking areascannot exceed 16 feet in height and must meet requirements found in Article VII. 
D. 	Density, lot area, width, height and yard requirements. Table 165-2642 outlines the minimum requirements that shall apply for uses in the R-2 District, subject to the modifications provided under Article IX of thisPart 2. 

41.Editor's Note: See § 165-35, Permitted use tables. 
42.Editor's Note: See the Table of Lot Requirements for Specific Uses, included as anattachment to this chapter. 
1:157 
§ 165-27. R-3 High-Density Residential District. 
A. 	Purpose. The High-Density Residential District is designed primarily to accommodate high-density housing, including apartments and condominiums with appropriate design, open space provisions andbuffering. The intent of this section is to ensure that diverse housing opportunities are available to meet the community's needs. 


B. 	General regulations. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
(1) 	
The conversion of an existing (as of November 1959) single-familydwelling into a two-family dwelling is permitted, provided suchdwelling has a total finished floor area of at least 1,800 square feet and is located on a lot having an area of at least 10,000 square feetat the time of application. 

(2) 	
Cottage housing, as defined in Article XIV, shall be permitted, subject to performance standards as specified in Article VII of thisPart 2. 

(3) 	
Home occupations, as defined in Article XIV, are permitted, provided that not more than 300 square feet of area shall be used for such purpose and that only persons residing in the homeshall be engaged in this activity. Home occupations or professional offices within the home may be permitted in accordance with theperformance standards as set forth in Article VII. A home occupation certificate shall be required. 

(4) 	
Conversion of dwellings or construction of buildings for business,personal and professional uses may be permitted as a specialexception in the Transition Overlay District, subject to performance standards as specified in Article VII of this Part 2. Buildings shallbe compatible in size and scale with properties located in theTransition Overlay District that are situated within 300 feet of the property in question. 

(5) 	
Professional office uses may be permitted in the R-3 TransitionOverlay District with special exception approval. 


C. 	Specific regulations. Permitted uses are listed in the use classificationcharts located at the end of Article III.43 Applicable regulations contained in other articles shall apply in the R-3 High-Density Residential District. Certain uses are subject to performance standardsspecified in Article VII of this Part 2. Exterior lighting for parking areascannot exceed 16 feet in height and must meet requirements found in Article VII. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
43.Editor's Note: See § 165-35, Permitted use tables. 
1:158 
D. 	Density, lot area, width, height and yard requirements. Table 165-2744 outlines the minimum requirements that shall apply for uses in the R-3 District, subject to the modifications provided under Article IX of thisPart 2. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
§ 165-28. R-O Residential-Office District. 
A. 	Purpose. The Residential-Office District is designed primarily for areaswhich are no longer viable as single-family residential areas due to high traffic volumes or other factors but which may be viable for high-density residential uses or offices. Office and service uses may beapproved as provided for by this Part 2. These areas are generally gateways to the Town Center and should be developed to ensure compatibility with existing residential uses while providing an attractive public frontage and a sense of arrival to the Town's historic core. 


B. 	General regulations. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
(1) 	
Customary home occupations and professional services may bepermitted in accordance with the performance standards as set forth in Article VII. A home occupation certificate is required. 

(2) 	
Parking areas for commercial uses shall be located in the side orrear yard only. An access permit shall be required for all parking area curb cuts. In residential districts, curb cuts for new residential uses shall not exceed 30 feet, and the driveway shall not exceed24 feet in width. The curb cut sidewalk pattern should be carried across the driveway in all districts. Buildings, low walls andattractive plantings shall be used to screen commercial parking areas. 

(3) 	
Development shall be compatible with neighboring developmentand provide a cohesive and rational pattern. All development shallconsider design features that will create an attractive and visual continuity between proposed development and adjacentneighborhoods. Buildings shall be constructed to ensure visual privacy and sunlight for adjacent structures, as well as protection from the new or renovated developments, site illumination, noiseand odors, as applicable. 

(4) 	
Building and site design should preserve and enhance special street views, in particular, views of landmark buildings and naturalfeatures, focal points at T-intersections and views along curvingroadways. Traditional building materials, such as brick or high-quality masonry finish, are encouraged. 

(5) 	
Building, design, height and massing. 


44.Editor's Note: See the Table of Lot Requirements for Specific Uses, included as anattachment to this chapter. 
1:159 
(a) 	
Building materials shall be compatible in quality, color, texture,finish and dimension with other buildings in the district. Architecturally harmonious material, color, texture and treatment shall be used for all exterior walls. 

(b) 	
Rear facades shall be of finished quality and shall be consistent in color and material with the rest of the building. 

(c) 	
The style and scale of the proposed building shall respectdesign elements prevalent in the community. Examples of such elements are the width, roofline pattern, size, shape, height,facing windows and building materials found throughout theTown. 

(d) 	
The use of fenestration, patterns and traditional designelements is encouraged. Examples of such design elements arefacade offsets, covered porticos, recessed or projected entries and other appropriate architectural features. Building wallsshall be a maximum of 40 feet in length without modulation. 

(e) 	
Roof forms shall be considered based on their compatibility with the existing architectural context and the character ofadjoining buildings. 

(f) 	
Glass should not be reflecting, as in mirrored windows. Tinted glass to prevent inner glare may be allowed, subject to reviewby the Zoning Administrator. Justification for tinted glass shallbe submitted to the Zoning Administrator. 

(g) 	
Simplicity of design and a limited range of colors and materialsare encouraged. Contrasting colors which accent architecturaldetails and entrances are encouraged, as well as the use of graffiti-resistant materials. 

(h) 	
A building height transition or step down is required forprojects that are adjacent to residential districts. 

(i) 	
The area covered by impervious surfaces shall be minimized tothe greatest extent practicable. 


(6) 	Fencing and screening. 
(a) 	
Walls and fences shall be uniform and compatible with architectural style, color and building material. Appropriatematerials include iron grating, wood, stone or brick. Walls greater than 40 feet in length shall incorporate some formof visual relief, including, but not limited to, pattern breaks,barrier wall construction, vertical features such as columns, differing construction materials or a combination of the above. 

(b) 	
All service areas, including, but not limited to, shipping,loading areas, dumpsters, refuse bins and similar accessory 


1:160 

uses, shall be placed in the side or rear yard and screened frompublic view. 
(c) 	Rooftop mechanical equipment and vents, utility facilities andother such equipment shall be located away from public viewor screened with a treatment that is complimentary to the building architecture. If service areas are exposed to view due to site conditions, such areas shall be screened with landscaping and appropriate fencing. 
(7) 	
Lighting and security. 

(a) 	
The use of decorative lighting and supporting structures consistent with building design, style and color is encouraged. 

(b) 	
Lighting provided for parking areas shall not exceed 12 feet inheight and shall meet requirements found in Article VII. 

(c) 	
The use of security alarm systems is encouraged. 



(8) 	
Vehicular and pedestrian access. 

(a) 	
Vehicular access points shall be kept to a minimum. Sharedor linked parking areas that provide cross access to adjacent properties are encouraged. 

(b) 	
Access points for corner sites shall be located in accordancewith requirements noted in Article VII of this Part 2. 

(c) 	
Curb cuts should be eliminated or minimized to the greatest extent possible through shared driveways with adjacentproperties. 

(d) 	
Street connectivity and access management shall be ensuredthrough driveway consolidation, relocation and enclosure ofcurb cuts and driveways, creation of medians and shared driveways to help improve the function of commercial streets. 

(e) 	
Walkways shall be designed to meet the followingrequirements: 




[1] 	Provide safe, convenient, well-illuminated entrance to the building. 
[2] 	Protect pedestrians from vehicular intrusion with landscaping and curbs that are integrated into the overallstreetscape design. 
[3] 	Provide safe community access for the handicapped to all major building entrances by means of minimum gradechanges, curb cuts, ramps and railings, as required by theAmericans With Disabilities Act (ADA).45 
45.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq. 
1:161 
[4] 	A continuous internal pedestrian walkway shall be provided from the perimeter public sidewalk to the principal customer entrance(s). ADA-compliant sidewalksextending the full length of the building or center must beprovided along any facade featuring a customer entrance and along any facade abutting public parking areas. Modifications may be authorized by the Building Officialon a case-by-case basis when site conditions warrant. 
[5] 	The internal pedestrian walkways, including those crossing vehicular lanes, must be distinguished from driving surfaces through the use of special pavers or scored concrete to enhance pedestrian safety and theattractiveness of the walkways. 
(9) 	Landscaping and amenities. Landscaping shall be designed to add visual interest to open spaces, parking areas and facades, as wellas to soften the transition between buildings of different heightsand styles. Landscaping plans shall be submitted as required in Articles VI and VIII of this Part 2. The landscape plan shall bedesigned to meet the following minimum requirements: 
(a) 	
Preserve the maximum number of existing healthy trees when developing the site. 

(b) 	
Add visual interest to open spaces and blank facades byutilization of landscaping to enhance the streetscape. 

(c) 	
Provide definition of public walkways and open areas. 

(d) 	
Provide a consistent visual image between adjacent propertiesalong the streetscape. 

(e) 	
Provide appropriate curbs, tree guards and grates to ensurethe continued health of the plant material located in pedestrian areas. 

(f) 	
Provide plant species for year-round appearance, maintenanceand compatibility with adjacent properties. 

(g) 	
Provide plants in proper size and quantities to allow their healthiest establishment and to compliment the developmentand the streetscape. 


(10)Signage. Signs shall be designed to project the image of the business or service while complementing the design of the subjectproperty and other buildings in the district. Signs permitted in thedistrict shall conform to regulations as specified in Part 3, Article XV, of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. 
C. 	Special regulations. Permitted uses are listed in the use and classification charts located at the end of Article III.46 Applicable regulations contained in other articles shall apply in the R-O 
1:162 

Residential-Office District. Certain uses are subject to performance standards specified in Article VII of this Part 2. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
D. 	Density, lot area, width, height and yard requirements. Table 165-2847 outlines the minimum requirements that shall apply for uses in the R-O District, subject to the modifications provided under Article IX of thisPart 2. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
§ 165-29. B-1 Limited Business District. 
A. 	Purpose. The Limited Business District is designed to accommodatesmall-scale local business, institutional or service establishments. Some more intense business, institutional, or service establishments may bepermitted as provided for by this Part 2. Uses in this district should bedeveloped to ensure compatibility with existing residential uses while providing an attractive public frontage and linkage to the Town Center. 


B. 	General regulations. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
(1) 	
Customary home occupations and professional services may bepermitted in accordance with the performance standards as set forth in Article VII. A home occupation certificate is required. 

(2) 	
The sidewalk pattern should be carried across the driveway.Buildings, low walls and/or attractive plantings shall be used to screen parking. 

(3) 	
General regulations, as shown in Article III, § 165-28B(2) through(10), shall apply to all developments in this district. 

(4) 	
Exterior lighting shall not exceed 16 feet in height and shall meetrequirements found in Article VII. 


C. 	Special regulations. Permitted uses are listed in the use classification charts located at the end of Article III.48 Applicable regulationscontained in other articles shall apply in the B-1 Limited BusinessDistrict. Certain uses are subject to performance standards specified in Article VII of this Part 2. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
D. 	Density, lot area, width, height and yard requirements. Table 165-2949 outlines the minimum requirements that shall apply for uses in the B-1District, subject to the modifications provided under Article IX of this Part 2. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
§ 165-30. B-2 Central Business District. 
46.Editor's Note: See § 165-35, Permitted use tables. 
47.Editor's Note: See the Table of Lot Requirements for Specific Uses, included as an

attachment to this chapter. 
48.Editor's Note: See § 165-35, Permitted use tables. 
49.Editor's Note: See the Table of Lot Requirements for Specific Uses, included as an
attachment to this chapter. 
1:163 
A. Purpose. The Central Business District is established to: 

(1) 	
Promote reuse, infill and redevelopment in Bel Air's traditional Town Center. 

(2) 	
Encourage efficient use of land and compact development. 

(3) 	
Retain and strengthen the land use pattern that includes a mix of shops, services, offices, civic uses and residences. 

(4) 	
Encourage increased economic vitality through the addition of newdowntown residences and uses that attract visitors, such as specialty shops, restaurants, theaters and overnightaccommodations. 

(5) 	
Encourage mixed-use buildings with retail and service uses at street level and office or residential uses on upper levels. 

(6) 	
Retain and create attractive streetscapes with a lively, pedestrian-oriented character. 

(7) 	
Provide for safe and convenient pedestrian, bicycle and automotivetravel. 

(8) 	
Promote building forms that respect and reinforce the historic streetscape. 

(9) 	
Require the use of building components that are human in scale. 


(10)Ensure that new, expanded or rehabilitated buildings are compatible with the scale of historic buildings in close proximity. 

B. 	General regulations. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
(1) 	
Customary home occupations and professional services may bepermitted in accordance with the performance standards set forthin Article VII. A home occupation certificate is required. 

(2) 	
Street trees shall be required along the street edge of the primary access road, with clustering of smaller trees encouragedthroughout the developed areas. 

(3) 	
A comprehensive coordinated sign plan shall be submitted at thetime of site plan review. This shall include one or a combinationof the following signage styles: freestanding, directory, projecting, wall, roof, awning and/or window. Signs shall conform to regulations specified in Article XV of this chapter. 

(4) 	
Permitted uses are listed in the use and classification charts located at the end of Article III.50 Applicable regulations containedin other articles shall apply in the B-2 District. 


50.Editor's Note: See § 165-35, Permitted use tables. 
1:164 
C. 	Site design standards. 
(1) 	
Design goals. 

(a) 	
The streetscape and the building facade facing the street shallbe the primary focus of the development. 

(b) 	
New development shall contribute to the creation or reinforcement of a pedestrian-friendly streetscape with sidewalks and a defined pedestrian edge. 

(c) 	
Buildings on corner lots shall establish a strong presence with unified facade design along both street frontages. 

(d) 	
Parking shall not be a dominant visual element of the streetscape. Views of parking should be screened by buildings or buffered with attractive plantings or low walls. 

(e) 	
Building and site designs should preserve and enhance specialstreet views, in particular, views of landmark buildings and natural features, focal points at T-intersections and views alongcurving roadways. 



(2) 	
Treatment of front yard and sidewalk area. The public streetscape between the building facade and the street shall be developedas a safe and attractive pedestrian area, with amenities such assidewalks, lighting, seating, canopies or awnings and landscaping. 

(3) 	
Building placement and frontage on street. 

(a) 	
The building facade shall occupy the entire lot frontage, exceptas provided in Subsection C(3)(b) through (e) below. 

(b) 	
A single driveway and/or walkway shall be permitted betweenthe building and a side lot line where needed for access to arear parking area. The maximum distance from the side lot line to the building shall be 30 feet for a two-way access, 16 feet fora one-way access, or eight feet for a walkway without vehicularaccess. (Driveways may be wider at the street in accordance with access permit requirements.) 

(c) 	
For through lots, placement of building facades along both lotfrontages is encouraged but not required. A through lot with building facade frontage on both roads may have one drivewayand/or pedestrian access for each road. 

(d) 	
For corner lots with cumulative frontage greater than 200 feet, a lesser building facade frontage may be approved alongone road, provided the primary building facade and entrancesare oriented towards the street frontages and the building complies with front yard requirements and architectural standards for corner lots. 


1:165 


(e) 	
For lots with frontage on two or more roads, in determiningwhich streets should have continuous building facade frontage, priority shall be based upon street classifications establishedby the Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan. Continuous building walls shall be created and retained along streets in the following order of priority: principal arterials, minor arterials, urban collectors, local roads. 




(4) 	Building setbacks and lot width. [Amended 2-21-2012 by Ord.No. 748-12; 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
(a) 	
Buildings with height up to 45 feet: 

[1] 	Minimum front setback: zero feet; maximum front setback: 10 feet. 
[2] 	Minimum side and rear setback: zero feet, except 10 feetif lot is adjacent to an R District. 
[3] 	No minimum lot width for nonresidential uses. 

(b) 	
Buildings with height between 45 feet and 55 feet: 


[1] 	Minimum front setback: 10 feet from right-of-way, no maximum front setback. 
[2] 	Minimum side and rear setback: zero feet, except 30 feetif lot is adjacent to an R District. 
1:166 


Figure165-30.I 

Illustration of height, 
1:167 


setback and front yardstandards 
1:168 


for the B-2 District. 
1:169 

[3] 	For a corner lot with frontage on two arterial roads, thefront yard setback shall be applied to the primary access frontage only. 
(5) Parking and access. 

(a) 	
Required parking may be provided off site in accordance with Article VII, § 165-51. For residential uses, a minimum of oneparking space per dwelling unit shall be provided on site or adjacent to the site. [Amended 2-21-2012 by Ord. No.748-12; 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 

(b) 	
Limit the width of curb cuts to 30 feet for two-way access or 22feet for one-way access, unless a wider curb cut is required by the Maryland State Highway Administration. 

(c) 	
Off-street parking shall be located to the rear of the principal structure. 

(d) 	
If a lot has frontage on more than one street: 

[1] 	For a corner lot, parking shall be located on one side of thebuilding interior to a block. Parking shall be no closer to the street than the building facade facing the same street. 
[2] 	For a through lot, parking may be located along one street frontage only. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
[3] 	For a lot with frontage on three streets, parking may belocated along no more than two street frontages. If feasible, limit to one street frontage. 

(e) 	
In determining where to locate on-site parking, priority shallbe based upon the street classifications established by the Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan. Parking areas adjacent topublic street rights-of-way should be located adjacent to a localroad whenever possible, then adjacent to the following types of roads, in order of preference: urban collectors, minor arterials,principal arterials. 


1:170 



Figure165-30.II 
Illustration of site designstandards: corner lot and interior lot. 
1:171 



Figure165-30.III 
Illustration of site designstandards: interior lots with shared driveway. 
1:172 



Figure 165-30.IV 
Illustration of site design standards: through lot. 
(6) 	
Screening for parking. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 

(a) 	
Parking areas unscreened by buildings for a length of 50 feet or greater shall be screened by an ornamental fence or wall,three feet high, between the parking area and the street right­of-way. Landscaping may be added between the wall and the right-of-way. 

(b) 	
Parking areas unscreened by buildings for a length of less than50 feet shall be screened by a continuous evergreen hedge or an ornamental fence or wall with a minimum height of threefeet. 



(7) 	
Retail development standards. 

(a) 	The floor area of an individual retail establishment shall not exceed 40,000 square feet. 

(8) 	
Residential development standards. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 

1:173 


(a) 	
Townhouses shall not be located on a lot with frontage on aprincipal arterial road. 

(b) 	
Garages, attached or detached, shall be accessed from the rearof the dwelling. 

(c) 	
Standards for percentage of window area shall not apply. 

(d) 	
Maximum building coverage for townhouses shall be 60% ofthe lot area. 

(e) 	
The standards of § 165-27 shall apply to single-family detached dwellings in the B-2 District. 


D. 	Architectural standards. 
(1) 	Building facade quality and variation. 
(a) 	
Use architectural details that provide visual interest and human scale on ground floor facades facing a public street.Features can include windows, columns, piers, entrances, and storefront windows. 

(b) 	
All facades shall be of finished quality and consistent in colorand material with the front facade. 

(c) 	
Buildings on corner lots shall be architecturally treated ashaving frontage on all facades along a street. 

(d) 	
Facades greater than 40 feet in length shall be articulated with discernible architectural elements, using one or more ofthe techniques listed below. Minor changes in material are notsufficient. The facade shall be divided into bays a maximum of 40 feet in length. 

[1] 	Divide facades into bays using masonry piers that framewindow and door elements. 
[2] 	Use vertical and horizontal articulation to break the facade, including features such as breaks in the surface ofthe wall (wall projections or recesses); the placement of window and door openings; or the placement of balconies,awnings, or canopies. 
[3] 	Divide the facade into a series of display windows. 
[4] 	Provide recessed entries. 

(e) 	
Buildings greater than 45 feet in height shall: [Amended4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 


[1] 	Provide a transition from the pedestrian levels to the upper stories through the use of materials, building articulation, and detailing. 
1:174 

[2] 	Use horizontal articulation to avoid monolithic street wall facade, using the features listed in Subsection D(1)(d) above. 
[3] Employ varied, articulated or fenestrated facades. 


Figure
165-30.V 

Facade 
walls 
should 
be 
designed 
to 
break 
down 
into 
component
pieces
horizontally
and 
vertically. 

(2) 	
Entrances and windows. 

(a) 	
Emphasize the entrances on facades facing the street throughdesign features such as columns, transoms, recessed entry,awnings or other features. 

(b) 	
Provide attractive design features and safe and convenientpedestrian access for entrance on side and rear facades. 

(c) 	
Generally, use framed, individual windows with vertical proportions. Continuous strip windows or other designs maybe approved, subject to review by an independent architect inaccordance with Article XVI, § 165-118A(6). 




1:175 

(d) 	
Glass should not be reflecting, as in mirrored windows. Tintedglass to prevent inner glare may be allowed, subject to review by the Zoning Administrator. Justification for tinted glass shallbe submitted to the Zoning Administrator. 

(e) 	
Window area on facades facing public streets shall be within the following range: 

[1] 	Storefront buildings: 70% to 90% for the ground floor;40% to 80% for upper floors. 
[2] 	Other buildings: 60% to 90% for the ground floor; 40% to80% for upper floors. 
[3] 	A smaller window area may be approved, subject to review by an independent architect in accordance with ArticleXVI, § 165-118A(6), for buildings that require less windowarea based upon their function. 
1:176 


Figure165-30.VI 
Illustration of window area standards. (Thebuildingdesignis for illustrative purposesand is not intended to require or recommend a 
1:177 



(3) 

(4) 	
Compatibility with neighboring buildings. 

(a) 	
Infill buildings within a block that is primarily developed shall contribute to the visual cohesiveness of the block. This may beaccomplished through: 

[1] 	Continuation of an established building wall, where applicable; and 
[2] 	Similarity between existing building facades and the proposed structure in one or more of the following elements: height and spacing of entrances and windows,window proportions, cornice height, canopy lines or roof treatments. 

(b) 
Buildings located adjacent to a designated historic site shallbe designed to complement the historic building architecture 

1:178 

(5) 

(6) 

(7) 

(8) 

(9) 




using similar proportions, spacing and height of windows,entrances, facade bays, cornices, or similarity in materials and colors. 
Awnings and canopies. 
(a) 	
Awnings and canopies should be visually contained within the building framework of columns and other architectural trim. 

(b) 	
Awnings and canopies should be compatible with the buildingand/or window in material, scale, proportion, and color. 

(c) 	
Awnings and canopies shall maintain a clearance of eight feetabove the ground. 

Materials and colors. 

(a) 	
Brick, high-quality masonry or alternative material compatibleand complimentary to materials used in the zoning district areappropriate for the primary building material of a principal building. 

(b) 	
Simplicity of design and a limited range of colors and materialsare encouraged. In general, use no more than three colors on a facade, including natural colors, such as unpainted stone orbrick. 

(c) 	
Contrasting colors may be used to accent architectural details, window trim, and entrances. 


Trademark buildings. Trademark buildings with franchise architecture shall conform in full to these architectural standards. Departures, for the purpose of conforming to corporate designstandards, are not permitted. 
Mechanical equipment. Screen mechanical equipment (such as air compressors, pumps, transformers, meters, boxes, and HVAC units) from public streets and public open spaces. Screeningmethods may include locating equipment upon a roof behind a parapet wall or to the rear of the building, fencing, or appropriatelandscaping. 
Structured parking.51 
(a) 	
Structured parking is encouraged to allow efficient use of landand provide shared parking within the downtown area. 

(b) 	
Whenever possible, integrate structured parking within a structure containing other uses. Locate retail or service uses on the first-floor street facade if possible. Treat parking 


51.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(9), Drive-through windows, was repealed 4-3-2017 byOrd. No. 780-17. This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection D(10) and (11) asSubsection D(9) and (10), respectively. 
1:179 
structure facades visible from the street in the same manner as the primary building facades. 
(c) 	
Freestanding parking structures not integrated with otheruses should, if possible, be located in the interior of a blockaccessed from a side street or alley. 

(d) 	
If a freestanding parking structure is adjacent to a publicstreet right-of-way other than an alley, the structure shall beset back a minimum of eight feet from the right-of-way. 

(e) 	
Design structured parking with materials, architectural detailsand landscaping that enable the structure to relate to thepedestrian scale and context and comply with requirements for facade quality and variation. Window area requirements shallnot apply. 


(10)Fire protection. For buildings higher than three stories or 45 feet, adequate access for ladder rescue vehicles shall be available on two sides of the proposed building to ensure fire/life safetyprotection, and a sprinkler system shall be installed throughout the building. 
E. 	Site elements. 
(1) 	Fencing and screening. 
(a) 	Walls and fences shall be uniform and compatible with architectural style, color and building material. Appropriatematerials include iron grating, wood, stone or brick. No split rail, wire mesh or chain-link fencing will be permitted. Wallsgreater than 40 feet in length shall incorporate some formof visual relief, including, but not limited to, pattern breaks, barrier wall construction, vertical features such as columns, differing construction materials or a combination of the above.
[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
(b) 	
All service areas, including, but not limited to, shipping,loading areas, dumpsters, refuse bins and similar accessoryuses, shall be placed in the side or rear yard and screened from public view. 

(c) 	
Rooftop mechanical equipment and vents, utility facilities andother such equipment shall be located away from public view or screened with a treatment that is complementary to thebuilding architecture. If service areas are exposed to view due to site conditions, such areas shall be screened with landscaping and appropriate fencing. 


(2) 	Lighting and security. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
(a) 	
The use of decorative lighting and supporting structures consistent with building design, style and color is encouraged. 

1:180 

(b) 	
Exterior lighting shall not exceed 20 feet in height and shallmeet requirements found in Article VII. 

(c) 	
The use of security alarm systems is encouraged. 



(3) 	
Vehicular and pedestrian access. 

(a) 	
Vehicular access points shall be kept to a minimum. Shared or linked parking areas that provide cross access to adjacentproperties are encouraged. 

(b) 	
Access points for corner sites shall be located in accordance with requirements noted in Article VII of this Part 2. 

(c) 	
Street connectivity and access management shall be ensuredthrough driveway consolidation, relocation and enclosure of curb cuts and driveways, creation of medians and shareddriveways to help improve the function of commercial streets.52 

(d) 	
Walkways shall be designed to meet the followingrequirements: 




[1] 	Provide safe, convenient, well-illuminated entrance to the building. 
[2] 	Protect pedestrians from vehicular intrusion with landscaping and curbs that are integrated into the overall streetscape design. 
[3] 	Provide safe community access for the handicapped toall major building entrances by means of minimum grade changes, curb cuts, ramps and railings, as required by theAmericans with Disabilities Act (ADA).53 
[4] 	A continuous internal pedestrian walkway shall be provided from the perimeter public sidewalk to the principal customer entrance(s). ADA-compliant sidewalksextending the full length of the building or center must be provided along any facade featuring a customer entranceand along any facade abutting public parking areas. Modifications may be authorized by the Building Official on a case-by-case basis when site conditions warrant. 
[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
[5] 	The internal pedestrian walkways, including those crossing vehicular lanes, must be distinguished from driving surfaces through the use of special pavers or 
52.Editor's Note: Former Subsection E(3)(c), regarding curb cuts, was repealed 4-3-2017 byOrd. No. 780-17. This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection E(3)(d) and (e) asSubsection E(3)(c) and (d), respectively. 
53.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq. 
1:181 
scored concrete to enhance pedestrian safety and theattractiveness of the walkways. 
(4) 	Landscaping and amenities. Landscaping shall be designed to addvisual interest to open spaces, parking areas and facades, as wellas to soften the transition between buildings of different heights and styles. Landscaping plans shall be submitted as required inArticles VI and VIII of this Part 2. The landscape plan shall bedesigned to meet the following minimum requirements: 
(a) 	
Preserve the maximum number of existing healthy trees whendeveloping the site. 

(b) 	
Add visual interest to open spaces and blank facades by utilization of landscaping to enhance the streetscape. 

(c) 	
Provide definition of public walkways and open areas. 

(d) 	
Provide a consistent visual image between adjacent properties along the streetscape. 

(e) 	
Provide appropriate curbs, tree guards and grates to ensurethe continued health of the plant material located in pedestrian 


54
areas.
(f) 	
Provide plant species for year-round appearance, maintenanceand compatibility with adjacent properties. 

(g) 	
Provide plants in proper size and quantities to allow theirhealthiest establishment and to complement the developmentand the streetscape. 


F. 	Density, lot area, width, height and yard requirements. Table 165-3055 outlines the requirements for uses in the B-2 District, subject to the modifications provided under Article IX of this Part 2. [Amended4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
G. 	Thresholds for applicability of requirements. 
(1) 	No legally existing use shall be considered nonconforming due to noncompliance with the standards of this zoning district formaximum setback, minimum height, minimum building facadefrontage along a public street right-of-way, location of parking or access driveways, or architectural standards. 
54.Editor's Note: Former Subsection E(4)(e) through (g), regarding screening, protectionfrom wind and sun, and stabilization of steep embankments, was repealed 4-3-2017 byOrd. No. 780-17. This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection E(4)(h) through (j)as Subsection E(4)(e) through (g), respectively. 
55.Editor's Note: See the Table of Lot Requirements for Specific Uses, included as anattachment to this chapter. 
1:182 
(2) 	
The following table specifies the thresholds at which the standardsof this district shall apply to proposed expansions or new constructions. 

(3) 	
If a proposed building expansion exceeds 50% of the gross buildingarea existing on the effective date of this section, and the proposed development site will not comply with the requirements of thiszoning district: 

(a) 	
Special exception approval shall be required for the expansion. 

(b) 	
The Board of Appeals, in reviewing the proposed specialexception, shall evaluate whether the proposed expansion willcontribute to accomplishing the purposes of this zoning district and complies, to the extent feasible and reasonable, with theapplicable standards indicated in the following chart: 





1:183 


1:184 


A. 	Purpose. The Central Business Gateway District is established to: 
(1) 	
Allow reuse, infill and redevelopment in areas bordering Bel Air'straditional Town Center in a manner that retains the small-town scale of development and provides a sense of arrival to the Town'shistoric core. 

(2) 	
Encourage efficient use of land and compact development that establishes a logical extension of the traditional downtown, reinforces pedestrian connections and is compatible with existingbuildings within and adjacent to the B-2A District. 

(3) 	
Strengthen the pattern of land use that integrates services, offices,civic uses, residences and public amenities. 

(4) 	
Provide for safe and convenient pedestrian, demolition and automotive travel. 

(5) 	
Require the use of building components that are human in scale. 

(6) 	
Encourage protection of mature vegetation and establishment of landscaping to reinforce the existing network of open space, lawns,gardens and landscaped areas. 

(7) 	
Provide transitions or buffers so that new development is compatible with and protective of surrounding residential uses. 


B. 	General regulations. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
1:185 

(1) 	
Customary home occupations and professional services may bepermitted in accordance with the performance standards set forth in Article VII. A home occupation certificate is required. 

(2) 	
Street trees shall be required along the street edge of the primary access road with clustering of smaller trees encouraged throughout the developed areas. 

(3) 	
Signs shall be designed to project the image of the business orservice while complementing the design of the subject property and other buildings in the district. All signs, including banners,require a permit. Signs shall conform to regulations specified inArticle XV of this chapter. 

(4) 	
The regulations in the B-2 District, Article III, § 165-30D,Architectural standards, and § 165-30E, Site elements, shall applyto the B-2A District. 

(5) 	
Permitted uses are listed in the use and classification charts located at the end of Article III.56 Applicable regulations containedin other articles shall apply in the B-2A District. 


C. 	Site design standards. 
(1) 	
Design goals. 

(a) 	
The streetscape and the building facade facing the street shall be the primary focus of the development. 

(b) 	
New development shall contribute to the creation or reinforcement of a pedestrian-friendly streetscape with sidewalks lined by front yards that provide attractive landscaping and convenient access to building entrances. 

(c) 	
Parking shall not be a dominant visual element of the streetscape. Parking should be screened by buildings or buffered by attractive plantings or low walls. 

(d) 	
Building and site designs should preserve and enhance special street views, in particular, views of landmark buildings andnatural features, focal points at T-intersections and views alongcurving roadways. 



(2) 	
Treatment of front yard areas. The front yard area for a nonresidential use shall be landscaped to provide a green amenityarea that contributes to an attractive streetscape. The landscaping shall include at least three of the following elements: trees, shrubs,flowering plants, benches, gazebos, lawn or other elements thatcontribute towards the goal of this provision. 

(3) 	
Building placement and frontage on street. 


56.Editor's Note: See § 165-35, Permitted use tables. 
1:186 
(a) 	
The building facade must occupy at least 60% of the streetfrontage. 

(b) 	
A single driveway and/or walkway shall be permitted betweenthe building and a side lot line for access to a side or rearparking area. 

(c) 	
For corner lots with cumulative frontage greater than 200 feet: 


[1] 	A building facade frontage less than 60% may be approvedalong one road, provided that the proposed building complies with the architectural standards for corner buildings and has the primary building facade and entrances oriented towards the street frontages. 
[2] 	In determining which streets should have the requiredbuilding facade frontage, priority shall be based uponstreet classifications established by the Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan. The required building frontage shallbe created along streets in the following order of priority:principal arterials, minor arterials, urban collectors, local roads. 
(4) 	
Parking location and access. 

(a) 	
Required parking may be provided off site in accordance with Article VII, § 165-51. For residential uses, a minimum of oneparking space per dwelling unit shall be provided on site oradjacent to the site. 

(b) 	
Limit the width of curb cuts to 30 feet for two-way access or 22feet for one-way access, unless a wider curb cut is required bythe Maryland State Highway Administration. 

(c) 	
For interior lots, off-street parking shall be located to the rearof the principal structure. In addition, no more than 1/2 bay ofparking may be located to the side of the principal structure, no closer to the street than the building facade. 

(d) 	
If a lot has frontage on more than one street: 


[1] 	For a corner lot, parking shall be located on sides of the building interior to the blocks. Parking spaces shall be nocloser to the street than the building facade facing the same street. 
[2] 	For a through lot, parking shall be located along one streetfrontage only. 
[3] 	For a lot with frontage on three streets, parking may be located along no more than two street frontages; if feasible, limit to one street frontage. 
1:187 


(e) 	
In determining where to locate on-site parking, priority shallbe based upon the street classifications established by the Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan. Parking areas adjacentto a public street right-of-way should be located adjacent to alocal road whenever possible, then along the following types of roads, in order of preference: urban collectors, minor arterials,principal arterials. 



Figure 165-31.I 
Illustration of site design standards for the B-2ADistrict. 
(5) 	
Screening for parking areas. Perimeter landscaping shall be provided between parking areas and street rights-of-way by a continuous evergreen hedge or an ornamental fence or wall with a minimum height of three feet. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 

(6) 	
Design of pedestrian areas, walls and fences. 

(a) 	
Walkways and pedestrian amenities shall be constructed ofmaterials compatible in color, pattern, texture and scale withadjacent and nearby buildings. 

(b) 	
Walls and fences shall be uniform and compatible with thearchitectural style, color and materials of buildings in closeproximity. Appropriate materials include iron grating, wood, stone, finished decorative concrete or brick. Chain-link fencingis not permitted. 

1:188 


(7) 	
Retail development standards. The floor area of an individual retailestablishment shall not exceed 7,500 square feet. 

(8) 	
Residential development standards. 

(a) 	
The front facade of townhouses shall not face a principalarterial road. 

(b) 	
Porches and steps may encroach up to eight feet into theminimum front yard. 

(c) 	
Garages, attached or detached, shall be accessed from the rear of the dwelling. 

(d) 	
Standards for percentage of window area shall not apply.57 

(e) 	
Maximum building coverage for townhouses shall be 60% of the lot area. 

(f) 	
The standards of § 165-27 shall apply to single-family detacheddwellings in the B-2A District. 





D. 	
Density, lot area, width, height and yard requirements. Table 165-3158 outlines the requirements for uses in the B-2A District, subject to the modifications provided under Article IX of this Part 2. [Amended4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 



Figure 165-31.II 
Illustration of height, setback and front yard standards for theB-2A District. 
E. 	Thresholds for applicability of requirements. 
(1) 	No legally existing use shall be considered nonconforming dueto noncompliance with the standards of this zoning district formaximum setback, minimum height, minimum building facade 
57.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(8)(d), regarding density standards for townhouses andmultifamily dwellings, was repealed 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17. This ordinance alsoredesignated former Subsection C(8)(e) through (g) as Subsection C(8)(d) through (f),respectively. 
58.Editor's Note: See the Table of Lot Requirements for Specific Uses, included as anattachment to this chapter. 
1:189 
frontage along a public street right-of-way, location of parking oraccess driveways, or architectural standards. 
(2) 	
The following table specifies the thresholds at which the standardsof this district shall apply to proposed expansions or new construction. 

(3) 	
If a proposed building expansion exceeds 50% of the gross buildingarea existing on the effective date of this section, and the proposeddevelopment site will not comply with the requirements of this zoning district: 

(a) 	
Special exception approval shall be required for the expansion. 

(b) 	
The Board of Appeals, in reviewing the proposed special exception, shall evaluate whether the proposed expansion willcontribute to accomplishing the purposes of this zoning districtand complies, to the extent feasible and reasonable, with the applicable standards indicated in the following chart: 





1:190 


Table 165-31A: Thresholds for Applying Requirements to New Construction 




[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
General Standards 
Standards Specific to B-2A District 
Extent of Development 

Additions to existing nonresidential or multifamily building not exceeding 50% of gross floor area; the standards indicated shall apply only to new construction and new site improvements 
Additions to existing nonresidential or multifamily building greater than 50% of gross floor area; compliance is required or special exception approval is needed for deviations from requirements 
Parking areas that add 1 to 5 spaces 



Minimum Design 
Building 
and StandardsPlacementMaximum Architectural
for Site and 
Front Standards 
Elements Frontage Setback 
X X 
X X X 




Landscaping 
and 
Screening 
for Parking 

Parking Location Area 
X 
X X 

1:191 


A. 	Purpose. 
(1) 	
The General Business District is designed to accommodate a widerange of commercial establishments. Uses in this district serve awide area and tend to generate high volumes of vehicular traffic. This district is intended to accommodate more intense commercial and mixed-use development and to implement the goals of theEconomic Development Element of the Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan. 

(2) 	
These areas are located along major transportation corridors andshould be developed in a sensitive manner to ensure compatible architecture and site design consistent with a major gateway. Campus-style development patterns with multilevel buildings,service, retail and institutional uses in a park-like setting are encouraged. The district should satisfy regional needs for large-scale institutional and commercial development. 


B. 	General regulations. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
(1) 	
Customary home occupations and professional services may be permitted in accordance with the performance standards set forthin Article VII. A home occupation certificate is required. 

(2) 	
General regulations found in the R-O District, as shown in Article III, § 165-28B(2) through (10), shall apply to all developments inthis district. 

(3) 	
Development shall enhance the visual approach to the Town by providing an attractive gateway to the Town. 

1:192 

(4) 	
Street trees shall be required along the street edge of the primary access road, with clustering of smaller trees encouraged throughout the developed areas. 

(5) 	
A comprehensive coordinated sign plan shall be submitted at thetime of site plan review. This shall include one or a combination of the following signage styles: freestanding, directory, projecting,wall, roof, canopy and/or window. All signs, including banners, require a permit. Signs shall conform to the regulations as specified in Article XV of the Town of Bel Air DevelopmentRegulations. 



C. 	
Special regulations. In addition to the general regulations noted above, the following regulations and the applicable regulations contained inother articles shall apply in the B-3 General Business District. Certainuses are subject to performance standards specified in Article VII of this Part 2. Exterior lighting shall not exceed 25 feet in height and alllighting shall meet the requirements found in Article VII. [Amended4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 

D. 	
Density, lot area, width, height and yard requirements. Table 165-3259 outlines the minimum requirements that shall apply for uses in the B-3District, subject to the modifications provided under Article IX of this Part 2. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 


§ 165-33. B-3A General Business Gateway District. 
A. 	Purpose. The General Business Gateway District is established to: 
(1) 	
Promote reuse, infill and redevelopment that provide a transitionfrom the highway-oriented development of the B-3 District to the Town's pedestrian-oriented, historic core. 

(2) 	
Encourage efficient use of land and compact development with amixture of retail, service, office, civic and residential uses. 

(3) 	
Allow the land uses permitted in the B-3 District while incorporating design standards appropriate to Bel Air's traditionaldowntown core. 

(4) 	
Encourage increased economic vitality through the addition of newdowntown residences and uses that attract visitors, such as specialty shops, restaurants, theaters and overnight accommodations. 

(5) 	
Encourage mixed-use buildings with retail and service uses at street level and office or residential uses on upper levels. 

(6) 	
Promote redevelopment of vacant and underutilized properties. 


59.Editor's Note: See the Table of Lot Requirements for Specific Uses, included as anattachment to this chapter. 
1:193 
(7) 	
Provide for safe and convenient pedestrian, bicycle and automotivetravel. 

(8) 	
Provide pedestrian connections between Route 1 and Bel Air'sdowntown area. 

(9) 	
Retain and create attractive streetscapes with a lively, pedestrian-oriented character. 


(10)Require the use of building components that are human in scale. 
(11)Provide transitions or buffers so that new development is compatible with and protective of surrounding residential uses. 
B. 	General regulations. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
(1) 	
Customary home occupations and professional services may bepermitted in accordance with the performance standards set forthin Article VII. A home occupation certificate is required. 

(2) 	
Street trees shall be required along the street edge of the primary access road, with clustering of smaller trees encouragedthroughout the developed areas. 

(3) 	
A comprehensive coordinated sign plan shall be submitted at thetime of site plan review. This shall include one or a combinationof the following signage styles: freestanding, directory, projecting, wall, roof, canopy, and/or window. Signs shall conform to regulations specified in Article XV of this chapter. 

(4) 	
The regulations in the B-2 District, Article III, § 165-30D, Architectural standards, and § 165-30E, Site elements, shall applyto the B-3A District. 

(5) 	
Permitted uses are listed in the use and classification charts located at the end of Article III.60 Applicable regulations containedin other articles shall apply in the B-3A District. 


C. 	Site design standards. 
(1) 	Design goals. 
(a) 	
The streetscape and the building facade facing the street shallbe the primary focus of the development. 

(b) 	
New development shall contribute to the creation or reinforcement of a pedestrian-friendly streetscape with a strong pedestrian edge along the sidewalk and screening for parking. 

(c) 	
Buildings on corner lots shall establish a strong presence withunified facade design along both street frontages. 


60.Editor's Note: See § 165-35, Permitted use tables. 
1:194 
(d) 	
Parking shall not be a dominant visual element of the streetscape. Parking should be screened by buildings or buffered by attractive plantings or low walls. 

(e) 	
Building and site designs should preserve and enhance specialstreet views, in particular, views of landmark buildings and natural features, focal points at T-intersections and views alongcurving roadways. 


(2) 	
Treatment of front yard and sidewalk area. The public streetscape between the building facade and the street shall be developed as asafe and convenient pedestrian area with attractive amenities, suchas sidewalks, public plazas or squares, lighting, seating, canopies or awnings and landscaping. 

(3) 	
Building placement and frontage on street. 

(a) 	
For lots with street frontage of less than 100 feet, the building facade must occupy at least 70% of the street frontage. 

(b) 	
For lots with street frontage of 100 feet or greater, the buildingfacade must occupy at least 60% of the street frontage. 

(c) 	
The Planning Commission may approve buildings with lesserfrontage: 

[1] 	To allow phasing of a development project in accordance with a detailed phasing plan; or 
[2] 	To allow a reduction to 50% of the street frontage if theplan represents an alternative design that fulfills the purposes of this zoning district and the design goals listedin Subsection C(1) above. 

(d) 	
A single driveway and/or walkway shall be permitted between the building and a side lot line for access to a side or rearparking area. 

(e) 	
For corner lots with cumulative frontage greater than 200 feet: 




[1] 	A building facade frontage less than the requiredpercentage may be approved along one road, providedthat the proposed building complies with the architectural standards for corner buildings and has the primarybuilding facade and entrances oriented towards the streetfrontages. 
[2] 	In determining which streets should have the minimumbuilding facade frontage, priority shall be based uponstreet classifications established by the Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan. The required building frontage shallbe created along streets in the following order of priority: 
1:195 

principal arterials, minor arterials, urban collectors, localroads. 
(4) 	Building setbacks and lot width. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
(a) 	
Buildings with height up to 45 feet: 

[1] 	Minimum front setback: zero feet; maximum front setback 25 feet. 
[2] 	Minimum side and rear setback: zero feet, except 10 feet if lot is adjacent to an R District. 
[3] 	No minimum lot width for nonresidential uses. 

(b) 	
Buildings with height between 45 feet and 55 feet: 


[1] 	Minimum front setback: 15 feet; no maximum front setback. 
[2] 	Minimum side and rear setback: zero feet, except 30 feet if lot is adjacent to an R District. 
1:196 


Figure165-33.I 
Illustration of height,setback 
1:197 


and front yardstandards for the 
1:198 


B-3A District. 
(5) Parking location and access. 
(a) Required parking may be provided off site in accordance with Article VII, § 165-51. For residential uses, a minimum of one 
1:199 

parking space per dwelling unit shall be provided on site or adjacent to the site. [Amended 2-21-2012 by Ord. No.748-12; 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
(b) 	
Curb cut width shall be limited to 30 feet for two-way access or22 feet for one-way access, unless a wider curb cut is required by the Maryland State Highway Administration. 

(c) 	
Off-street parking shall be located to the rear and to the side ofthe principal structure. 

(d) 	
For interior lots, parking spaces shall not be located betweenthe building facade and the street. 

(e) 	
If a lot has frontage on more than one street: 

[1] 	For a corner lot, parking shall be located on the sidesof the building interior to the block. Parking shall be nocloser to the street than the building facade facing the same street. 
[2] 	For a through lot, parking shall be located along one streetfrontage only. 
[3] 	For a lot with frontage on three streets, parking may belocated along no more than two street frontages; if feasible, limit to one street frontage. 

(f) 	
In determining where to locate on-site parking, priority shallbe given based upon the street classifications established bythe Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan. Parking areas adjacent to a public street right-of-way should be locatedadjacent to a local road whenever possible, then adjacent tothe following types of roads, in order of preference: urban collectors, minor arterials, principal arterials. 


1:200 


(6) 
(a) 	Parking areas unscreened by buildings shall be screened by a minimum three-foot-high continuous evergreen hedge or equivalent dense landscaping or a decorative wall or fence located at the edge of the sidewalk. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
(7) 	
Design of pedestrian areas, walls and fences. 

(a) 	
Walkways and pedestrian amenities shall be constructed ofmaterials compatible in color, pattern, texture and scale withadjacent and nearby buildings. 

(b) 	
Walls and fences shall be uniform and compatible with thearchitectural style, color and materials of buildings in closeproximity. Appropriate materials include iron grating, wood, stone, finished decorative concrete or brick. Chain-link fencingis not permitted. 



(8) 	
Residential development standards. 

(a) 	
The front facade of the townhouses shall not face a principalarterial road. 

(b) 	
Garages, attached or detached, shall be accessed from the rear of the dwelling. 


1:201 


(c) 	
No density standards are applicable to townhouses or multifamily dwellings. 

(d) 	
Standards for minimum percentage of window area shall notapply. 

(e) 	
Maximum building coverage for townhouses shall be 60% of the lot area. 

(f) 	
The standards of § 165-27 shall apply to single-family detacheddwellings in the B-3A District.61 


D. 	Density, lot area, width, height and yard requirements. Table 165-3362 outlines the requirements for uses in the B-3A District, subject to the modifications provided under Article IX of this Part 2. [Amended4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
E. 	Thresholds for applicability of requirements. 
(1) 	
No legally existing use shall be considered nonconforming due to noncompliance with the standards of this zoning district formaximum setback, minimum height, minimum building facadefrontage along a public street right-of-way, location of parking or access driveways, or architectural standards. 

(2) 	
The following table specifies the thresholds at which the standardsof this district shall apply to proposed expansions or new construction. 

(3) 	
If a proposed building expansion exceeds 50% of the gross buildingarea existing on the effective date of this section, and the proposed development site will not comply with the requirements of thiszoning district: 

(a) 	
Special exception approval shall be required for the expansion. 

(b) 	
The Board of Appeals, in reviewing the proposed specialexception, shall evaluate whether the proposed expansion willcontribute to accomplishing the purposes of this zoning district and complies, to the extent feasible and reasonable, with theapplicable standards indicated in the following chart: 




61.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(9), standards for automotive uses, which immediatelyfollowed this subsection, was repealed 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17. 
62.Editor's Note: See the Table of Lot Requirements for Specific Uses, included as anattachment to this chapter. 
1:202 

1:203 


A. 	Purpose. The Industrial District is designed to accommodate enterprises engaging in the manufacturing, processing, designing,repairing, renovating, cleaning, or assembling of goods, merchandiseor equipment. In some instances, the traditional industrial areas are immediately adjacent to residential uses. The regulations and standardsin this district are intended to ensure compatibility between thesedivergent land uses while assuring implementation of the Economic Development Element goals of the Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan. 
B. 	General regulations. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
1:204 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

(7) 


Development shall be compatible with neighboring developmentand provide a cohesive and rational pattern. All development shall consider design features that will create an attractive and visualcontinuity between proposed development and adjacentneighborhoods. Buildings shall be constructed to ensure visual privacy and sunlight for adjacent structures, as well as protectionfrom the new or renovated developments, site illumination, noiseand odors, as applicable. 
The use of fenestration, patterns and traditional design elements isencouraged. Examples of such design elements are facade offsets,covered porticos, recessed or projected entries and other appropriate architectural features. Building walls shall be a maximum of 40 feet in length without modulation. 
A building height transition or step down is required for projects that are adjacent to residential districts. 
The area covered by impervious surfaces shall be minimized to thegreatest extent practicable. 
Fencing and screening. 
(a) 	
Walls and fences shall be uniform and compatible with architectural style, color and building material. 

(b) 	
All service areas, including, but not limited to, shipping,loading areas, dumpsters, refuse bins and similar accessoryuses, shall be placed in the side or rear yard and screened from public view with a solid wall or fence. 

(c) 	
Rooftop mechanical equipment and vents, utility facilities andother such equipment shall be located away from public view or screened with a treatment that is complimentary to thebuilding architecture. If service areas are exposed to view due to site conditions, such areas shall be screened with landscaping and appropriate fencing. 

Lighting and security. 

(a) 	
Exterior lighting provided for parking areas shall not exceed 25 feet high and shall meet requirements found in Article VII. 

(b) 	
The use of security alarm systems is encouraged. 

Vehicular and pedestrian access. 

(a) 	
Vehicular access points shall be kept to a minimum. Sharedor linked parking areas that provide cross access to adjacentproperties are encouraged. 

(b) 	
Access points for corner sites shall be located in accordancewith requirements noted in Article VII of this Part 2. 


1:205 

(c) 	Walkways shall be designed to meet the followingrequirements: 
[1] 	Provide safe, convenient, well-illuminated entrance to the building. 
[2] 	Protect pedestrians from vehicular intrusion with landscaping and curbs that are integrated into the overallstreetscape design. 
[3] 	Provide safe community access for the handicapped to all major building entrances by means of minimum gradechanges, curb cuts, ramps and railings, as required by theAmericans with Disabilities Act (ADA).63 
[4] 	A continuous internal pedestrian walkway shall be provided from the perimeter public sidewalk to the principal customer entrance(s). ADA-compliant sidewalks extending the full length of the building or center must beprovided along any facade featuring a customer entranceand along any facade abutting public parking areas. Modifications may be authorized by the Building Officialon a case-by-case basis when site conditions warrant. 
[5] 	The internal pedestrian walkways, including those crossing vehicular lanes, must be distinguished from driving surfaces through the use of special pavers or scored concrete to enhance pedestrian safety and the attractiveness of the walkways. 
(8) 	
Landscaping and amenities. Landscaping shall be designed to addvisual interest to open spaces, parking areas and facades, as well as to soften the transition between buildings of different heightsand styles. Forest stand delineation, forest conservation and landscaping plans shall be submitted as required in Articles VI and VIII of this Part 2. 

(9) 	
Signage. Signs shall be designed to project the image of thebusiness or service while complimenting the design of the subject property and other buildings in the district. All signs, includingbanners, require permits. Signs permitted in the district shallconform to regulations as specified in Article XV of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. 


C. 	Density, lot area, width, height and yard requirements. Table 165-3464 outlines the minimum requirements that shall apply for uses in the M-1 District, subject to the modifications provided under Article IX of thisPart 2. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-1765] 
63.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq. 
64.Editor's Note: See the Table of Lot Requirements for Specific Uses, as an attachment tothis chapter. 
1:206 
§ 165-35. Permitted use tables. 
The permitted use tables are included at the end of this chapter. 
65.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection C, Special regulations, andredesignated former Subsection D as Subsection C. 
1:207 
ARTICLE IV 
Overlay Districts 
§ 165-36. Purpose. 
Overlay zoning imposes additional regulations for a special public purpose. The establishment of an overlay district is based on its location and functionas part of the Town's land use plan. Overlay district requirements shall bein addition to those imposed by the zoning district. In the case of a conflict among regulations in this Part 2, the overlay district standard shall apply. 
§ 165-37. Transition Overlay District. 
A. 	Purpose. The Transition Overlay District is established to: 
(1) 	
Accommodate areas of the Town which were traditionallyresidential and have evolved to have a current mixed use of residential and professional business and personal service uses. 

(2) 	
Protect residential neighborhoods from the impacts of higher-intensity development. 

(3) 	
Maintain the residential appearance and scale of development of transitional neighborhoods. 

(4) 	
Support small-scale community business uses to minimize dailyvehicular trips. 

(5) 	
Support the sense of arrival and provision of attractive gateways tothe Town Center. 


B. 	Boundaries. The Transition Overlay District boundaries are delineated on the Official Town Zoning Map, which is available for review at theTown Department of Planning and Community Development and the BelAir Town Hall.66 The Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan is the basis for determining transition area boundaries. These are residential areaslocated along heavily traveled roads and areas significantly impactedby adjacent commercial development. 
C. 	General regulations. All applications for conversion of residential dwellings to office use, additions to previous conversions or new office/professional service development within the Transition Overlay District shall be reviewed by the Board of Appeals. Uses are permitted asspecified in the underlying zoning district. Regulations of the overlaydistrict are in addition to those of the underlying zoning district. 
D. 	Special regulations. Development within the Transition Overlay Districtshall be subject to special standards designed to permit the best andmost appropriate development within the district. These regulations 
66.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is also included as an attachment to this chapter. 
1:209 
are in addition to the underlying zoning district regulations. Thepertinent regulations are as follows: 
(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

(7) 


The applicant shall retain the residential appearance of the property, development or improvement. 
All new development or additions shall be compatible in character with the surrounding residences in the residential district in termsof roof style, building, size, scale, building orientation and setting. 
Accessory structures shall be designed to be harmonious with the existing structures on the site through the use of complementarybuilding materials and styles. Recycling/refuse containers shall bestored in the rear or side yards and no dumpsters shall be permitted. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
Additional buffers above the requirements outlined in Article VII may be required to mitigate impacts of higher-intensitydevelopment upon the existing neighborhood. Such buffering shall be determined by the Board of Appeals. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
Parking areas shall be designed to minimize impact on residentialneighbors and to maintain the integrity of the neighborhood. On-site parking shall be provided at a maximum number of 15 spaces.No more than three fleet vehicles shall be parked on the lot at anytime. During the review of the application for property conversion to an office, the Board of Appeals shall determine the requirednumber of parking spaces, based on the unit, lot size and proposed use of the building. Criteria for evaluation: [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
(a) 	
Size of lot. 

(b) 	
Relationship of maximum parking area square footage to the lot size. 

(c) 	
Site design and setting. 

(d) 	
Impact on adjacent properties, e.g., drainage, lighting, noise and odor. 

(e) 	
Visibility from the adjacent residential uses and public way. 


A transition between the office building and the street shall be provided. This shall be accomplished through planting,consideration of pedestrian and traffic safety, and design and screening of parking areas. 
Exterior lighting, when determined necessary by the Board ofAppeals, shall not exceed eight feet in height to provide minimumillumination and address safety concerns. Lighting standards and building fixtures shall be compatible in design and size with the 
1:210 

building and adjacent areas. Excessive lighting shall be avoided,and all lighting shall be shielded from neighboring uses. All lighting shall meet requirements found in Article VII. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
(8) 	
The applicant shall ensure that the impact of noise on nearby residential uses is minimized. 

(9) 	
The applicant shall specify hours of operation for conversions tooffice use and the impact on the adjacent residential area. Visitor traffic associated with the commercial use shall be by appointmentonly with no walk-in patrons or retail space. The Board of Appealsshall determine the maximum number of tenants and the appropriate hours of operation based on impact to nearbyresidential uses. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 


(10)The applicant shall provide a traffic impact evaluation identifyingmeasures needed to ensure protection of the neighborhood fromcommercial vehicle intrusion, parking loss and significant traffic increases and other related adverse traffic impacts. 
1:211 

ARTICLE V 
Historic Resource Conservation Regulations 
§ 165-38. Purpose. 
The Historic Resource Conservation Regulations are established: 
A. 	To safeguard the heritage of the Town of Bel Air by preserving thehistoric buildings and sites which reflect elements of its cultural, social,economic, political or architectural history; 
B. 	To retain and improve property values in such areas; 
C. 	To encourage property owners of historic buildings to repair andmaintain their properties in ways sensitive to the building's original style and method of construction; 
D. 	To provide guidelines for the construction of new additions to existinghistoric structures and for infill development in historic neighborhoods; 
E. 	To preserve, to the extent possible, significant historical or archeological resources; 
F. 	To encourage adaptive reuse of historic properties as part of the Town's sustainable development initiative; 
G. 	To promote the use of historic properties for the education, pleasureand welfare of the community; and 
H. 	To foster public awareness of the Town's history and historic structures. 
§ 165-39. Boundaries. 
The Historic Resource Conservation District is composed of individually designated historic districts and sites within the Town boundaries. TheOfficial Historic Resource Conservation District Map, which is available forreview at the Town Department of Planning and Community Development and Bel Air Town Hall, shows each designated district/site. 
§ 165-40. Designation of historic structure, site or district. 
At the request of the property owner or any public agency, the Bel Air Historic Preservation Commission reviews and recommends historic designation of a structure, site or district and makes a recommendationto the Board of Town Commissioners for its consideration. Designation is based on the following criteria: 
A. 	The property must be surveyed in accordance with requirements ofthe Maryland Inventory of Historic Properties procedures. Further, the property must demonstrate significance in terms of one or more of fourbroad criteria which are consistent with National Register criteria usedto identify and evaluate historic properties. The criteria are as follows: 
1:213 

B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
(1) 	
The structure, site or district is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of Bel Air's history. 

(2) 	
The structure, site or district is associated with the life of a personor persons who were significant in Bel Air's past. 

(3) 	
The structure, site or district embodies the distinct characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction or possesses highartistic values or represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction. 

(4) 	
A property with the potential to yield information that will contribute to a better understanding of the community's prehistory or history. 


Significance may be evaluated on a national, state or local context.The Historic Preservation Commission shall conduct a public hearing in accordance with Chapter 246 of the Bel Air Town Code. If the propertysatisfies the requirements for designation, the Historic PreservationCommission shall cause a resolution to be submitted for Board of Town Commissioners consideration to formally designate this structure,site or district. The Board of Town Commissioners has final approvalauthority for all historic designations. 
Once a property is designated, the Historic Preservation Commissionreviews and approves all applications for permits for construction,alteration, repair, moving or demolition of a designated site or structure(s) prior to issuance of a demolition or a building permit.Additionally, the Historic Preservation Commission or its designee shallreview and approve accessory structures, exterior building features and/or appurtenances. 
Applications for review are filed with the Historic Preservation Commission through the Department of Planning and Community Development. Commission approval or approval by its designee isrequired for any changes which would affect the exterior appearanceof a structure visible or intended to be visible from an adjacent public right-of-way in the district. 
The Historic Preservation Commission shall review the proposedconstruction to ensure appropriateness to an historic setting based upon Chapter 246, Historic Preservation, of the Bel Air Town Code,the Town of Bel Air Design Guidelines for Rehabilitation, Maintenance,and New Construction, Historic Preservation Commission Powers and Duties, and in conjunction with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation of Historic Buildings, in addition to requirements of this Part 2. In the case of a conflict among regulations, the strictest standard shall apply. 
F. A request for amendment to the historic designation shall follow theprocedures for change outlined in Article XIII of this Part 2. 
1:214 

§ 165-41. Special regulations. 
A. Designated historic districts/sites. 
(1) 	
No permit for any change may be granted until the Commission hasacted thereon as provided in the officially adopted Town of Bel Air"Historic Preservation Commission Powers and Duties." 

(2) 	
Every attempt shall be made to retain existing architectural character. 

(3) 	
Every attempt shall be made to retain the structure's compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood. 

(4) 	
Materials for exterior alterations shall be sensitive to those with materials used in the original method of construction. 

(5) 	
Proposed construction shall be in harmony with approved plans forthe surrounding area, so that existing and future land values withinthe area will not be depreciated. 

(6) 	
Demolition of historic structures should be avoided. If no other option is available, the property owner should try to relocate thebuilding. Any new construction should be compatible in color, size, materials and mass with any adjacent historic structures. 

(7) 	
Additionally, the Town of Bel Air Design Guidelines for Rehabilitation, Maintenance and New Construction, Chapter 246, Historic Preservation, of the Bel Air Town Code and the Historic Preservation Commission Powers and Duties should be consulted prior to exterior construction, renovation or rehabilitation. 


B. 	Exemptions. Exemptions from permit requirements are listed in theHistoric Preservation Commission Powers and Duties and are incorporated herein by reference. 
C. 	Appeal process. 
(1) 	In the event that any party is aggrieved by a decision of the Boardof Town Commissioners to designate a property as an historic site or part of an historic district, the party has the right to appeal tothe Circuit Court of Harford County as authorized by the Land UseArticle of the Annotated Code of Maryland. Such appeal shall be petitioned in the same manner as a rezoning decision as specifiedin Article XIII, § 165-101B(8), of this Part 2. An appeal to the CircuitCourt shall be taken in accordance with Rules 7-201 through 7-211 of Title 7, Chapter 200, of the Maryland Rules of Procedure.
[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
(2) 	Following designation, should a party be aggrieved by a decision of the Historic Preservation Commission during its review process,the party may appeal to the Board of Appeals in accordance withArticle XII, § 165-91, of this Part 2 and the Land Use Article of the 
1:215 

Annotated Code of Maryland. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
(3) 	All appeals must be filed within 30 days of the Board of TownCommissioners or Historic Preservation Commission's decision. 
1:216 

ARTICLE VI 
Environmental Regulations 
§ 165-42. Purpose. 
A. 	Environmentally sensitive areas are compromised as urbanization occurs. Development decreases forest cover, increases impervioussurface area, alters and disrupts water flow and water-sensitive soilsand vegetation, and eliminates animal and biotic habitat. Once destroyed, many types of environmentally sensitive areas are permanently lost. Downtown areas become heat islands. Floodplainareas are altered, and wetlands are destroyed. Sheet runoff from roof, driveway, parking pad and road surfaces disrupts the hydrologic cycleand destroys the quality of streams. The result is a highly degraded environment lacking natural function. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
B. 	By recognizing sensitive areas and prioritizing the benefits associatedwith woodland areas, streams, wetlands, floodplains, erodible soils and sloped areas, environmentally unique areas may be protected from thedestructive processes of urbanization. The preservation and, if possible,the reestablishment of sensitive areas will result in a more desirable living environment. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
C. 	Specifically, the intent of the Environmental Regulations is to preserveand protect ecologically and environmentally sensitive areas as identified in the Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan and achieve the following goals: 
(1) 	
Protect the Winters Run and Bynum Run watersheds. 

(2) 	
Protect steep slopes. 

(3) 	
Protect water quality and quantity in streams, rivers and watercourses. 

(4) 	
Protect nontidal wetlands. 

(5) 	
Protect persons and property from environmental hazards, such aserosion, siltation and flood hazards. 

(6) 	
Promote tree retention, afforestation and reforestation measures identified in Chapters 216, Forest Conservation, and 435, Trees, ofthe Bel Air Town Code. 


§ 165-43. Boundaries. 
Sensitive areas identified on the Official Bel Air Sensitive Areas Map andthose determined by the Department of Planning and CommunityDevelopment to contain any resources of sensitive environmental value shall be subject to mitigation and enhancement and, whenever possible,protected and preserved as undevelopable open space. Major areas 
1:217 

impacted by the Environmental Regulations are delineated on the OfficialSensitive Areas Map in the Town's Comprehensive Plan, which is available for review at the Town Planning Office and Bel Air Town Hall. 
§ 165-44. General regulations. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No.780-17] 
Proposed residential subdivisions and nonresidential development projectscontaining environmentally sensitive areas, as defined in Article XIV of thisPart 2, whether specifically indicated on the Official Sensitive Areas Map or not, shall be subject to protection measures. An environmental impactassessment report shall be prepared by a registered landscape architect,certified arborist, forester or a certified forest professional addressing identification, protection, impact mitigation, and enhancement of environmental resources of the project site and its vicinity. The report shallcontain sufficient maps and analysis to describe the site, the proposed use and development, environmental characteristics and environmental effectsof the proposal. Resources shall be fully described and accurately mappedas determined necessary by the Zoning Administrator. A forest conservation plan may serve as the environmental impact assessment report for a projectsite if determined sufficient by the Zoning Administrator. Road crossings,utility lines and trail systems may be permitted in the environmentally sensitive areas upon determination by the Zoning Administrator that allnecessary steps have been taken to minimize any adverse effect on theenvironment. Protection, impact mitigation, and enhancement of all other proposed development in the environmentally sensitive areas shall be addressed as they relate to woodland areas, unique vegetation, flood hazardareas, nontidal wetlands, steep slopes and rare and endangered species. Wherever possible, the proposed development project shall be designedto use sensitive areas as visual or recreational open space, greenways orundisturbed space. 
§ 165-45. Woodland areas and unique vegetation. 
A. 	Description of the area. Woodlands and areas of unique vegetationinclude any land areas where contiguous forest cover of at least 3,500 square feet exists or trees of any species 10 inches or greater in diameter at breast height (DBH). 
B. 	Special regulations. The identification, location and methods of protection and enhancement of woodland and unique vegetation shallbe provided through the following means, as applicable. The designof proposed development shall, to the maximum extent possible, incorporate existing stands of trees into the overall development.Development proposals shall preserve these stands and provide forprotection and retention through maintenance of pervious surfaces within the critical root zone of trees and separation of trees fromvehicular traffic. Unique vegetation shall be similarly protected inconsultation with a registered landscape architect and/or certified arborist. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
1:218 

(1) 	
Subdivision and large lot development. Any parcel in excess of40,000 square feet in area shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 216, Forest Conservation, of the Bel Air Town Code. Ata minimum, a forest stand delineation is required at the time ofsite plan review. A forest conservation plan must be completed and approved prior to final site plan approval. 

(2) 	
Small lot development. Design of any development on parcels ofland less than 40,000 square feet in area must take into consideration any existing mature trees or forest cover. A maturetree shall be considered any tree measuring 10 inches in DBHor greater. All mature trees shall be mapped on the grading plan and submitted prior to or in conjunction with the site plan for theproposed development. Adequate protection measures, includingbut not limited to tree protection fences, root pruning and noninvasive construction methods, may be required. On woodedsites, a minimum of 50% of all mature trees must be preserved andprotected during the development process. 


(a) 	When development design cannot be accomplished withoutremoval of more than 50% of the existing mature trees, theapplicant shall replace each tree removed that reduces the fifty-percent threshold with a species determined to be appropriate by the reviewing agency. At a minimum, two treesshall be required for every one tree removed below the threshold. The tree replacement requirement shall be determined by the planning staff and Bel Air Tree Committee,in order to adequately maintain the environmental value of the site. Recommended replacement requirements are as follows:
[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
Diameter at Breast HeightRatio of Replacement to(DBH) Existing 
(inches) 
10 to 24 2:1 Greater than 24 4:1 
(b) 	
The following trees may only be removed if the applicant canadequately document, to the satisfaction of the Bel Air Tree Committee and the planning staff, that no other option exists: 

[1] 	Trees in excess of 36 inches in DBH. 
[2] 	Trees listed on the Town champion tree list. 
[3] 	Trees 50% or more the size of the state champion for thespecies. 

(c) 	
The Zoning Administrator and/or the Planning Commission may permit the tree replacement requirements to be satisfied 


1:219 

through the payment of a fee in lieu of on-site planting whenreplacement of trees is impractical due to site conditions. 
(d) 	Fees shall be determined by statute based on tree replacementcosts. Tree fee-in-lieu payments shall be used for tree plantingand maintenance through the Town's Tree Planting Fee-in-Lieu Fund. 
§ 165-46. Flood hazard areas. 
A. 	Description of the area. 
(1) 	
Flood hazard areas are described as those areas delineated as special flood hazard areas on the Flood Insurance Rate Map(FIRM), part of the one-hundred-year floodplain determination criteria established by FEMA for flood-prone areas. The Department of Planning and Community Development and theDepartment of Public Works may determine other areas as flood-prone and require hydrologic analysis to determine the extent ofimpact the proposed development may have on the area. If areais impacted, Chapter 210, Floodplain Management, of the Bel Air Town Code shall apply. 

(2) 	
The official floodplain maps used in the enforcement of this chaptershall be the "Flood Insurance Rate Maps," as prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, issued on April 19, 2016,and any subsequent amendments. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 

(3) 	
The delineated one-hundred-year floodplain and other areas determined to be flood prone may be revised, amended andmodified as specified in Chapter 210, Floodplain Management, of the Bel Air Town Code. 


B. 	Special regulations. 
(1) 	
Specific use and Development Regulations specified in Chapter 210, Floodplain Management, of the Bel Air Town Code shall govern development proposed in floodplain areas. Protection measures shall include replanting and/or maintenance of natural vegetation to ensure bank stabilization, erosion control and streamprotection. 

(2) 	
Perpetual protection shall be provided through the use of deed restrictions, restrictive covenants or donation to a land trust. 

(3) 	
To prevent excessive damage to buildings and structures, restrictions shall apply to all new construction and substantial improvements (as defined in Chapter 210, Floodplain Management,of the Bel Air Town Code) to existing structures occurring in aspecial flood hazard area. The Department of Planning and Community Development and/or the Department of Public Works 


1:220 

(4) 
(5) 

(6) 

(7) 


may impose similar restrictions, as necessary, to adequatelyprevent damage to structures located in close proximity to special flood hazard areas. This may include, but not be limited to, structures proposed within 50 feet of a special flood hazard area,or a structure with the lowest floor elevation below the established base flood elevation of the special flood hazard area affecting theparcel. 
The design, placement and construction of all public and private utilities and facilities in designated flood hazard areas shall meetthe following requirements: 
(a) 	
New or replacement water distribution and treatment systems and/or sanitary sewage systems shall be designed and floodproofed to eliminate or minimize infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters and to avoid impairment during flooding andto minimize flood damage. Cesspools and seepage pits areprohibited. All pipes connected to sewage systems shall be sealed to prevent leakage. 

(b) 	
All gas, electrical and other facility and utility systems shall belocated, constructed and floodproofed to eliminate or minimize flood damage. 

(c) 	
All new storm drainage facilities within and leading to or fromthe Floodplain District shall be adequately designed, floodproofed and installed to eliminate or minimize propertydamage resulting from the floodwaters of the one-hundred­year flood and to minimize the adverse environmental impacts of their installation and use. 


Building permit approval in designated flood areas may requirevariance approval and shall be subject to procedures specified in Article XI of this Part 2. The Board of Appeals may grant a varianceupon a finding of uniqueness and practical difficulty as specified inArticle XII of this Part 2. 
In granting a variance, the Board of Appeals must make a determination that failure to grant a variance would result in exceptional hardship (other than economic) to the applicant, and a determination that the granting of a variance will not resultin increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local and statelaws or ordinances. 
Any variance granted to allow building in a designated flood area shall be the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, toafford relief. In considering a variance action, comments from theNFIP Coordinating Office, Maryland Department of Environment, must be taken into account and maintained with the permit file. 
1:221 

§ 165-47. Nontidal wetlands. 

A. 	Description of the area. Wetlands are defined as areas that have a predominance of hydric soils and that are inundated or saturated bysurface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficientto support, and, under normal circumstances, do support, a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soilconditions. 
B. 	Special regulations. The applicant shall design proposed development in accordance with all pertinent state and federal regulations, includingbut not limited to those of the United States Army Corps of Engineers,the Fish and Wildlife Service, the Maryland Department of Environment, the State Department of Natural Resources (DNR) andChapter 210, Floodplain Management, of the Bel Air Town Code. Designof the proposed development shall incorporate mitigation of impacts and protection of wetlands. A buffer of at least 25 feet, as requiredby the State Nontidal Wetlands Protection Act, shall be maintained inareas adjacent to wetlands, unless waived by the Maryland Department of Environment. The applicant shall prepare a delineation of wetlandsand hydric soils in conformance with the latest edition of the FederalManual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands (or alternate method approved by the Zoning Administrator). Copies of thesubmission material shall be provided to the Maryland Department of Environment and the Town of Bel Air. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
§ 165-48. Steep slopes. 
A. 	Steep slopes are defined as natural land areas in excess of 20% slope as measured over a ten-foot interval encompassing a minimum area of20,000 square feet and identified on the Town of Bel Air Sensitive AreasMap. These areas shall be left undisturbed by development with any disturbance requiring approval by the Board of Appeals. [Amended4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
B. 	Special regulations. Proposed development shall be of extent, scale, and design appropriate for the soil, geologic and topographicconditions of the site. Development plans must indicate pre-and post-construction grades. Natural vegetation shall be maintained whenever possible, and revegetation and stabilization of the slope shall berequired. Any development other than required infrastructure shall beprohibited on areas in excess of 25% slope. 
§ 165-49. Rare and endangered species. 
A. 	Description of the area: any area previously or currently identifiedduring site review and planning design as containing any rare and/or endangered species or habitat. 
1:222 

B. 	Special regulations. The applicant shall consult the State Department ofNatural Resources (DNR) Natural Heritage and Environmental Review to identify any valuable habitats on or in the vicinity of the projectsite. However, reliance solely on existing DNR information shall beconsidered an incomplete analysis. All findings in consultation with the DNR shall be submitted to the Town. Applicants shall fulfill allrequirements of the DNR in protection of identified environmentallysignificant habitats and/or species and shall document fulfillment of the requirements to the satisfaction of the Town Department of Planningand Community Development and the Department of Public Works. 
1:223 

ARTICLE VII 
Development and Performance Standards 
§ 165-50. Purpose and applicability. 
A. 	These regulations are applicable to all developments within the Town of Bel Air. The regulations are designed to preserve the environmental,aesthetic and functional values of the Town while improving services,creating more accessible land use patterns, reducing traffic congestion and improving mobility. 
B. 	Regulations governing parking and loading, landscaping and performance standards for specific uses are stipulated in this article. These regulations are intended to improve security, increase efficiencyof parking facilities and to encourage alternative modes of travel toreduce traffic and parking issues. 
§ 165-51. Parking and loading. 
A. 	Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure provision of adequate,safe, convenient, aesthetically pleasing parking facilities, while minimizing the negative visual impacts of parking, service and loadingfacilities. Further, these regulations are intended to achieve the following goals and objectives: 
(1) 	
To regulate the number of required off-street parking spaces forthe needs and safety of occupants, customers, visitors or othersinvolved in use or occupancy of any building, structural improvement or place of assembly to eliminate the unnecessary useof the surface street system for parking purposes. 

(2) 	
To support the state's smart growth goals by minimizing the area used for parking, thus minimizing runoff and other environmentalimpacts. 

(3) 	
To provide shared parking options for different but compatible uses. 


B. 	Parking space required. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
(1) 	A sufficient number of parking spaces to accommodate the numberof vehicles that ordinarily are likely to be attracted to a specific use shall be provided in all zoning districts. Parking requirementsare specified for particular uses in Subsection H of this section.Issuance of any building permits or use and occupancy certificates shall not be granted until a plot plan showing such off-streetparking as is herein required is submitted and approved by theZoning Administrator. The number of parking spaces required shall be based on the net or gross floor area as defined in Article XIVdepending on the use. 
1:225 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 


Retail and service uses in the B-2 District which do not exceed a requirement 50 spaces per property are exempt from minimum parking requirements. All other uses must meet minimum requirements for parking. 
When determination of the number of parking spaces requires results in a fractional space, any fraction of 1/2 or less may bedisregarded, while a fraction in excess of 1/2 shall be counted asone parking space. 
The Town recognizes that the parking requirements contained herein cannot cover every possible situation that may arise. Therefore, in cases not specifically mentioned herein, the parking requirement of the use most similar to the enumerated use shallapply. No building permit or use and occupancy certificate shall beissued until the parking need has been evaluated and requirements satisfied. 
Shared parking facilities may be permitted by the reviewingauthority for different uses within an individual building or adjacent buildings or properties located within 500 feet of thesubject property's boundaries based on a parking impact studyprovided by the developer(s) or owner(s) establishing that the estimated peak demand for parking required by the users will besatisfied due to differing hours of peak demand. If approved, ashared parking plan shall be enforced through written agreement. 
(a) 	
Agreement for shared parking plan. An attested copy of theagreement between the owners of the parking lot property, theentity utilizing the parking and the Town shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator, who shall forward a copy to theTown Attorney for review. Proof of recordation of the agreement shall be presented to the Zoning Administrator prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The agreementshall: 

[1] 	List the names and ownership interest of all parties to the agreement and contain the signatures of those parties; 
[2] 	Include a site plan showing the area of the parking parcel; 
[3] 	Describe the area of the parking parcel and designate and reserve it for shared parking unencumbered by anyconditions which would interfere with its use; 
[4] 	Agree and expressly declare the intent for the covenant to run with the land and bind all parties and all successors ininterest to the covenant; 
[5] 	Ensure the continued availability of the spaces for joint use and provide assurance that all spaces will be usable toall participating uses; 
1:226 

[6] 	Describe the obligations of each party, including the maintenance responsibility for the parking area and any open space. 
[7] 	Incorporate the parking impact study by reference; and 
[8] 	Describe the method by which the covenant shall, if necessary, be revised. 
(b) 	
Change in use. Should any of the shared parking uses be changed, or should the Zoning Administrator find that any of the conditions described in the approved parking impact studyor agreement no longer exist, the owner shall have the optionof submitting a revised parking impact study and an amended shared parking agreement in accordance with the standards ofthis subsection, providing the number of spaces required foreach use as if computed separately or paying the parking fee­in-lieu costs, if applicable. 

(c) 	
Revocation of permits. Failure to comply with the shared parking provisions of this subsection shall constitute a violation of this Code and shall specifically be cause for revocation of a certificate of occupancy. 



(6) 	
Accessory uses to an existing permitted use that are seasonal in nature and do not operate for more than six months of the year arenot required to provide parking provided they do not exceed 75%of the capacity of the principal use. 


C. 	Flexibility. 
(1) 	
Satellite parking. Satellite or off-site parking for commercial/service/institutional uses, excluding fifty-five-and-over housing uses, may be provided through a recorded easement or an agreement for shared parking as specified in Subsection B(4) ofthis section. Satellite or off-site parking may be permitted at a site not greater than 500 feet from the property boundaries of that useif the Planning Commission finds that the proposed parking area iseasily accessible to the proposed development and includes a safe, accessible pedestrian connection. Any parking space dedicated toan off-site use must be signed accordingly. 

(2) 	
Fee in lieu of on-site parking. 


(a) 	The Planning Commission may permit fulfillment of all or partof the parking requirement in the B-2 Central Business Districtto be satisfied through the payment of a fee in lieu of on-site parking, a fifteen-year renewable lease agreement or acombination of these alternatives when on-site parking isimpractical due to site conditions and it is determined that public parking facilities are located within 500 feet of the property boundaries and that such parking facilities are easily 
1:227 

accessible and include a safe, accessible pedestrianconnection. Appropriate signs indicating the location of off-site parking shall be posted. Fees shall be determined by statutebased upon a per-space cost. Parking fee-in-lieu payments shallbe used for development of parking facilities through the Town's Parking Enterprise Fund. 
(b) 	
A fee in lieu of on-site parking spaces, a fifteen-year renewablelease agreement or a combination of these alternatives may be provided by an applicant in the B-2A Central Business GatewayDistrict or the B-3A General Business Gateway District insituations where the application of the parking regulations would be undesirable or impractical and it is determined thatpublic parking facilities are located within 500 feet of the property boundaries and that such parking facilities are easily accessible to the proposed development and include a safe,accessible pedestrian connection. The alternative parkingprovisions shall not exceed 50% of the required on-site parking. 

(c) 	
This subsection shall not apply to applications for alterations,repairs or renovations, but shall apply to new buildings, replacement buildings and expansions. For expansions, onlythe expansion area shall be considered in calculating parkingrequirements. 


(3) 	
Parking and loading space reduction. Upon receipt of an application for a parking or loading space waiver, a public hearingshall be scheduled before the Board of Appeals. A waiver or reduction of the parking and loading requirements in any districtmay be permitted by the Board of Appeals whenever the characteror use of the building is such as to make full provision of the specific parking and loading requirements unnecessary, or whereadequate community loading facilities are provided on site, or where, due to problems of access or to the size of the lot, the provision of the required loading spaces is impractical. 

(a) 	
In permitting such a waiver for new construction, the Board ofAppeals must find the following: 

[1] 	The requirements for parking and loading would resultin particular or exceptional difficulties upon the owner ofsuch property; and 
[2] 	Such relief can be granted without substantial impairmentof the intent or purpose of this article. 

(b) 	
In permitting such a waiver for existing buildings, the Board of Appeals must find the following: 


[1] 	Proposed new use of the building would normally requirefewer parking spaces than the prior use; 
1:228 

[2] 	The reduced number of parking spaces will be adequate toaccommodate the proposed use; and 
[3] 	Any such reduction in required parking spaces shall berestricted to such proposed new use only and shall notoperate to permit a later occupancy of such building if the use is substantially changed or enlarged, unless approvedby the Board of Appeals. 
(c) 	
In permitting mixed-use development, the Board of Appeals may reduce the cumulative parking space requirements afterreviewing a parking impact study. The Board of Appeals mustfind the following: 

[1] 	The peak requirements of several occupants occur at different times during the day; and 
[2] 	The Board of Appeals determines the findings of the parking study prepared by a qualified consultant supportthe requested reduction and that no adverse impact will becaused by the reduction. 

(d) 	
A copy of the Board of Appeals decision on any approvedparking and loading space reduction shall be attached to thebuilding permit and/or any certificate of occupancy permit. 



D. 	
Parking space dimensions. Each off-street parking space shall measurenine feet in width by 18 feet in length. Parallel spaces shall measureeight feet in width by 20 feet in length. Parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall meet the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA)67 requirements. Parking garage spaces shall be 8 1/2 feet in width and 18 feet in length. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 

E. 	
Required aisle and driveway widths. 


(1) 	Parking area aisle widths shall conform to the following table, which varies the minimum width requirement according to the angle of parking: [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
Parking Angle 
Aisle Width 

(feet) 	0° 45° 60° 90° 
One-way traffic 12 15 18 21 Two-way traffic 20 20 22 24 
(2) 	Driveway access to a parking area shall not be less than 12 feet inwidth for one-way traffic and 18 feet in width for two-way traffic,except that twelve-foot-wide driveways are permissible for two-way traffic when sufficient turning space is provided so that vehicles 
67.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq. 
1:229 
need not back into a public street (as determined by the Director of Public Works). [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
(3) 	
Access shall be a minimum of 30 feet from any intersection. 

(4) 	
Curb cuts should be eliminated or minimized to the greatest extent possible through shared driveways with adjacent property. 


F. 	Parking lot/driveway design, construction and maintenance. 
(1) 	General requirements. 
(a) 	
Unless no other practicable alternative is available, as determined by the Director of Public Works and the ZoningAdministrator, vehicle accommodation areas shall be designed so that vehicles may exit such areas without backing onto apublic street. This requirement does not apply to parking areasconsisting of driveways that serve one or two dwelling units, although backing onto arterial streets is discouraged. 

(b) 	
Vehicle accommodation areas of all developments shall be designed so that sanitation, emergency, and other public service vehicles can serve such developments without thenecessity of backing unreasonable distances or making otherdangerous or hazardous turning movements. 

(c) 	
Every vehicle accommodation area shall be designed so thatvehicles cannot extend beyond the perimeter of such area ontoadjacent properties or public rights-of-way. Such areas shall also be designed so that vehicles do not extend over sidewalksor tend to bump against or damage any wall, vegetation, orother obstruction. Bumper blocks or other means may be required to ensure this provision. 

(d) 	
Parking lots with 15 or fewer spaces may be constructed ofapproved stone, pavers or a similar pervious surface, subject to review and recommendation of the Director of Public Works and Planning Commission approval. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 

(e) 	
Access to parking areas shall be designed so as not to obstructfree flow of traffic. Parking lot grade shall not exceed a five-percent slope and grade for all driveways and access shall not exceed 10% subject to review of the Director of PublicWorks. There shall be adequate provision for ingress to andegress from all parking spaces to ensure ease of mobility, ample clearance and safety of vehicles and pedestrians. Thestacking of parking spaces may be approved in certain circumstances by the Planning Commission if the applicant can demonstrate that there will be no adverse impact on the use and circulation pattern of the parking area. [Amended4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 783-18] 

1:230 

(f) 	
Parking areas shall be suitably landscaped to minimize glareand other nuisance characteristics, as well as to improve the environment of the site and surrounding area. Large parkinglots shall be broken into sections as appropriate for the typeand size of the development. Sections shall be separated by landscaped dividing strips, berms and similar elements. Specific landscape and buffer requirements for parking areasare delineated in Article VIII. 

(g) 	
Any parking area required herein shall be continuallymaintained in good serviceable condition with striping clearlyvisible so as to be safe, attractive and free of any hazard, nuisance or other unsafe condition. Commercial parking areasshall be maintained to ensure customer safety. All potholesor similar hazards shall be repaired promptly upon written notification by the Town. In no case shall such conditions existfor more than 30 days. 

(h) 	
Parking of vehicles in areas other than a driveway, garage, parking pad, parking lot or other Town-approved parking areashall be prohibited. Further, the parking of vehicles or trailers on any grass or pervious area in any yard area shall be prohibited. [Amended 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 783-18] 

(i) 	
No more than 25% of the front yard area on the collector road shall be used for drives. Rear and side yard parking isencouraged. 

(j) 	
Parking and vehicular access shall be clearly identified. A plan indicating proposed traffic-calming devices, such as speedlimits, parking area signage and speed humps, shall be included on the site plan to be submitted for review and approval. 

(k) 	
Vehicular access shall be from the side streets, where possible,provided that traffic is not directed through an abutting residential district. Traffic mitigation measures designed tominimize or eliminate negative impacts of traffic movementshall be used wherever possible.68 



(2) 	
Residential district requirements. 

(a) 	
In a residential district, driveways shall not exceed 20 feet inwidth, except in the R-O District, where driveways shall not exceed 24 feet in width. 

(b) 	
The remaining required front yard area must be maintained ingrass, ground cover or other landscape material. 




68.Editor's Note: Former Subsection F(1)(k), regarding parking area lighting, was repealed4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17. This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection F(1)(l)as Subsection F(1)(k). 
1:231 
(3) Nonresidential district requirements. 

(a) 	
A parking management plan shall be submitted for all parking areas designed to accommodate 25 vehicles or more. This plan shall specify the proposed layout, circulation, signage,drainage, access, traffic arrows (if applicable), pedestrian walkways, loading/unloading, refuse/recycling service, lightingand internal and peripheral landscaping for the parking area.The plan is subject to review and approval or modification by the reviewing body. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 

(b) 	
All commercial/service use parking areas shall provide a minimum of three parking spaces and all lots over 15 parkingspaces be paved with a dust-free material and graded toaccommodate proper surface water runoff and vehicle access. Alternative pervious paving surfaces are encouraged in all parking and services areas. Such surfaces are subject to Planning Commission approval. Where inconsistencies between this provision and the requirements of the Americanwith Disabilities Act (ADA)69 exist, ADA requirements shall apply. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17; 4-2-2018by Ord. No. 783-18] 

(c) 	
Nonresidential parking shall be set back from the establishedstreet right-of-way or alley line as outlined in Article VIII. In cases where a commercial or industrial parking lot adjoins anR District, the parking area shall be limited to the side andrear yard areas. A landscape buffer shall be provided between the parking area and the adjacent residential property thateffectively screens the parking from the residential property.


[Amended 11-25-2011 by Ord. No. 744-11; 4-3-2017 byOrd. No. 780-17] 
(d) 	Bicycle parking facilities shall be provided for all nonresidential parking areas designed for 25 or more vehicles.This shall include at least one bicycle rack. The location and description of the rack shall be shown on the preliminary plan.
[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
(e) 	Commercial parking lots shall be brought to minimum standards prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy permit for any business use. Standards shall include, but not be limited to, buffer, landscaping, surface repairs, markings,curbing, bumper strips and safe pedestrian access, as required by the Zoning Administrator. 
G. 	Restricted accessory parking area. The Board of Appeals may alsoauthorize the establishment and operation of an off-street parking area 
69.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C.A. § 12101 et seq. 
1:232 
in any R District that adjoins a B or M District, subject to the followingconditions and limitations: 
(1) 	
The parking lot shall be accessory to and for use of one or morebusinesses or industrial establishments located in the adjoining Bor M District and existing at the time of adoption of this chapter. 

(2) 	
It shall be required to serve the public interest by relieving trafficcongestion in the streets on or near the premises in question bytending to reduce the amount of traffic or parking on residential streets or by tending to promote more safety for children or pedestrians. 

(3) 	
The parking lot shall provide parking space for no more than 25 vehicles. 

(4) 	
It shall be located on a lot which is adjacent to a B or M District. 

(5) 	
No charge shall be made for parking or storage of vehicles. 

(6) 	
Where possible, entrances and exits shall be located within theadjoining businesses or industrial district. Alternatively, the entrances and exits shall be located as far as practicable from adjacent residential properties. 

(7) 	
The application shall be accompanied by the names and addressesof all property owners within 200 feet of the proposed lot in question, who shall be given the opportunity to be heard at apublic hearing by the Board of Appeals in connection with theconsideration of such application. 

(8) 	
In addition to the above requirements and those of this Part 2, theBoard of Appeals may prescribe further requirements or conditionsdeemed necessary or desirable in respect to surfacing, marking, signage, lighting, walls, fencing or planting for protection of theadjacent property. 


H. 	Required off-street parking by use/activity. Unless otherwise noted, the basic measuring unit shall be the net square footage of the building.
[Amended 1-3-2011 by Ord. No. 738-10; 2-21-2012 by Ord. No.748-12; 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17; 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 783-18] 
Use or Use Category 	Spaces Required 
Amusement/entertainment Adult entertainment center 1 per 200 gross square feet Amusement center and indoor 1 per 200 gross square feet
recreation 
Arena/stadium 1 per 3 seats 
Bowling alley 4 per lane 

1:233 

Use or Use Category Spaces Required 

Country club, golf, tennis, swim club 
Ice/roller rink 
Tavern, tavern with entertainment, microbrewery/winery/distillery 
Theater 
Industrial 
Industrial use (unless specifiedotherwise) 
Fuel storage facility 
Warehouse 

Institutional Civic service club, 
organization, and community center Convent Day care, group Dormitory 
Fire station 
Hospital 
House of worship 

Library Nursing home, assisted living 
Post office 
Prison 

School 1 per 3 persons permitted under the State Fire Code 
1 per 100 square feet 
1 per 3 persons permitted under the State Fire Code 
1 per 3 persons permitted underthe State Fire Code 
1 per 400 square feet (or largestemployee shift, whichever is greater) 
1 per 800 square feet 
1 per employee (at largest shift) and 1 per 300 square feet office 
1 per 3 persons permitted by the State Fire Code 
1 per 2 beds (minimum of 2) 
2 per 6 clients 
1 per 4 beds (high school), 1 per 2 beds (college) 
1 per 250 square feet 
1 per 2 beds 
1 per 4 persons permitted by the State Fire Code permitted in mainassembly hall 
1 per 400 square feet 
1 per 3 beds, plus additionalspaces as determined by theBoard of Appeals based on parking impact study 
1 per 400 square feet 
1 per 2 employees, plus public spaces as determined by theBoard of Appeals based onparking impact study 
1:234 

Use or Use Category 
Elementary/middle school 
High school 
College, university 
All other school uses 
Natural resources 
Agricultural products 
processing 
Greenhouse/nursery, 

commercial 
Residential Bed-and-breakfast 
Boardinghouse Community shelter Group home/halfway house Multifamily and 55-and-over
dwelling units 
Single-family detached,semidetached and two-family dwellings 
Townhouse 
Retail and service use 
Antique shop/art gallery/ museum 
Spaces Required 
1 per 10 seats in main assembly 
room or 1 per 10 classroom seats,
whichever is greater 

1 per 5 seats in main auditorium
or 1 per 8 classroom seats, 
whichever is greater 

1 per 3 students 

1 per 3 persons permitted by 
State Fire Code 

1 per 800 gross square feet 

1 per 400 gross square feet 

1 per bed, plus 1 per owner/ 
manager 
1 per 2 beds (minimum of 2) 
1 per 2 beds (minimum of 2) 
1 per 2 beds (minimum of 2) 

1.5
 per 1-bedroom dwelling unit; 

2 per 2-bedroom dwelling unit; 

2.5
 per 3-or-more-bedroomdwelling units (dens and libraries in multifamily to be counted asbedrooms) 


2 per dwelling unit 
2.5 per dwelling unit (excluding garage space) 
1 per 400 gross square feet 
Auction house 	1 per 6 seats or 1 per 400 squarefeet, whichever is greater 
Bank 	1 per 300 square feet, plus drive-through stacking space ifapplicable [See § 165-53I(2)(c).] 
1:235 

Use or Use Category 
Banquet hall 
Beauty shop/barbershop 
Bulk mail service Car wash and auto detailing 
Cleaners/laundromat Convenience goods Construction supply/service 
Feed and grain mill 
Fitness center 
Funeral home 

Group service 
Hotel 
Instructional service Liquor store Medical service or laboratory Mini storage 
Motion-picture distribution 
Motor vehicle sales, service and/or storage Business and personal service 
Pharmacy 
Professional service 
Restaurant 

Spaces Required 
1 per persons permitted by the 
State Fire Code 1 per 150 gross square feet/or 2.5per station, whichever is greater 
1 per 200 square feet 1 per full-time equivalentemployee plus drive-through
stacking space if applicable [See 165-53I(2)(c).] 1 per 200 square feet 1 per 150 square feet 1 per 200 square feet for retail/
office area; 1 per 800 square feet for storage area 1 per 800 square feet 
1 per 200 gross square feet 1 per 50 square feet (minimum of 30 spaces) 
1 per 200 square feet 
1 per room, plus 1 per full-time equivalent employee 1 per 300 square feet 1 per 200 square feet 1 per 200 square feet 1 per employee and 1 per 300
square feet office 1 per 200 square feet 1 per 300 square feet (minimum of
10) 
1 per 300 square feet (unlessotherwise specified) 1 per 200 square feet 1 per 300 square feet 1 per 3 patron seats or 1 per 100
square feet of gross floor area, excluding food preparation area,whichever is greater, plus drive-through stacking spaces, if applicable [See § 165-53I(2)(l).] 
1:236 

Use or Use Category 	Spaces Required 
Retail use (unless specified 1 per 200 square feet 
otherwise) 
Service use (unless specified1 per 300 square feet
otherwise) 

Shopping center Under 400,000 square feet 4 per 1,000 gross square feet 400,000 square feet and 3.5 per 1,000 gross square feet 
above Spa 1 per 200 gross square feet Specialty food 1 per 300 square feet Specialty shop 1 per 300 square feet Veterinarian/veterinarian1 per 200 square feet
clinic/hospital The Zoning Administrator shall establish requirements for any use not specified above based on the requirements of the most similar usecited above. 
I. 	Loading areas. Whenever the normal operation of any developmentrequires that goods, merchandise, or equipment be routinely delivered to or shipped from that development, facilities shall be provided in accordance with the requirements specified below: [Amended4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
(1) 	No loading area shall be located closer than 50 feet to any otherlot in any R District unless wholly within a completely enclosedbuilding or unless screened by a masonry wall. Such wall shall not be less than four feet nor more than six feet in height and shall bemaintained in good condition without any advertising thereon. Useof loading areas for loading and unloading of goods and materials shall be prohibited between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:30 a.m.
[Amended 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 783-18] 
Gross Floor Area 
(square feet) 	Number of Spaces 
6,000 to 24,999 1 25,000 to 79,999 2 For each additional 72,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, of
gross floor area, one additional loading space shall be provided. 
(2) 	Every public assembly use, such as auditoriums, office buildings, funeral homes, restaurants, theaters and hotels of 30,000 squarefeet or more, shall provide off-street loading facilities as follows: 
1:237 

Gross Floor Area 
(square feet) 	Number of Spaces 
30,000 to 119,999 1 120,000 to 197,999 2 For each additional 105,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, of 
gross floor area, one additional loading space shall be provided. 
(3) 	
The minimum dimensions of each loading space shall be 12 feet by45 feet, and an overhead clearance of 14 feet from street grade shall be required unless user or site requirements necessitate sizeadjustment as demonstrated by parking management plan andapproved by Planning Commission. 

(4) 	
Loading areas shall be so located and designed so that the vehiclesintended to use them can: 

(a) 	
Maneuver safely and conveniently to and from public rights-of way; and 

(b) 	
Complete the loading and unloading operations without obstructing or interfering with any public right-of-way, parking space, or parking lot aisle or pedestrianway. 



(5) 	
No area allocated to loading facilities may be used to satisfy thearea requirements for off-street parking, nor shall any portion of any off-street parking area be used to satisfy the area requirementsfor loading facilities. 

(6) 	
No loading area shall be located closer than 50 feet to any other lot in any R District unless wholly within a completely enclosedbuilding or unless screened by a masonry wall. Such wall shall notbe less than four feet nor more than six feet in height and shall be maintained in good condition without any advertising thereon.Use of loading areas for loading and unloading of goods/materialsin a residential district and within 500 feet of a residentially zoned property shall be prohibited between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and


7:00 a.m. 
J. 	Refuse and recycling. [Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
(1) 	
Except for single-family residential uses, all refuse and recyclingshall be stored in an enclosed area. Dumpster areas, loading bays and other service elements shall be screened from view. Debris and trash shall be removed from premises and lots shall be clearedregularly. 

(2) 	
Refuse or recycling removal, compaction or other similar operations shall not be permitted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:30 a.m. [Amended 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 783-18] 

1:238 

(3) 	
All enclosures shall completely screen the container, provide for anoperable gate to be closed when not in use and allow for separate human access for loading. Enclosures should match the materialsor color of the principal structure. 

(4) 	
Access to refuse and recycling may not obstruct or interfere with any public right-of-way parking space or pedestrian access. 

(5) 	
Containers for nonprofit collections may be placed within existingparking areas provided no more than one per parking area is installed. 



K. 	
Exterior lighting. [Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 

(1) 	
A lighting plan indicating illumination measured in footcandlesshall be submitted to the Director of Planning at the time ofpreliminary site plan submission for review and approval. A site that is adjacent to a residential use shall restrict exterior lightingto minimize glare and ambient light on the adjoining property. 

(2) 	
Measurement of proposed lighting shall adhere to the standards of the Illuminating Engineering Society (IES) for the proposed use. 

(3) 	
Fixture style, layout and height shall complement the buildingdesign, parking lot layout, traffic circulation and be compatible with the scale of adjacent properties. 

(4) 	
Lighting for safety shall be provided at intersections, alongwalkways, at entryways, between buildings and in parking areas. 

(5) 	
Spacing of standards shall be equal to approximately four timespole height. 

(6) 	
The maximum height of fixtures shall not exceed 25 feet or the limit outlined in the district or use regulations, whichever is less.The Planning Commission may restrict pole height and requiremeasures to mitigate glare when lighting is located near existing residences or residentially zoned property. [Amended 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 783-18] 

(7) 	
Spotlights, if used, shall be placed so as not to create a hazard or impact nearby residents or motorists. 




§ 165-52. Open space and recreation. 
Residential subdivision or site developments in Bel Air shall be required to provide open space and to dedicate land necessary for completion ofthe pedestrian trail network adjacent to newly developed properties asdescribed in Articles IV and V of the Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan. Developed open space shall be designed to provide active recreationalfacilities to serve the residents of the development. Undeveloped open space shall be designed to preserve important site amenities and environmentally sensitive areas. In addition, or in lieu of provision of open 
1:239 

space, and if approved by the Board of Town Commissioners, the applicantmay contribute to the Town Open Space Recreation Fund. 
A. 	Minimum requirements. 
(1) 	
Amount of open space required. A minimum of 15% of the tractproposed for development shall be set aside for developed and undeveloped open space. 

(2) 	
Size of open space parcels. To qualify as part of required openspace, areas shall be lawn, landscape or natural vegetation with a minimum of 500 square feet and have a width of no less than10 feet. Usable open space shall be a minimum of 40% of therequired open space area. This open space area shall be usable for active recreation, such as swimming pools, tennis courts, tot-lots, outdoor racquet courts, par courses, hike/bike trails, ball fieldsand other similar activities. Water bodies shall not exceed 15% of the required open space area. Active recreation space shall bedry, reasonably flat and accessible. The land shall not exceed agrade of 3%. Land must be configured to provide adequate space for active recreation facilities, as determined necessary by the Planning Commission. [Amended 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 783-18] 

(3) 	
Location of open space parcels. 


(a) 	Developed open space. 
[1] 	The Planning Commission may require the installation of recreational facilities, taking into consideration: 
[a] 	The character of the open space land; 
[b] 	The estimated age and the recreation needs of persons likely to reside in the development; 
[c] 	Proximity, nature, and excess capacity of existingmunicipal recreation facilities; and 
[d] 	The cost of the recreational facilities. 
[2] 	The Planning Commission shall determine specific openspace and/or recreation requirements based upon needs as assessed by the Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan.
[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
[3] 	Accessibility; open space. Recreation sites must be accessible in terms of safety, as well as distance traveled by users. 
(b) 	Undeveloped open space. As a general principle, undevelopedopen space should be left in its natural state. A developer may make certain improvements, such as the cutting of trails forwalking or jogging, or the provision of picnic areas, etc. In 
1:240 

addition, the Planning Commission may require a developerto make other improvements, including but not limited to removing dead or diseased trees, thinning trees or other vegetation to encourage more desirable growth and gradingand seeding. 
B. 	Maintenance and ownership. Open space and recreation facilities shallinclude provisions for maintenance and ownership as stipulated in Part4, § 165-118E(2), of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. Should use or ownership of property upon which the open space islocated change, open space requirements shall be reevaluated. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
C. 	Fee in lieu of open space. 
(1) 	
The Planning Commission may permit the open space requirementsto be satisfied through the payment of a fee in lieu of on-site recreation areas when provision of on-site open space is impractical due to site conditions. Fees shall be determined by statute based upon a per-acre cost for active and passive recreational open space. 

(2) 	
Open space fee-in-lieu payments shall be used for development ofrecreational space/facilities through the Town's Recreational Open Space Fund. 


§ 165-53. Performance standards and development guidelines by use. 
A. 	Purpose. 
(1) 	
The following standards and guidelines are intended to implementthe purpose of the Town's zoning districts as noted in Article III of this Part 2, to promote quality development, to add consistencyand predictability to the permit review process, and to reinforcethe Town's Comprehensive Plan land use goals and objectives. This section not only specifies the performance standards required forthe specific uses but also includes guidelines intended to articulatethe community's goals and objectives for new development and redevelopment. 

(2) 	
All performance standards and guidelines must be addressed byan applicant. The performance standards are mandatory and offer relatively little flexibility, unless choices are provided within thestatement itself. The guidelines are meant to be applied, but with some flexibility. The Town will consider design or development features that are equal to or better than that stated, so long as theintent is satisfied. The applicant assumes the burden of proof todemonstrate how a proposal meets this test, and determination will be made by the reviewing body. 


B. 	General performance standards and development guidelines by use. 
1:241 

(1) 
The following performance standards and guidelines apply in all districts: [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 

(a) 	
Where not explicitly addressed as a condition of use approval,the integration of pedestrian sidewalks and pedestrian-friendly design shall be required in any application for development. 

(b) 	
The applicant shall provide written confirmation that the proposed use will conform to all requirements of applicable federal, state and local reviewing agencies and will be operated in strict compliance with laws and regulationsapplicable to the use. 

(c) 	
The proposed site shall be of sufficient size to accommodatethe use without adversely affecting adjacent land uses. 

(d) 	
Pedestrian areas shall be protected with landscaping and curbs that are integrated into the overall site design. 

(e) 	
Building entrances shall be linked to sidewalks and parking areas by means of a safe and convenient well-lit walkway system. 

(f) 	
The applicant shall demonstrate that the use will be safe andwill not create a nuisance due to traffic, noise, etc., or create adverse impacts on the use or development of the surroundingproperties due to noise, odor, traffic or lights. The use shallnot adversely affect the use of other property in the immediate neighborhood. 

(g) 	
The applicant shall identify all proposed noise-generating uses or design elements and specify how noise levels will be mitigated. 

(h) 	
The subject property shall have frontage on, and direct vehicular access to, an existing street with sufficient capacity to accommodate the type and amount of traffic generated bythe requested use. Vehicular access shall not be by meansof streets internal to residential subdivisions. The reviewing agency may require a traffic impact study. 

(i) 	
Proposed development adjoining historic structures or sitesshall be compatible in color, size, material and mass with such historic properties. 

(j) 	
Buildings shall be architecturally compatible in quality,texture, finish, size, shape, style, rooflines and like materials. All sides of the use shall have the same architectural features or shall be architecturally compatible with the building groupor neighborhood with which it is associated. 

(k) 	
Rooftop mechanical equipment shall be screened from publicview. 

1:242 

(l) 	
Fences and retaining walls shall be designed to be consistentin materials and quality to that of the building and the adjacent properties. 

(m) 
All districts are subject to noise restrictions specified in Chapter 345 of the Town Code. 



(2) 	
Guidelines. 

(a) 	
New buildings are encouraged to include green buildingstandards during construction to minimize impacts on public water, sewer and stormwater facilities. 

(b) 	
Buildings should be designed to compliment and contribute tothe neighborhood in terms of shape, style, roofline, color and materials. 





C. 	
Use category performance standards and guidelines: amusement/ entertainment. All amusement/entertainment uses are subject to performance standards and guidelines. These shall be addressed asspecified in Subsections A and B of this section and as listed below: 

(1) 	
Performance standards. 

(a) 	The applicant shall identify any hazardous materials or explosive materials that may be stored on site and describemeasures to be taken to ensure public safety. 

(2) 	
In addition, specific amusement/entertainment uses listed belowshall be subject to the following: [Amended 5-2-2011 by Ord. No.741-11; 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 754-12; 4-3-2017 by Ord. No.780-17] 

(a) 	Adult entertainment center. 
[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	No lot on which such establishment is located shall be located within 1,000 feet of the property line of any institutional or residential use. 
[b] 	The merchandise shall be arranged to ensure that no merchandise depicting, describing, showing or relating to sexual conduct, sexual excitement, sadomasochistic abuse or human genitalia is visiblefrom the outside of the establishment. 
[c] 	No use on which such an establishment is located shall be located within 1,000 feet of an existing adultbookstore/adult entertainment center. 
[d] 	The hours of operation shall not include any timeperiods between 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
1:243 


(b) 
Amusement center and indoor recreation facility. 

[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	Amusement center uses shall not be located closer than 300 feet to any school building, exclusive oftemporary structures. Such use shall not be located within 100 feet of any adjoining property which isin an R District except when located in a shopping center. 
[b] 	Such use shall be established only after approval bythe Planning Commission of a plan setting forth acceptable rules for the operation of the establishment. Such plan shall specify procedures topreclude gambling and loitering, regulationsregarding the use of the establishment by school-age children, and procedures for the enforcement of therules. 
[c] 	The Planning Commission shall impose such conditions and restrictions as it may deem necessaryto ensure that the use will be compatible with andwill not adversely impact the adjacent area. Such conditions and restrictions may include, but need notbe limited to, the following: 
[i] 	Hours of operation. 
[ii] 	Number of adult attendants required to be on thepremises at all times. 
[iii] Size of the establishment and the number and type of amusements. 

(c) 	
Country club, golf, tennis, swim club/fitness centers. 

[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	Off-street parking and loading areas, swimming pools,tennis courts, golf tees and maintenance facilities shall be screened to provide an effective visual buffer from adjoining uses. 

(d) 	
Fortune telling. 




[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	The use shall not be located closer than 1,000 feet to any school property lines. 
[b] 	The use shall not be located within 1,000 feet of an existing fortune-telling establishment. 
1:244 

[c] 	The Board of Appeals or reviewing agency shall impose such conditions and restrictions as it may deem necessary to ensure that the use is compatiblewith and will not adversely impact the adjacent area.Such conditions and restrictions may include, but not be limited to the following: 
[d] 	Hours of operation; 
[e] 	Scope of operation. 
(e) 	
Smoking lounge. [Added 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 754-12] 

[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	No such use shall be located within 1,000 feet of a school property line or 100 feet of a residential use. 
[b] 	The use shall adhere to the applicable requirements of the Maryland Clean Indoor Air Act.70 
[c] 	The Board of Appeals or reviewing agency shall impose such conditions as it may deem necessary to ensure that the use will not adversely impact theadjacent area. Such conditions may include, but neednot be limited to the following: 
[i] 	Hours of operation. 
[ii] 	Age restrictions. 
[iii] 	Ventilation of premises. 
[iv] 	Accessory services such as the sale of food, beverages and live entertainment. 

(f) 	
Tavern, tavern with entertainment and microbrewery/winery/ distillery. 


[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	Tavern with entertainment shall not be located closer than 300 feet from any school building unless a reduction is granted by the Board of Appeals basedupon site conditions or mitigating factors. Special exception review is required for a tavern located within 300 feet of a school building. 
[b] 	The Board of Appeals or reviewing agency shall impose such conditions and restrictions as it may deem necessary to ensure that the use will be 
70.Editor's Note: See the Health-General Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, § 24-501 et seq. 
1:245 
compatible with and will not adversely impact theadjacent area. Such conditions and restrictions may include, but need not be limited to, the following: 
[i] 	Number of security attendants required to be onthe premises at all times. 
[ii] 	Hours of operation. 
[iii] Size of establishment including area dedicated tobar, restaurant, stage and dance floor, etc. 
[iv] 	Plan for clearing trash/debris from site and adjacent properties. 
[v] 	Use of outdoor portion of property must address standard in § 165-53I(2). 
[vi] 	Alternative parking and service provisions. 
D. 	Use category performance standards and guidelines: industrial uses. All industrial uses are subject to performance standards and guidelines.These shall be addressed as specified in Subsections A and B of this section and as listed below: [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
(1) 	Performance standards for light industrial to include electronicssupply and services, greenhouse/nursery, medical equipment and supply, printing and publishing and secondary manufacturing. 
(a) 	
All manufacturing operations (except for permitted outdoorstorage) shall be located in a wholly enclosed building unless specifically authorized by the Planning Commission. 

(b) 	
The release, disposal, or storage of waste materials shall notbe visible from off site. All trash and refuse shall be stored in a self-contained/enclosed storage area. 

(c) 	
There shall be no outdoor storage of the finished productunless such storage is authorized by the Planning Commission. Bulk storage of the finished product in a wholly enclosedbuilding shall be considered an accessory use. 

(d) 	
Raw materials, waste products, and other by-products associated with the process shall be identified by the applicantprior to approval. 

(e) 	
Outdoor storage of raw materials, waste products, and other by-products may be permitted. The outdoor storage area shallbe effectively screened by opaque fencing, screening or landscaping. The height of the stored materials shall not exceed the height of the screening. The general location, typeand extent of all proposed storage screening shall be shown onthe site plan. Unsafe storage of waste or hazardous material 


1:246 

that creates a pollution threat or fire hazard or is an attractionto rodents or insects is not permitted. 
(f) 	
The hours of operation shall be specified. 

(g) 	
Provisions shall be made for the control of noxious and offensive odors, air pollution, water quality, and noise generated by the proposed use. 


(2) 	
Performance standards for heavy industrial to include agriculturalproducts and processing, construction supply and services, fuel storage, feed and grain mill, primary manufacturing, vehicle andequipment storage and warehousing: 

(a) 	
The performance standards and guidelines for light industrial, § 165-53D(1), shall apply to heavy industrial. 

(b) 	
All loading, unloading and service of refuse/recycling facilitiesshall be performed between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 

p.m. when use is within 500 feet of a residential district. 

(c) 	
A traffic impact study shall be submitted for review. 

(d) 	
Exterior lighting shall provide for a reduction in intensity between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. as required bythe reviewing authority. 



(3) 	
Guidelines. 

(a) 	
All stored goods, merchandise, vehicles or implements shouldbe secured against theft, vandalism or loss. 

(b) 	
To the extent possible, all storage should be limited to the rear of the principal building. 



(4) 	
In addition, specific industrial uses listed below shall be subject tothe following: 


(a) 	Fuel storage facilities. 
[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	Gasoline, propane, oil or diesel fuel storage facilities may be permitted, maintained and decommissioned inaccordance with all state and federal regulations. 
E. 	Use category performance standards and guidelines: institutional uses. All institutional uses, except parks and recreation areas, are subjectto performance standards and guidelines. These shall be addressed asspecified in Subsections A and B of this section and as listed below: 
(1) 	Performance standards. 
(a) 	The project shall be designed to provide a transition near the periphery of the site, either with open space areas and 
1:247 

landscaping, or by designing the buildings near the peripheryto be harmonious in density and type with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(b) 	Institutional establishments adjacent to an existing residential use shall meet the following standards: [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
[1] 	Deliveries, loading, idling or similar operations shall not occur between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., unless the activity occurs within a screened loading bay or on thestreet side of the retail establishment. 
[2] 	Trash removal, compaction or similar operations shall not be permitted between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
[3] 	Operating refrigeration trucks is prohibited from parkingareas adjacent to residential districts between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., unless operated on the street side of theestablishment. 
(2) 	
Guidelines. 

(a) 	
The applicant should provide a written explanation of thecharacter of the facility, the program's policies, goals, meansproposed to accomplish these goals, characteristics of the service population and number of Town/county residents to beserved, operating methods and procedures, and other aspectspertinent to the facility's program and how the facility will impact the neighborhood. 

(b) 	
The reviewing agency/body may require a parking impact study if deemed necessary to ensure the adequacy of the proposed number of parking spaces. 



(3) 	
In addition, specific institutional uses listed below shall be subject to the following: [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 

(a) 	
Cemetery. 

[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	Graves shall be considered as structures for the purpose of determining setbacks from property lines,and in no case shall the graves be located closer than 7 1/2 feet to the property lines. 
[2] 	Guidelines. 
[a] 	The applicant should provide walls, fences and/or planting of shrubbery, trees or vines as may be reasonable and proper to afford adequate screening. 

(b) 
Civic service club, fraternal organization. 


1:248 

[1] Performance standards. 

[a] 	The facility shall be under the control and direction of a duly constituted governing body. 
[b] 	The Board of Appeals may specify hours of operationor other conditions deemed necessary to adequately protect nearby property owners. 
(c) 	
Community center. 

[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	The facility shall be under the control and direction ofa duly constituted governing body composed, at leastin part, of residents of the area intended to be served by the facility. 

(d) 	
Day care, group. 

[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	The Board of Appeals or reviewing agency mayprescribe specific conditions determined necessary tominimize effects of use on neighboring properties given identification of concerns specific to a particularsite. 
[b] 	In the case of child day care, the applicant shall provide 150 square feet of usable outdoor recreationarea for each child that may use this space at anyone time. Such usable outdoor recreation area shall be identified on the site plan and shall be sufficientlybuffered from adjacent residential areas. Usable outdoor recreation areas shall be limited to the side and rear yard of the property. Recreational areas shallnot include the required front yard of the property orany off-street parking areas. 
[c] 	All such uses shall be located so as to permit the safepickup and delivery of all persons on this site. 

(e) 	
Dormitory. 


[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	An educational institution must be affiliated or owner of the facility. Use may be considered as accessory if located on the school campus. 
[b] 	Adult staff shall be on the premises 24 hours per day. 
[c] 	Kitchens or cooking equipment are prohibited in the individual dormitory rooms. 
1:249 

[d] 	An operable fire alarm is required on all floors andsprinklers in all units. 
[e] 	Parking is prohibited in the front yard. 
[f] 	The Board of Appeals or reviewing authority mayimpose additional conditions to ensure the use will not impact the surrounding area. 

(f) 	
Fire station. 

[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	The applicant shall make provisions to ensure safetyin the area surrounding the facility, which may includeadditional traffic control devices, i.e., signal lights, signs, pavement painting. Adequate area for operationof all equipment shall be provided. Adequacystandards shall include, but not be limited to, turning radii necessary for emergency equipment and/orpaving type for particular equipment. 
[b] 	Environmental considerations shall be addressed fully. This shall include minimizing noise of the facility,minimizing impact of lighting upon adjacentproperties, and screening parking areas and equipment storage areas from adjacent uses as determined necessary by the Board of Appeals. 

(g) 	
Hospital. 

[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	All structures shall be located at least 200 feet from any adjacent residence. 
[b] 	All parking areas shall be located at least 50 feet fromany adjacent residential lot. 
[c] 	A minimum of 25% of the gross site area shall be open space. The open space shall be generally continuous,accessible to the residents of the neighborhood andprotective of natural features. 
[d] 	Any helipad associated with the hospital use shall belocated at least 200 feet from any adjacent residential property. 
[2] 	Guidelines. 
[a] 	Accessory uses may include, but not be limited to,recreational and educational services, therapy areas, retail stores, personal and professional services, andhealth services. 
1:250 

(h) 	
Houses of worship. 

[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	Building(s) shall be designed to ensure safe vehicularand pedestrian circulation. A traffic study may berequired by the reviewing agency. 
[2] 	Guidelines. 
[a] 	A structure used primarily for religious activities maybe erected to a greater height than permitted in the district in which it is located, provided that the front,side and rear setbacks shall be increased one foot for each foot by which such structure exceeds the height limitation. 

(i) 	
Assisted living. 

[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	Parking and loading shall be provided at the rear ofthe site. 
[b] 	Adequate access to medical services, shopping areas, recreational and other community services often desired by elderly and handicapped persons shall beavailable to residents or provided on the site for residents. 
[c] 	Business uses which may be permitted as accessoryuses shall be integrated with the dwelling units and oriented towards the interior of the project. No exterior signs or other evidence of business facilitiesshall be visible from the periphery of the site. 
[2] 	Guidelines. 
[a] 	The Board of Appeals may prescribe specificconditions determined necessary to minimize effects of use on neighboring properties given identificationof concerns specific to a particular site. 

(j) 	
Recycling or reuse center. 


[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	The applicant shall fully describe the proposed useto the satisfaction of the Board of Appeals and shall establish that the use will not cause interference with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
1:251 

[b] 	The description shall include the operating scheduleof the center and the number of attendants available at each shift operated by the center. 
[c] 	The applicant shall specify the method for material storage, removal of trash and debris and shall describe how this will be accomplished. 

(k) 	
Nursing home. 

[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	Adequate access to medical services, shopping areas,recreational and other community services often desired by elderly and handicapped persons shall be available to residents or provided on the site for residents. 
[b] 	All parking areas shall be located at least 50 feet from any adjacent residential lot. 
[c] 	A minimum of 25% of the gross site area shall be openspace. The open space shall be generally continuous, accessible to the residents and protective of naturalfeatures. 
[d] 	Open space areas, recreational facilities and other accessory facilities shall be developed in each phase ofdevelopment to meet the needs of the residents. Thedeveloper shall provide a schedule for the installation of facilities at the time the special exception is approved. 
[2] 	Guidelines. 
[a] 	Accessory uses in residential districts may includerecreational and educational services, therapy areas,retail stores, personal and professional services and health services. In commercial/industrial districts, accessory uses shall be based on uses permitted in thedistrict. 

(l) 	
Park and recreation area. 




[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	A plan of proposed use shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for review and comment. 
[b] 	No structure associated with the use shall be located closer than 50 feet to any residential lot line. 
1:252 

[c] 	The park shall have adequate frontage on a publicstreet of sufficient capacity to provide safe access and convey anticipated traffic. 
[2] 	Guidelines. 
[a] 	Special consideration shall be given to traffic safety. Protective methods may be required, includingfencing along roadways, and/or additional requirements to ensure the adequacy of sight distance for the particular use. 
[b] 	Taking into account safety, noise, dust, glare, and traffic factors, the Planning Commission may prescribe additional conditions to ensure compatibility with adjacent uses. 
(m) 	School, college, university. 
[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	If the school offers general academic instruction below college level, an outdoor play area (or other outdoor activity area) shall be required which shallmeet minimum state requirements for such outdoorplay area. The area shall be located at least 25 feet from any adjoining lot. 
[2] 	Guidelines. 
[a] 	The Board of Appeals may specify the maximum number of students to be enrolled. "Enrollment" shall mean the total number of students enrolled at anyone time. If there are separate morning, afternoon and evening sessions, each one of which is attendedby different students, "enrollment" shall mean the number of students enrolled in the session having the largest number of students. 
F. 	Use category performance standards and guidelines: natural resourceuses. All natural resource uses are subject to performance standards and guidelines. These shall be addressed as specified in Subsections Aand B of this section and as listed below: 
(1) 	
Performance standards. 

(a) 	
The release, disposal, or storage of waste materials shall notbe visible from off site. All trash and refuse shall be stored in a self-contained/enclosed storage area. 

(b) 	
There shall be no outdoor storage of the finished product. Bulkstorage of the finished product in a wholly enclosed buildingshall be considered an accessory use. 




1:253 

(c) 	
Raw materials, waste products, and other by-productsassociated with the process shall be identified by the applicant prior to approval. Outdoor storage of raw materials, wasteproducts, and other by-products may be permitted. The outdoor storage area shall be effectively screened from any adjacent land in any residential zone or land proposed to beused for residential purposes. The general location, type andextent of all proposed screening shall be shown on the site plan. 

(d) 	
An impact statement shall be submitted, explaining: 

[1] 	The proposed architectural design (graphic or narrative) of all buildings and structures. 
[2] 	The scope of the operation. 
[3] 	The proposed hours of operation. 
[4] 	The provisions to be made for the control of noxious andoffensive odors. 
[5] 	The air pollution, water quality and noise control measures to be taken. 
[6] 	The type and amount of traffic expected to be generated. 
[7] 	The compatibility of the use with the surrounding areas. 
(e) 	
All proposed accessory uses shall be identified, and the maximum square footage allotted for each use shall be indicated on the site plan. 

(f) 	
Uses must also meet standards outlined in § 165-53D if classified as heavy or light industrial. [Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 

(2) 	
In addition, specific natural resource uses listed below shall besubject to the following: 

(a) 	Mining and mineral extraction. 
[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	All mining and mineral extraction operations shall bereviewed by the Planning Commission. 
[b] 	The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposedextraction will not have an adverse impact on the nearby property owners. In determining the impact on property owners, the Planning Commission shallconsider the following: dust, noise, vibration, trafficgeneration, odor and fumes. 
1:254 

[c] 	The applicant shall be responsible for restoring thearea with a minimum of two inches of topsoil. A plan for such restoration shall be submitted to the Director of Public Works for approval prior to any mining orextraction operation. 
[d] 	Exposed land shall have a slope not greater than 3:1.A grading plan shall be submitted with the site plan,showing existing and proposed ground elevations on the site, adjacent land, and all abutting streets. 
[e] 	A traffic analysis shall be required as part of thePlanning Commission application, which shall include the following: 
[i] 	Expected volume of traffic generated by the operation; 
[ii] 	Streets to be used to access the site; 
[iii] Identification of driveways or access pointslocated so as not to endanger pedestrians or create traffic hazards; and 
[iv] 	Identification of material used in construction of the driveway or access. 
[f] 	All operations shall be screened, including outdoorstorage of machinery and equipment, from adjacentland or streets. The Planning Commission shall consider use of techniques for noise attenuation inreviewing applications. 
[g] 	The site plan shall include an estimate of the time required for the removal of the material and return ofthe site to a condition suitable for development. 

G. 	
Use category performance standards and guidelines: residential uses. All residential uses are subject to performance standards and guidelines. These shall be addressed as specified in Subsections A andB of this section and as listed below: 


(1) 	Performance standards. [Amended 4-1-2013 by Ord. No. 759-13; 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
(a) 	
The applicant shall provide a graphic description of the proposed architectural design. 

(b) 	
All proposed accessory uses shall be identified, and the maximum square footage allotted for each use shall be indicated on the site plan. If a deck is not included on the siteplan proposal for single-family or multifamily residential units, 


1:255 

the rear or side yard setback shall be increased to allow futureconstruction of a deck at least 10 feet by 20 feet in size. 
(c) 	
No dwelling shall be occupied by more than one person forevery 220 square feet of habitable space. Persons sharingdwellings or beds on a rotating or shift basis shall each be counted as separate occupants for purposes of this requirement. 

(d) 	
In the case of townhouse units, the maximum number of attached dwelling units within a building block shall be no more than six units unless the Planning Commission determines to increase the number of units to a maximum of eight based on the intensity of surrounding land use, thearchitectural design, the layout of the development, and distribution of parking, as shown on the plans submitted. 


(2) 	In addition, specific residential uses listed below shall be subject tothe following: 
(a) 	
Bed-and-breakfast. 

[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	No separate kitchens shall be provided for guests. 
[b] 	Parking and loading shall not be provided in the front yard. 
[c] 	An operable fire alarm shall be placed on each floor,including the basement. 
[d] 	The owner or operator must maintain his or her residence on site, or an employee must be on sitewhen the facility is occupied by guests. 
[e] 	A minimum of one full bathroom with a lavatory, toiletand shower or tub, or combination thereof, shall be available for every two guest rooms. 
[2] 	Guidelines. 
[a] 	The dining area of the bed-and-breakfast may berented for special catering events. 

(b) 	
Boardinghouse. 


[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	Facilities for dining shall be in a common location customarily used by a single family in the structure.Separate kitchens for residents shall not be provided.Meals shall be provided for boardinghouse residents and guests only. 
1:256 

[b] 	Parking and loading shall not be provided in the frontyard. 
[c] 	The owner or operator must maintain his or her residence on site. 
[d] 	An operable fire alarm shall be placed on each floor, including the basement. 
(c) 	
Community shelter. 

[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	A statement shall be submitted by the property owneror manager explaining the character of the facility,the programs, policies, goals, means proposed to accomplish these goals, characteristics of the servicepopulation and number of residents to be served,operating methods and procedures, hours of operation and any other aspects pertinent to the facility's program. 
[b] 	A supervisor shall be on the premises at all times to assist residents with specialized needs. 
[c] 	An operable fire alarm shall be placed on each floor,including the basement. 

(d) 	
Cottage housing. 

[1] 	Performance standards. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
[a] 	The use shall be limited to immediate family members(parent, child or sibling) of the owners of the primaryresidence. 
[b] 	The use shall discontinue as soon as the designatedcottage housing is vacated by immediate family. 
[c] 	The parcel on which the apartment is located must be a minimum of 10,000 square feet. 

(e) 	
Day care, group. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 


[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	In the case of child day care, the applicant shallprovide 150 square feet of usable outdoor recreation area for each child that may use this space at anyone time. Such usable outdoor recreation area shall be identified on the site plan and shall be sufficiently buffered from adjacent residential areas. Usable outdoor recreation areas shall be limited to the side 
1:257 

and rear yard of the property. Recreational areas shallnot include the required front yard of the property or any off-street parking areas. 
[b] 	All such uses shall be located so as to permit the safepickup and delivery of all persons on this site. 
[2] 	Guidelines. 
[a] 	The Board of Appeals or reviewing agency mayprescribe specific conditions determined necessary to minimize effects of use on neighboring propertiesgiven identification of concerns specific to a particularsite. 
(f) 	
Group home/halfway house. 

[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	No more than two unrelated residents shall receive ongoing, on-site medical care. Otherwise, the use shallbe treated as a nursing home or assisted living facility and regulated as such. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
[b] 	The use shall have an operable fire alarm and smokedetector on each floor, including the basement. 
[c] 	A supervisor shall be on the premises at all times toassist residents. 

(g) 	
Home occupations. 


[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	The home occupation shall be clearly incidental andsubordinate to the residential use. The floor area used for the home occupation shall not exceed 300 squarefeet unless additional area is approved by the Board ofAppeals. 
[b] 	The home occupation shall be conducted within thedwelling unit or an accessory building on the property.No outdoor advertisement, display or storage of materials, goods, supplies or equipment used in thehome occupation shall be permitted on the premises.No commercial vehicles, noise, dust, fumes or other nuisances emitting from the premises shall be permitted. 
[c] 	The residential character/appearance of the dwelling unit and/or accessory structures shall not be alteredto accommodate a home occupation. 
1:258 

[d] 	Only persons residing in the home shall providebusiness services associated with the home occupation on the premises. The total of all employees, inclusive of family members, shall not exceed three. No home occupation shall be open to the public between 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
[e] 	No home occupation shall generate more than 20 vehicle trips per day. A "trip" is defined as a vehicle traveling in one direction to or from a source. Twentytrips is equivalent to 10 round trips. 
[f] 	No article or commodity shall be offered for sale at the premises. 
[g] 	Adequate off-street parking shall be provided,pursuant to Article VII of this Part 2. Any additional off-street parking required for the home occupationby the Board of Appeals shall be provided in the sideor rear yard of the lot and shall be screened from adjacent public roads and residential lots. 
[h] 	No goods, materials or supplies shall be delivered bycommercial vehicles either to or from the premises in connection with the home occupation, except by theUnited States Postal Service or a delivery service. Nodeliveries by semi/tractor-trailer trucks are permitted. 
[i] 	Illumination of the site shall be no greater than isgenerally used in a residential district. No parking area lighting is permitted. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
[j] 	Notwithstanding the above, home occupations shall not include automobile repair, beauty shops or barbershops, construction supply services, kennels,or printing business. This section is not intended toexclude a home occupation in which the resident provides administrative functions, such as bookkeeping, accounting or answering service for abusiness use cited above. 
[2] 	Guidelines. 
[a] 	One full-or part-time nonresident employee mayprovide business services on the premises if the property is located in a Transition Overlay District.A maximum of three full-or part-time nonresidentemployees or tenants may provide business services on the premises if located in the Transition OverlayDistrict and approved by the Board of Appeals. If theproperty is not in a Transition Overlay District, one 
1:259 

nonresident employee may be approved by the Board of Appeals. [Amended 2-21-2012 by Ord. No. 748-12] 
(h) 	Fifty-five-and-over housing. 
[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	Residency in fifty-five-and-over housing projects shallbe restricted to households having at least one individual 55 years of age or older, with a spouse of any age or other persons 40 years of age or older.Persons under 40, other than a spouse, shall not residein a dwelling unit for more than a total of 30 days per calendar year. If a project will not be a rentalcommunity under single ownership, a condominiumassociation or homeowners' association shall be established to implement and maintain the agerestrictions, in addition to Town enforcement of the Development Regulations. The provisions in this subsection shall be subject to any and all applicablefederal or state laws and regulations. To the extentthere is a conflict between the Bel Air regulations and the Fair Housing Act, the Fair Housing Act shallcontrol. In addition, nothing contained herein shall bedeemed to prohibit any party from occupying a unit under the age of 40 years if such person is necessaryto provide a reasonable accommodation to a personwho is entitled to occupy a unit under the Fair Housing Act or is a handicapped dependent of a person who is entitled to occupy a unit under the Fair Housing Act. [Amended 11-25-2011 by Ord. No.744-11; 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
[b] 	The developer shall provide a schedule for the installation of open space and recreation facilities at the time the special exception is approved and in eachphase of the development to meet the needs of theresidents. A minimum of 25% of the site shall be set aside as a permanent open space area. Such open space shall be restricted to uses such as parks,swimming pools, tennis courts, putting greens, assembly facilities or other facility deemed appropriate by the Planning Commission. 
[c] 	Any housing development for persons 55 years of age or older shall require a deed restriction requiring theproperty to be used as fifty-five-and-over housing for aperiod of not less than 40 years. 
1:260 

[d] 	The project shall be designed to provide a transitionnear the periphery of the site, either with open space areas and landscaping or by designing the buildingsnear the periphery to be harmonious in density andtype with the surrounding neighborhood. 
[2] 	Guidelines. 
[a] 	Adequate access to medical services, shopping areas,recreational and other community services often desired by elderly and handicapped persons shouldbe available to residents or provided on the site forresidents. 
[b] 	Business uses which are permitted as accessory usesshould be integrated with the dwelling units andoriented towards the interior of the project. No exterior signs or other evidence of business facilitiesshould be visible from the periphery of the site. 
H. 	Use category performance standards and guidelines: retail uses. All retail uses are subject to performance standards and guidelines. Theseshall be addressed as specified in Subsections A and B of this sectionand as listed below: 
(1) 	Performance standards. 
(a) 	
The location of the subject property shall be suitable for thetype and scope of development proposed, taking into account such factors as the existing urbanization of the neighborhood,traffic, and the character of surrounding properties and theneighborhood in general. 

(b) 	
Any proposed retail use that will abut land in a residential zoneshall include a ten-foot buffer from the residential parcel andbe effectively screened, as required in Article VIII of this Part 

2. 

(c) 	
The applicant shall locate amenities, such as lighting, seating,shelter and landscaping, in attractive groupings that provide for safe and unobstructed pedestrian movement. 

(d) 	
All proposed accessory uses shall be identified, and the maximum square footage allotted for each use shall be indicated on the site plan. 

(e) 	
The applicant shall design and site buildings to screen frompublic view unsightly elements such as shipping/loading areas, snow piling, transformers, dumpsters and meters. 

(f) 	
Retail establishments within 500 feet of a residential district shall meet the following standards: [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 


1:261 

[1] 	Deliveries, loading, idling or similar operations shall not occur between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., unless the activity occurs within a loading bay or on the street side ofthe retail establishment. 
[2] 	Trash removal, compaction or similar operations shall not be permitted between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
[3] 	Operating refrigeration trucks is prohibited from parkingareas adjacent to residential districts between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., unless operated on the street side of theestablishment. 
(2) 	
In addition, specific retail uses listed below shall be subject to the following: 

(a) 
Liquor store. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 

[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	Hours of operation shall be specified. 
[b] 	Security provisions shall be specified. 
[c] 	The use shall not be located closer than 300 feet from a school building unless a reduction is granted bythe Board of Appeals based upon site conditions or mitigating factors. 
[d] 	Drive-through use is prohibited. 

(b) 	
Shoppers' merchandise. 

[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	The size and location of, and access to, the establishment shall be oriented toward meeting the needs of the neighborhood. In the B-1 District, shoppers' merchandise uses shall not exceed 5,000square feet. 

(c) 	
Shopping center. 


[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	The project shall provide a unified arrangement of buildings, service areas, parking and landscaped areas. 
[b] 	The project shall be designed with regard to the topography and other natural features of the parcel. 
[c] 	Materials, massing and facade design for the projectshall be harmonious with the character of the neighborhood. 
1:262 

[d] 	The internal circulation system shall be designed tominimize through traffic and traffic conflicts within the project. 
[e] 	Safe pedestrian movement and the provision of pedestrian walks within the parking lot and surrounding the building perimeter shall be considered in the vehicular plan. 
[f] 	All establishments shall have vehicular service access either from an individual service drive or from a common service yard. 
[g] 	All such service areas, loading, trash removal, compaction or similar activities shall be segregatedfrom public areas and screened from public view. 
[h] 	Any part of a lot not used for buildings or other structures or paved for off-street parking, loading andmaneuvering areas, drives and pedestrian walks orincidental outside storage shall be landscaped and properly maintained. 
[i] 	All parking lots, loading areas and outdoor storageareas shall be separated with buffer yards of at least 10 feet from any adjacent residential districts. 
[j] 	Signs to identify the use of an occupant shall bedesigned as part of the architectural design of the building and attached thereto. Proposed signage shallbe submitted with the preliminary plan and shall besubject to review and approval by the Planning Commission. 
[k] 	Directional and informational signs shall be adequately provided and design coordinated. 
[l] 	Center management shall be responsible for providingon-site security service. 
[m] A traffic study shall be required at the time of application. 
[n] 	Vehicular access to the subject property shall not beby means of any street internal to a subdivision for single-family dwellings. 

I. 	
Use category performance standards and guidelines: service uses. Allservice uses are subject to performance standards and guidelines. These shall be addressed as specified in Subsections A and B of thissection and as listed below: 

(1) 	
Performance standards. 




1:263 

(a) 	
Any proposed service use that will abut land in a residentialzone or land proposed to be used for residential purposes shall include a ten-foot buffer from the residential parcel and beeffectively screened, as required in Article VIII of this chapter.

[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
(b) 	
All proposed accessory uses shall be identified, and the maximum square footage allotted for each use shall be indicated on the site plan. 

(c) 	
The applicant shall design and site buildings to screen frompublic view unsightly elements such as shipping/loading areas,snow piling, transformers, dumpsters and meters. 


(2) 	In addition, specific service uses listed below shall be subject to thefollowing: [Amended 5-2-2011 by Ord. No. 741-11; 4-3-2017by Ord. No. 780-17] 
(a) 	
Beauty shop/barbershop/spa (located in the R-O and B-1 Districts). 

[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	Applicants requesting approval of a beauty shop orbarbershop shall specify the number of chairs to be inoperation, the number of employees to be on premises and the hours of operation. 
[b] 	The proposed use shall not exceed 5,000 square feetin gross area. 
[c] 	The proposed use shall not produce adverse effects onthe use or development of the surrounding area due tonoise, odor, traffic or lighting. 
[d] 	The application of permanent makeup may be permitted as an accessory use. Such use shall be subject to all applicable COMAR standards. 

(b) 	
Communications tower(s)/platform. 


[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	Prior to approval of a new tower, the applicant shall demonstrate that every effort has been made to acquire space on an existing tower structure, buildingor utility pole in the Town limits or surrounding area and that due to valid considerations, including, but notlimited to, location, economic, elevation, engineering or technical feasibility, no appropriate location is available. 
1:264 

[b] 
[c] 
[d] 
[e] 
[f] 
[g] 
[h] 
[i] 
[j] 
[k] 
The setback of such structure from the nearest habitable building shall be equal to its height above grade. The minimum setback from any boundary of a residential district, dwelling, school, church, or institution for human care in any other district shall be the tower height. 
The structure shall be located on a lot of record with a minimum of two acres. 
The structure shall be enclosed within a locked, chain-link fence or comparable wall or structure at leasteight feet high. 
No signals or lights shall be permitted on towers unless required by the Federal Communications Commission or the Federal Aviation Administration. 
Ground-level equipment buildings associated with thetowers shall be screened and secured from adjacentproperties by landscaping and fencing. 
The applicant shall submit an affidavit with the Boardof Appeals application stating that space on the proposed tower will be made available to future users when possible. 
An environmental impact statement, includinginformation on emission levels and the impact of the structure on the ecosystem, shall be provided as evidence at the Board of Appeals hearing. 
A nonionizing electromagnetic radiation analysis shall be submitted for review with every application forplacement of an antenna on an existing tower or placement of a new tower. The analysis shall cite, incorporate and meet the current ANSI standards. 
Environmental Protection Agency standards and guidelines relating to radiation emissions shall be met at all times. 
Every five years or sooner, in the event of substantialdamage, a certification by a professional structural engineer registered in the State of Maryland shall befiled with the Department of Public Works, indicatingthat the communications tower meets all safety requirements. Any upgrade or maintenance required to comply with any changes in the safetyrequirements, or to maintain the safety thereof, shall be performed prior to the filing of such certification. 
1:265 

(c) 

[l] 	The applicant shall minimize adverse visual effects oftowers through careful design, siting and vegetative screening and shall avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure and falling icethrough engineering and careful siting of tower structures. 
[m] The applicant shall cooperate in Town efforts to maximize the use of new communications transmission towers in order to reduce the number of towers needed. 
[n] 	A communications tower that is no longer used shall be removed from the site within one year of the datethat the use ceases. 
[o] 	Installation of communication antenna on existing utility poles located in the public right-of-way or existing structures may be permitted with approvalof the Director of Public Works based upon aesthetic considerations, impact to nearby residences and availability of viable alternative installation options.
[Amended 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 783-18] 
Drive-through facility for a restaurant, car wash, pharmacy,bank and other similar uses shall be subject to the followingrequirements. 
[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	The use shall be designed so that pedestrian and vehicular circulation is coordinated with that of adjacent properties. A traffic impact study shall berequired. 
[b] 	Drive-through lanes shall be marked with distinctive pavement markings and/or special striping and shallnot block exit or entry to off-street parking spacesotherwise required on the site. 
[c] 	Adequate spaces for stacking at drive-throughfacilities shall be provided. Specifically, five stackingspaces are required from the first window or bay, plus two for each additional station (intercom). 
[d] 	Noise from speaker systems shall be regulated tomeet State of Maryland standards for control of noise pollution. 
[e] 	Drive-through windows and vehicle queing lanes shallbe located along the side and rear facades and not between the building and primary public right-of-way. 
1:266 

(d) 	
Fitness center. 

[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	Hours of operation shall be specified. 
[b] 	Floor plan of the use shall be submitted with the site plan identifying each designated area within the facility. 
[c] 	Any accessory use such as retail or other services shall be identified. 

(e) 	
Hotel. 

[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	Circulation and parking shall be adequate to fulfill requirements of all proposed uses, principal and accessory. A traffic analysis shall be provided by theapplicant demonstrating adequacy of the system to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission/Board ofTown Commissioners. 
[b] 	The public streetscape shall be developed between the street-front building and the street curb as a safeand convenient pedestrian area, with amenities suchas paving, lighting, seating, shelter and landscaping located into attractive groupings that provide for safeand unobstructed pedestrian movement. 
[2] 	Guidelines. 
[a] 	Accessory uses may include gift shops, beauty shops,barbershops, restaurants, cocktail lounges/nightclubs,auditorium/meeting facilities, and similar retail stores and commercial establishments. 

(f) 	
Medical service/medical clinic/medical laboratory. 

[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	Disposal of waste shall be through approved, safe means and shall be separate from regular trash disposal. 

(g) 	
Mixed-use center. 


[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	The applicant shall provide a unified arrangement of buildings, service areas, parking, signage and landscaping. 
1:267 

[b] 	The architecture, site design, lighting and signageshall incorporate consistent design and theme elements. 
(h) 	
Motor vehicles and related service uses/car wash/auto detailing. 

[1] Performance standards. 

[a] 	All sales and installation facilities operations shall beconducted within a wholly enclosed building. Outdoor display of motor vehicles for sale shall be permitted ifareas for this purpose are integrated into the overallsite design and are compatible with the adjacent and neighboring properties. The applicant shall submit aplan indicating outdoor storage areas and screeningof such areas. The Planning Commission may require additional landscape treatment to address this requirement. 
[b] 	Neighboring properties shall be protected from site illumination, noise and odor. Noise shall be regulatedto meet Control of Noise standards as specified by theState of Maryland. 
[c] 	A sightly, solid wall or fence at least five feet highshall be located along all property lines adjoiningresidentially zoned land. Such wall shall contain no advertising and shall be maintained in good condition.Fenced areas shall be landscaped on the residentialside to provide screening from residential areas. 
[d] 	The area of the lot devoted to vehicle display or storage shall include no more than the 75% of thetotal lot area, exclusive of floodplains, steep slopes, or other environmentally sensitive areas. 
[e] 	The number and type of vehicles permitted on the lotshall be determined on a case-by-case basis, taking into account factors such as the gross weight of thevehicle, vehicle size, nature of the vehicle (commercial, industrial, passenger, or other), impacts on adjoining properties and traffic implications of thefacility. 
[f] 	A safe, identifiable driving lane shall be provided within the parking lot. 
[g] 	Landscape islands, curbs and signs shall be used toclearly distinguish the parking from loading, delivery areas and driving lanes. 
1:268 

[h] 	Adequate space shall be provided on site for serviceand delivery vehicles. 
[i] 	Turning areas shall be provided in order to avoiddead-end parking situations. 
[j] 	Outdoor storage or service areas shall be located on the side or rear yard and screened from the streetwith a wall or fence. 
[k] 	Pump islands and vehicle circulation for filling stations shall be screened with a wall and landscaped as described in Article VIII. Pump island canopiesshall be set back a minimum 10 feet from right-of-way and 15 feet from adjacent property lines. 
[l] 	Building facades in the B-2/B-2A and B-3A Districtsshall be a minimum of 30% window area. Required street frontage shall not apply. 
[2] 	Guidelines. 
[a] 	Display for sale or rental purposes of motor vehicles, trailers, boats, camping trailers, or other vehicles maybe permitted, provided that the lot on which the vehicles are parked is adequately screened from all neighboring residentially zoned land or land proposedfor residential purposes by the Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan. 
(i) 	Outdoor dining or bar service. 
[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	No amplified music or public address system is permitted unless as part of a temporary permitted use. 
[b] 	Live entertainment must end at 10:00 p.m. 
[c] 	No gaming is permitted unless part of a temporary permitted use. 
[d] 	The exterior area is limited to 75% of the capacityof the principal permitted use and any temporary enclosure must meet provisions of § 165-71C. 
[e] 	Bar service is subject to Board of Appeals reviewwhich may impose conditions as it may deem necessary to ensure there is no adverse impact toneighboring property. 
[i] 	Hours of food or alcohol service. 
1:269 

[ii] 	Limit to the size of the bar including televisionand other visual display. 

(j) 	
Parking, commercial. 

[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	Sign area is limited to 1/2 square foot per each linear foot of primary road frontage. 
[b] 	Minimum vehicle stacking at each entrance is two carlengths. 
[c] 	An uninterrupted screen/barrier of four feet in heightis required along all public road rights-of-way. 
[d] 	No accessory use is permitted. 

(k) 	
Professional, business and personal services in TransitionOverlay Districts and R-O Districts shall comply with thefollowing: 


[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	Merchandise offered for sale in the R-O District on the premises in connection with the use shall be limited to those that are secondary and incidental to the primaryuse, e.g., eyeglasses for opticians. Retail sales shallbe described in a written statement submitted to the Zoning Administrator. If the Zoning Administrator determines that products offered for sale are secondary to the use and meet the intent of the regulations to limit retail sales operations in residential areas, written authorization shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator specifying approval and associated conditions. 
[b] 	No merchandise, material or equipment shall be stored outside of any structure. 
[c] 	Adequate parking facilities shall be available on site.No parking and/or loading shall be provided in thefront yard setback area. 
[d] 	The property owner shall maintain the residential appearance of the dwelling or build a new buildingthat is compatible in size, shape and scale to nearby residential units. 
[e] 	Lighting shall be kept to a minimum. No floodlightingor commercial lighting shall be permitted. 
1:270 

[f] 	Uses in the Transition Overlay District shall providefor services by appointment only with no walk-in or retail patrons. 
(l) 	
Restaurants. 

[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	Hours of operation shall be specified. 
[b] 	Trash and debris shall be removed from premises, andlots shall be cleared of same regularly. 
[c] 	Drive-through restaurants shall be subject to § 165-53I(2)(c). 

(m) 	
Tattooing and body-piercing service. 

[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	The applicant shall comply with all state and federalstandards regarding handling, treatment and disposal of medical waste as specified by the State of Maryland. 
[b] 	The applicant shall comply with OSHA Bloodborne Pathogen Standards. 
[c] 	No such use shall be located within 1,000 feet of a school nor 300 feet from a residential or institutional use other than a school. 
[d] 	No such use shall be located within 1,000 feet of an existing tattoo and/or body-piercing establishment. 
[e] 	The hours of operation shall not include any timebetween 9:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. 

(n) 	
Veterinary clinic/veterinary service/kennel. 


[1] 	Performance standards. 
[a] 	Disposal of organic and/or medical waste shall be through approved, safe means and shall be separate from regular trash disposal. 
[b] 	Veterinary services as a professional office use in aresidential district shall not include outdoor animal runs. 
[c] 	Veterinarian services, clinics, laboratories and kennels in the commercial and industrial districts shall be set back at least 200 feet from any residentiallot line or residential use.71 
1:271 

71.Editor's Note: Former Subsection J, regarding temporary uses, which immediately followedthis subsection, was repealed 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17. See now Art. X, Accessory andTemporary Uses. 
1:272 ARTICLE VIII 
Landscaping Standards 
§ 165-54. Purpose. 
A well-prepared landscape plan integrates the various elements of a site's design, while preserving and enhancing the preexisting identity of the site.It creates a sense of entry to a building and/or site. Landscape plans arerequired for all new developments to ensure protection of the site's natural features and sensitive areas; to provide landscaping that is consistent withstandards for crime prevention through environmental design; to enhancecommunity design by using landscaping to buffer incompatible uses; to create seasonal interest through use of a variety of landscaping materials;and to improve the general appearance of public and private spaces,walkways and open spaces throughout the community. Landscape plans tailored to the location, design and use of a particular site also enhancethe Town's character. The landscaping standards are intended as a toolto implement the Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan goals of protecting sensitive areas, achieving quality growth and development and upgradingthe Town's appearance. 
§ 165-55. Applicability. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
A. 	A landscape plan shall be submitted with each subdivision and site planapplication. The plan shall include all elements required in § 165-57 ofthis article. 
B. 	Additionally, landscape plans are required for any enlargementexceeding 500 square feet of an existing building and/or constructionor expansion of a parking lot. 
§ 165-56. Landscape plan requirements. [Amended 4-3-2017 byOrd. No. 780-17] 
The landscape plan must be prepared, signed and sealed by a landscape architect registered in the State of Maryland. The plan should specify thelocation, size, species, spacing of plant materials, method of installation,method for maintenance and retention of materials in accordance with standards outlined in the latest edition of the Town Landscape Manual. 
A. 	The applicant shall submit a landscape plan, identifying all existingvegetation, streams, floodplain zones and nontidal wetlands, along with the preliminary site plan. The plan shall indicate provisions for landscape maintenance, stormwater management, revegetation,establishment of vegetated buffers and the method of providing perpetual protection of any special flood hazard areas as required byChapter 210, Floodplain Management, of the Bel Air Town Code. 
B. 	The plan shall include all existing and proposed street trees located within the public right-of-way. Wherever possible, the plan should emphasize use of native vegetation and incorporate sustainable 
1:273 

development practices through the use of green roofs and associatedsustainable planting practices. 
C. 	The plan shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator and his/herdesignee and the Director of Public Works for completeness,conformance with the requirements of this Part 2 and for appropriateness of species and location. 
D. 	Following staff approval, the plan shall be submitted to the PlanningCommission, if applicable, for final review. 
E. 	Any property owner seeking a modification to the approved plan shallsubmit a written request to the Department of Planning and CommunityDevelopment justifying the proposed change and a revised plan graphically identifying the proposed modifications. Any significantrevisions to the approved plan, as determined by the ZoningAdministrator and Director of Public Works, will require Planning Commission approval. 
F. 	The Department of Planning and Community Development shall forward said documentation to the Planning Commission for consideration if determined that revisions are significant. The PlanningCommission shall then determine whether the modifications are comparable in quality, effectiveness and durability with the originally approved plan and whether minimum standards of this Part 2 havebeen satisfied. The modifications shall have no adverse visual effect on adjacent properties. 
§ 165-57. General planting requirements. [Amended 4-3-2017 byOrd. No. 780-17] 
A. 	General planting specifications. 
(1) 	
All proposed planting shall have a minimum size and height asoutlined in the Town Landscape Manual. 

(2) 	
The condition of plant material shall meet standards outlined in the Town Landscape Manual. After, installation and acceptance, allrequired plant material shall be maintained by the property ownerfor the lifetime of the development. 

(3) 	
Within one year of planting, any dead or dying trees or plantmaterials shall be replaced by the applicant during the next planting season prior to release of any required surety. 

(4) 	
Existing vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extentpractical. The landscape plan shall identify the protection area andmethod of protection for retained vegetation. The applicant shall be responsible for replacement of such vegetation should removalor loss occur during and/or within one year of construction. 

1:274 

(5) 	No buildings, structures, storage of materials, or parking shall bepermitted within preservation areas and designated buffer areas unless specifically approved by the Planning Commission. 

B. 
Screening plans and materials. 


(1) 	
Every development shall provide sufficient screening when the Planning Commission determines that there is a need to shieldneighboring properties from any adverse external effects of a development or to shield the development from negative impacts of adjacent uses. 

(2) 	
When building design and siting do not provide privacy, the Planning Commission may require landscaping, fences, or walls to screen dwelling units for privacy. 

(3) 	
When landscape buffers are used as screening, the buffers shall bemeasured from right-of-way, side and rear property lines, excluding driveways. 

(4) 	
Screening shall provide a year-round visual shield in order to minimize adverse impacts. 

(5) 	
Screening may consist of walls, fencing, vegetation, berms, rocks,boulders, mounds, or combinations thereof to achieve the same objectives. 

(6) 	
Plant species considered to be invasive or which may cause damageto the environment or infrastructure are prohibited. The list ofthese species are outlined in the Town Landscape Manual. 

(7) 	
If planted berms are used, the minimum top width shall be fourfeet, and the maximum side slope shall be 3:1. 

(8) 	
Plantings shall be watered regularly and in a manner appropriate for the specific plant species. 

(9) 	
Buffer areas shall be maintained and kept free of all debris,rubbish, weeds, and tall grass. 



C. 	
Tree plantings. In addition to general planting requirements notedabove, any tree planting in close proximity to overhead or undergroundutilities shall satisfy the following specifications and standards: 

(1) 	
Any trees planted within 15 feet of the center of a distribution poleline (<69 kilovolts) should not have a mature height that exceeds30 feet. 

(2) 	
Any trees planted in an area 15 feet to 40 feet from the center ofa distribution pole line should not have a mature height exceeding50 feet. 

(3) 	
Any trees that are allowed to generate to satisfy the forest conservation plan or other vegetation enhancement requirements 




1:275 

shall conform to the requirements noted in Subsection C(1) and
(2) above. These conditions shall be appended to any existing and future Town-approved forest conservation plans and associateddeclarations of covenants, conditions and restrictions, and within any recorded easements that may encumber the property through which a pole line or utility easement is situated. 
(4) 	Major deciduous trees are not permitted within 10 feet of underground utilities excluding storm drains. 
§ 165-58. Street trees. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
A. 	Location. Major or minor deciduous trees shall be installed on bothsides of all proposed streets and along the street frontage of all existing streets in accordance with the approved landscape plan. 
(1) 	Trees shall be planted at predetermined intervals along streets;spacing shall depend on site conditions and species, as follows: 
Tree Height 	Planting Interval 
(feet) 	(feet) 
Major deciduous trees 40 
Minor deciduous trees 30 

(2) 	Trees shall be planted so as not to interfere with utilities (buried and overhead), roadways, sidewalks, sight easements, or streetlights. Tree species location, and spacing shall be approvedby the Planning Commission as part of the landscape plan. The plan must be approved by a representative of the Department of NaturalResources, Forest Service. Street trees should be planted in a right­of-way or easement area located behind the sidewalk to allow room for root growth. 
B. 	Tree type. Selection of tree species shall be approved by the ZoningAdministrator or his/her designee and the Director of Public Works. 
C. 	Safety and visibility. Street trees shall not restrict sight lines at intersections, nor restrict the approach view of any traffic or road signor device. The Planning Commission may waive street tree location requirements if their placement would have an adverse impact on safety requirements. 
§ 165-59. Minimum planting requirements. [Amended 4-3-2017 byOrd. No. 780-17] 
A. 	Perimeter buffer. 
(1) 	Planting for all required buffers is based upon the application of a standardized planting unit (PU) along the length of mandatoryperimeter screening area. The required planting is based on dividing the length of required buffer by the number of planting 
1:276 

units per linear foot or fraction thereof. Table 165-59.I, below, provides the number of planting units per linear foot. 
(2) 	
Planting unit is equal to the following tree or shrub types or acombination thereof: [Amended 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 783-18] 

(3) 	
The Planning Commission may approve a lesser buffer width orscreening requirement in the B-2, B-2A and B-3A Districts basedupon mitigating factors such as walls, fencing, elevation change or existing vegetation. 


1  Major deciduous tree  
2  Minor deciduous trees  
2  Evergreen trees  
10  Shrubs  


1:277 

(4) 	
Buffer widths may be expanded and buffer planting may be increased if required by performance standards in Article VIII, the zoning district in Article III or by determination of the PlanningCommission based upon site conditions, intensity of proposed useor impact to adjacent uses. 

(5) 	
Spacing shall be based on the selected species or the conditions atthe site. 

(6) 	
Commercial, industrial, institutional, multifamily residential uses shall provide screening in the form of landscaping and fencingaround any proposed utility, storage or service areas and refuse/recycling areas. 

(7) 	
The location, size, species, design, method of installation andplanting area must meet requirements set forth in the Town Landscape Manual. 


B. 	Parking lot interior landscape. 
(1) 	
"Parking lot interior" is defined as the area located within theoutside edge of all paving area used for parking and vehicular access. 

(2) 	
Interior parking lot landscape is required for all developmentcontaining more than five spaces. Landscape area shall equal or exceed 8% of the interior area. 

(3) 	
One major deciduous tree shall be provided for every 10 parkingspaces. Any fraction of spaces below five may be disregarded. 

(4) 	
The location, size, species, design, method of installation andplanting area must meet requirements set forth in the Town Landscaping Manual. 


§ 165-60. Site protection. 
A. 	Topsoil preservation. Topsoil moved during the course of constructionshall be redistributed on all regraded surfaces so as to provide at least four inches of even cover to all disturbed areas of the development andshall be stabilized by seeding or planting. 
B. 	Removal of debris. All stumps and other tree parts, litter, brush, weeds, excess or scrap building materials or other debris shall be removedfrom the site and disposed of in accordance with the law. No tree stumps or portions of tree trunks or limbs shall be buried anywhere in the development. All dead or dying trees, standing or fallen, shall beremoved from the site. If trees and limbs are reduced to chips, theymay be used as mulch in landscaped areas, subject to approval by the Director of Public Works. 
C. Protection of existing planting. Tree and plant maintenance and protection provisions shall be incorporated in the required landscape 
1:278 

plan. Maximum effort should be made to save mature trees. No construction material, soil stockpile or equipment shall be placed within four feet of shrubs or within the critical root zone of trees designated on the landscape plan to be retained. Protective barriers ortree wells shall be installed around each plant and/or group of plants that are to remain on the site. Barriers shall not be supported by theplants they are protecting, but shall be self-supporting. They shall be aminimum of four feet high and constructed of a durable material that will last until construction is completed. Snow fences and silt fencesare examples of acceptable barriers. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
D. 	Slope plantings. Slope protection measures, when necessary, shall beincorporated in the required landscape plan. Landscaping of all cutsand fills and/or terraces shall be sufficient to prevent erosion, and all slopes steeper than one foot vertically to three feet horizontallyshall be planted with ground cover appropriate for the purpose and for soil conditions, water availability, and the environment. [Amended4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
E. 	Additional landscaping. In residential developments, besides the screening and street trees required, additional plantings or landscaping elements may be required throughout the subdivision where necessaryfor climate control, privacy, or other reasons in accordance with thelandscape plan approved by the Planning Commission. In nonresidential developments, all areas of the site not occupied bybuildings and required improvements shall be landscaped by theplanting of grass or other ground cover, shrubs, and trees as part of the landscape plan approved by the Planning Commission. [Amended4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
§ 165-61. Inspection and maintenance. 
A. 	The approved landscape plan must be implemented in its entirety priorto issuance of a final use and occupancy certificate for the project.Completion of all landscaping requirements shall be certified by the Zoning Administrator. 
B. 	Prior to issuance of a grading permit, the applicant shall provide aperformance guarantee in a form acceptable to the Town. The performance guarantee shall be in the amount of the estimated costof the landscaping, as provided on the approved landscape plan, andother common area improvements as determined by the Zoning Administrator. All improvements as shown on the approved landscapeplan shall be completed in accordance with the plan prior to releaseof the surety. The financial surety shall be included as part of the improvement guarantees specified in § 165-119 of the Town of Bel AirDevelopment Regulations. If required, this financial surety shall be heldfor a warranty period of one year or one growing season, whichever is longer, to ensure the integrity of the plan. The length of time designated 
1:279 

as the warranty period shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator at the time of use and occupancy issuance. [Amended 2-21-2012 byOrd. No. 748-12; 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
C. 	Prior to the end of the warranty period, all stakes, tree wrapping andassociated protective and/or supportive materials used in association with the approved landscape plan shall be removed. 
D. 	A reinspection shall be made prior to the release of the financial suretyreceived by the Department of Planning and Community Development for a landscape project. The Zoning Administrator or his/her designeewill inspect the condition of all landscaping on the site. All plantmaterial indicated by the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee as dead or dying shall be replaced by the property owner. A reinspectionof the site will be made to verify replacement of dead or dying materialprior to release of the financial surety. The property owner or builder, depending on conditions under which the lots were purchased, isresponsible for replacement of landscape material. Should he/she beunable or otherwise refuse to replace any landscape material as so required, the Zoning Administrator may utilize the surety in order tocomplete the landscaping requirement for the project. 
1:280 

ARTICLE IX 
Special Provisions and Modifications 
§ 165-62. Purpose. 
This article specifies zoning provisions which are general to all developments and establishes the basis for identifying, continuing andeliminating nonconforming uses, structures and site improvements. Also,in certain cases, usually as a result of the age or use of a property or building, it may not be possible to apply current zoning requirements. Forthis reason, special provisions and modifications outlined in this article areprovided and may be used, if applicable and necessary, to modify existing conditions. 
§ 165-63. Lot area requirements. 
The following general area requirements shall apply to all development: 
A. 	Street frontage required. 
(1) 	
Single-family detached dwellings shall abut for at least 25 feet on astreet as defined in Article XIV of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations, except as permitted in § 165-118D(17), Panhandle lots, of this chapter. Lot width is measured at the front building line. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 

(2) 	
Each unit in an attached dwellings project shall abut for a minimum of 18 feet on open space, courts or a group parking area. Adequateaccess shall be provided for servicing, fire protection and off-streetparking. Adequacy shall be determined by the Planning Commission. 

(3) 	
All lots in the B or M District shall abut for at least 25 feet on a street as herein defined. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 

(4) 	
Street frontage standards shall apply, except as permitted in ArticleXII of this Part 2. 


B. 	Required yards: general. 
(1) 	Required yard cannot be reduced. No lot shall be subdivided insuch a manner that it would result in creation of a lot that does not meet minimum size or provide for minimum setback requirementsrequired by this Part 2. If a lot is already less than the minimumrequired, it shall not be further reduced. Parcels set aside during the site plan or subdivision process to satisfy parking, open space or similar requirements of the Town of Bel Air DevelopmentRegulations shall be maintained for the stated purpose and shall not be included as part of parking, a yard, open space or a similarrequirement for another use or building. 
1:281 

(2) 	
Off-street parking and loading areas may occupy all or part of anyrequired yard or open space, provided location, setback, parking, loading, landscaping and buffering regulations required by thisPart 2 are not violated. 

(3) 	
Subdivision which creates a new buildable lot requires Planning Commission approval. Such division and/or combination shall notbe permitted if the proposed division and/or combination wouldcreate any lots which do not comply with the requirements of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. Consolidation ofexisting parcels, minor adjustment of property lines or additionof easements shall be reviewed and approved by the Zoning Administrator and Director of Public Works. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 


C. 	Yard requirements by type. 
(1) 	Front yard requirements. Front yard depth shall be measured fromthe required right-of-way line, as specified in Chapter 165, Part4, of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations, except in instances where modification or supplementation of these lines byany officially adopted street or highway widening or location planor record plat has occurred, in which case the latter shall control. Yard area abutting denied-access roadways shall not be considereda front yard. [Amended 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 783-18] 
(a) 	On corner lots, all yards of a lot that abut a street must comply with the applicable front yard setback. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
1:282 

§ 165-63 	GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-63 


(b) 

(c) 	
Front setback requirements for single-family dwellings may bereduced to 20 feet and all other dwelling units reduced to 15 feet when off-street group parking is provided and eachdwelling unit is designed without a garage or parking pad. 


1:283 

Setback in this case shall be measured from the back of curb. 
[Added 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 754-12] 
(2) 	Rear and side yard calculations. 
(a) 	
Where the rear or side yard opens on an alley or common area,1/2 of the alley or common area, not to exceed 20 feet, may be included as a portion of the rear or side yard, as the case maybe. 

(b) 	
Side yard and rear yard width may be varied where the sidewall of a building is not parallel or is broken or otherwiseirregular with the side lot line. In such case, the mean averagewidth of the required yard shall not be less than the minimum width; provided that such side yard shall not be narrower atany point than 75% of the required width. Decks, bay windowsor similar architectural features shall not be included in the calculation allowance. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 

(c) 	
Side yard setback requirements for single-family attached and multifamily units within 100 feet of the lot line of a single-family detached residence or vacant residential lot shall be30 feet and shall include a landscaped buffer as outlined in Article VIII along the lot line, as applicable. No vehicle accessmay penetrate the buffer. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 

(d) 	
Development of multi-lot deeded parcels shall meet setbackrequirements of this Part 2 through consolidation of such lotsthrough the subdivision process. Additions to existing residential structures, which cross existing interior lot lines,shall require lot consolidation or recordation of easement agreements to satisfy setback requirements. 

(e) 	
Rear yard setback requirements for single-family attached andmultifamily units within 100 feet of the lot line of a single-family residence or vacant residential lot shall be 50 feet and shall include a landscaped buffer as outlined in Article VIIIalong the lot line. No vehicle access may penetrate the buffer.


[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
D. 	Height requirements. 
(1) 	Height measurement. Building height shall be measured from theaverage point of grade to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs and to the deckline for mansard roofs and to the average heightbetween the eaves and the ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. 
1:284 


Figure 165-63.II 
(2) 	
Stories. The ground story or first story of any building is considered the lowest story, the floor of which is not more than 3 1/2 feet belowthe average contact of the adjoining ground level at the exteriorwalls of the building. 

(3) 	
Height bulk transition requirements. To reduce the apparent bulkof buildings 40 feet or more in height, a distinct base shall beprovided at ground level using articulation and materials such as stone, masonry or decorative concrete. The top of the buildingshould be treated with a distinct outline, with elements such as a projecting parapet, cornice or projection. A height transition or step down is required adjacent to residential development. 


§ 165-64. Special provisions. 
A. 	Use of existing lots of record. In any district where dwellings are permitted, single-family dwellings may be constructed or altered onany lot or plot of official record which does not meet minimum districtlot size or width as of the date the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations are adopted, subject to the following requirements: 
[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
(1) 	
The sum of the side yard widths of any such lot or plot shall be a minimum of 30% of the width of the lot, but in no case shall any oneside yard be less than 10% of the width of the lot. 

(2) 	
The depth of the rear yard of any such lot shall be a minimum of 20% of the depth of the lot, but in no case shall it be less than 10feet. 

(3) 	
Adequate street frontage shall be available as stated in Article IX, § 165-63A, of this Part 2. 

(4) 	
Division and/or combination of existing lots shall not be permittedif the proposed division and/or combination would create any lots which do not comply with the requirements of the Town of Bel AirDevelopment Regulations. 


B. 	Front yard modifications. 
(1) 	In any residential district, the required depth of the front yardmay be modified. This may occur if at least two front yards areless than that required for the district on lots which are on the 
1:285 

C. 
D. 
E. 
same frontage as the property in question and within 250 feet ofthe property in question. In such case, the depth shall not be less than the minimum depth of any existing front yard having the samefrontage. However, the depth of a front yard on any lot shall be atleast 10 feet. 
(2) 	
Front yard setback requirements for single-family attached unitsmay be modified to a minimum front yard depth of 25 feet if theunits within a building block are designed with a minimum offset of two feet. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 

(3) 	
Decks, balconies, porches and canopies. Decks, balconies, unenclosed porches and canopies may project into the front yard adistance of 25% of the minimum required setback for the district or the established front yard setback for the subdivision or neighborhood, as applicable. Canopies/awnings must maintain aneight-foot clearance above the sidewalk.72 

Side and rear yard modifications. 

(1) 	
Decks, balconies, porches and canopies. Decks, balconies, unenclosed porches and canopies may project into the side and/or rear yard a distance of 25% of the minimum setback for the property. 

Other exceptions to yard requirements. The following architecturalfeatures may project into required yards as hereinafter set forth: 

(1) 	
Cornices, eaves or other architectural features may project a distance not exceeding two feet, six inches. 

(2) 	
Fire escapes may project a distance not exceeding four feet, six inches. 

(3) 	
Necessary landings may project a distance not to exceed six feet,provided that such landing shall not extend above the entrance floor of the building, except for a railing as required by building code. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 

(4) 	
Uncovered stairs, as necessary, to access the primary and firesafety-related entrances to a unit. 

(5) 	
Bay windows and chimneys may project a distance not to exceedthree feet, provided that such features do not occupy, in the aggregate, more than 1/3 of the length of the wall on which they are located. 


Height modifications. The building height limitations of this Part 2 shallnot apply to the following: 
72.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(4), regarding filling station pumps and pump islands,which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17. 
1:286 
(1) 	
Accessory roof structures designed to house stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building, provided that objectionable views of suchequipment are completely screened from all adjacent properties. 

(2) 	
Fire or parapet walls, towers, steeples, flagpoles, silos, smokestacks, masts, water tanks, monuments or other accessorystructures that project into the air. 

(3) 	
Places of public assembly in churches, schools, libraries, hospitals and other permitted public and semipublic buildings, provided that,for each three feet by which the height of such building exceedsthe maximum height otherwise permitted in the district, its side and rear yards shall be increased in width or depth by an additionalfoot over the side and rear yards required for the highest buildingotherwise permitted in the district. 

(4) 	
Bulkheads, cupolas, elevator equipment enclosures, water tanks,equipment containment screens and structures, and clearstorywindow structures and skylights, provided that no linear dimension of any such structure exceeds 20% of the corresponding lineardimension of the building. 

(5) 	
Towers and monuments, fire towers, hose towers, cooling towers, grain elevators, gas holding tanks or other structures used in municipal or manufacturing uses where such use requires a greater height, provided that all parts of such structures above the heights otherwise permitted in the district shall not occupymore than 25% of the area of the lot and shall be at least 50 feet from every lot line excluding a street right-of-way line. [Amended4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 

(6) 	
Public utility buildings, provided that, for each three feet of theheight of such building that exceeds the maximum height otherwise permitted in the district, its side and rear yards shall be increasedin width and depth by an additional foot over the side and rearyards required for the highest building otherwise permitted in that district. 


§ 165-65. Traffic visibility. 
A. 	Except in instances where traffic visibility is not impacted due to one-way traffic patterns, no sign, fence, wall, hedge, planting, structure,unit or other temporary or permanent obstruction to vision, extendingto a height in excess of three feet above the established street grade, shall be erected, planted, placed or maintained within the sight triangleof an intersection. 
1:287 

Nonobstruction Area Requirements by Street Classification 
(measured along right-of-way) 

"A" (Distance in Feet)Local Collector Arterial 
Required Setback Street Street Street 

25  Local street  25  30  40  
30  Collector street  25  30  40  
40  Arterial street  25  30  40  

(1) Where an intersection is formed with a state road, state sight distance criteria shall also be applied. 

Figure
165-65.I 

B. 	Poles, posts and guys for streetlights and other utility services shall notbe considered obstructions to vision within the meaning of this section. 
C. 	The Planning Commission shall have the authority to require additional setback requirements at intersections where the configuration of thespecific intersection creates sight distance limitations. 
§ 165-66. Nonconforming uses, buildings or structures. 
If, prior to the adoption of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations,a property was being used for a then-lawful purpose that the Town ofBel Air Development Regulations prohibit and render nonconforming, the property owner shall have a vested right to continue the nonconforming use. However, it is the purpose of the Town of Bel Air DevelopmentRegulations to secure the gradual or eventual elimination of nonconforming uses. To further this goal, no expansion or change of a nonconforming useshall be permitted unless authorized by the Board of Appeals as providedfor herein and in Article XII of this Part 2. 
1:288 

A. Continuance, extension, enlargement and abandonment. 

(1) 


(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 


Any building or structure which is lawfully existing under the terms of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations at the time ofits enactment, or at the time of any amendment thereto, may beused as provided by the regulations, even though the building or structure does not conform with the size, setback, parking,loading, landscaping or performance standards of the Town of BelAir Development Regulations, or any amendment thereto, for the zoning district or overlay district in which the building or structureis located. 
In the event a nonconforming use ceases for a period of one year or more, the nonconforming use shall be deemed abandoned, andfuture use of the property shall comply with the requirementsof the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. The casual, temporary or illegal use of land or a structure does not establishthe existence of a nonconforming use. 
Nothing herein contained shall require any alteration in the building or structure, or part thereof, for which final approval ofits plans, construction, size or use have been granted prior to theenactment of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations or any amendment thereto. Notwithstanding the above, in the event abuilding permit has not been issued for a building or structure, thepreviously granted final approvals of the use, building or structure shall continue to be valid for the period originally granted. 
Alterations of any building that reduce the total square footageof the nonconformity may be permitted by right. If 50% or more of the square footage of an existing nonconforming building isdemolished, any new construction shall be performed in conformance with the standards specified in the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations for the zoning district in which thisbuilding is located. 
No existing building or structure devoted to a nonconforming use, in the district where it is located, shall be enlarged, extended,reconstructed, substituted or structurally altered unless authorizedby the Board of Appeals. 
In the case of an extension or enlargement of a structure, thefollowing shall apply: The Board of Appeals may authorize theextension or enlargement of the nonconformity of a building or structure, with or without conditions, provided that: [Amended4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
(a) 	The enlargement or extension does not exceed 35% of the gross square footage of the nonconforming area in use at thetime of the creation of the nonconformity. 
1:289 

(b) 	
The enlargement or extension does not violate the height orcoverage regulations for the district. 

(c) 	
The enlargement or extension would not adversely affect adjacent properties, traffic patterns or the surroundingneighborhood. 


(7) 	In the B-2, B-2A and B-3A Districts: 
(a) 	
The provisions of Article III establish thresholds at which aproposed expansion of a nonconforming structure must comply with current requirements. Where there is a conflict between§§ 165-30, 165-31 and 165-33 and this § 165-66, the formershall apply. 

(b) 	
Board of Appeals approval for expansion of a nonconformingstructure in accordance with this section shall be required onlyif the proposed enlargement or extension: 


[1] 	Is subject to current standards according to § 165-78; and 
[2] 	Does not lessen or reduce the extent of the nonconformity. 
B. 	Replacement of damaged buildings and structures. 
(1) 	
Any nonresidential nonconforming building or structure, or groupor assemblage of buildings constructed as a total entity undercommon ownership, which becomes damaged by less than 50% of the fair market value may be restored or reconstructed to itsformer dimensions on the same lot with the same nonconforminguse, provided that the restoration or reconstruction is completed within two years of the date of the damage. 

(2) 	
Any residential nonconforming building or structure that is damaged or destroyed may be reconstructed to its former dimensions on the same lot and with the same nonconforming use,provided that the reconstruction is completed within two years ofthe date of the damage. 


1:290 

ARTICLE X 
Accessory and Temporary Uses 
§ 165-67. Purpose. 
Certain uses, whether permitted as of right, by special development or by special exception, have singular, individual characteristics which make itnecessary, in the public interest, to specify regulations in greater detailthan would be feasible in the individual use regulations for each zoning district. This section therefore provides such regulations for accessory usesand temporary uses. These requirements are intended to meet the economicdevelopment and housing objectives outlined in Articles IX and X of the Town of Bel Air's Comprehensive Plan. 
§ 165-68. Accessory uses. 
Generally, except as otherwise restricted in Article III, Establishment and Regulation of Zoning Districts, accessory buildings and uses customarilyincidental to any principal permitted use or authorized special exception orspecial development shall be permitted in any district in connection with the principal use, subject to the following: 
A. 	General. 
(1) 	
No accessory use or structure, except fences, shall be located within any recorded easement area unless approved by the Director of Public Works. 

(2) 	
Uses generally prohibited or not permitted as principal permitted uses in a district shall not be permitted as accessory uses. 

(3) 	
No enclosure for refuse/recycling shall be located within the front yard setback required in the district. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 

(4) 	
A small wind energy system used to generate electricity of lessthan 100 kw through a wind turbine conversion system shall be considered an accessory use in all zoning districts. The wind towershall be set back from all property lines, rights-of-way and overhead utility lines a distance equal to the height of the tower plus 20 feet. The tower cannot be readily accessible to the publicfor a minimum height of 12 feet. The appearance of the wind generator, blades and tower must blend into the existing environment. The wind generator shall comply with the state-regulated Noise Ordinance. [Added 11-25-2011 by Ord. No. 744-11] 

(5) 	
A solar energy system used to provide electrical power throughphotovoltaic cells and related accessories or harness thermal energy for heating water or air using thermal collectors or similar structures shall be considered an accessory use in all zoning districts. Ground-mounted systems must adhere to accessory 


1:291 


building requirements and must be screened with appropriatelandscape from any right-of-way or adjacent residential property. Structurally attached solar collectors cannot project verticallyabove the peak of a sloped roof and cannot project more than five feet above a flat roof. [Added 11-25-2011 by Ord. No. 744-11] 
B. 	Residential districts. 
(1) 	
Accessory structures shall be no more than 1 1/2 stories or 20 feet in height, whichever is less. 

(2) 	
No accessory use or building shall be erected in any required courtor in any yard other than a side or rear yard, except as provided hereinafter. Accessory uses or buildings shall be distanced at leastsix feet from alley lines and at least three feet from lot lines ofadjoining lots. If approved by the Zoning Administrator, cluster mailbox structures may be permitted in the front yard. 

(3) 	
Accessory buildings, except stables, may be erected as a part ofthe principal building or, if at least six feet therefrom, may be connected thereto by a breezeway or similar structure, in whichcase it shall be considered to be a part of the principal building,provided all yard and Fire Code73 requirements for a principal building are satisfied. Open carports may be erected over drivewaypads if screening is provided and if located at least five feet fromthe lot line. 

(4) 	
Satellite receiving dishes in excess of 24 inches in diameter mustbe ground-mounted and shall require a building permit in accordance with the Town Building Code.74 All satellite receiving dishes shall be treated as any other accessory structure with thesame setback and yard requirements. All dishes shall be properlyscreened from view with landscaping or fencing, as appropriate and as determined by the Zoning Administrator. Dishes less thanor equal to 24 inches in diameter may be mounted on the principal structure or an accessory unit on the lot. [Amended 11-25-2011 by Ord. No. 744-11] 

(5) 	
An accessory use or structure(s) shall not exceed 50% of the squarefootage of habitable space, nor exceed the height of the principal use or structure. However, a minimum of 480 square feet may be permitted regardless of the size of the principal structure.


[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
(6) 	Pens and runs for domestic animals shall not be located within 50 feet of an adjacent residential primary structure. Kennels shall bepermitted only as special exceptions. Honeybee hives may also be permitted on parcels with a minimum size of 1/2 acre providedhoney is not produced for commercial purposes. On properties of 
73.Editor's Note: See Ch. 204, Fire Prevention. 74.Editor's Note: See Ch. 145, Building Construction. 
1:292 
(7) 
(8) 

(9) 

(10) 


two acres or more, pens, barns or stalls for farm animals shall bepermitted, provided that the number of animals shall not exceed one per acre, the animals are contained within a fenced area, andthe following minimum setbacks for principal and accessory uses are met: [Amended 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 754-12; 4-3-2017by Ord. No. 780-17] 
Setback From Adjacent 
Residential Primary Structure 
Number of Animals (feet) 
1 to 2 100 
3 to 10 150 
11 or more 200 
Residential recreational facilities, such as swimming pools and tennis courts, shall be located not less than six feet from anyside or rear lot line. For community pools and tennis courts, theedge of the facility shall be located not less than 50 feet from any residential unit or side or rear lot line. 
Recreational vehicles, campers, trailers and similar equipmentshould be stored in a garage or similar enclosed structure. Open storage shall be permitted in side and rear yard areas. Openstorage on driveways may be permitted for short-term storage ormaintenance purposes for a period not to exceed a total of seven days within any ninety-day period. No living, sleeping or otheroccupancy of a recreational vehicle, camper or trailer shall bepermitted for more than seven days within any ninety-day period. Except as stated above, storage of any recreational vehicle, camper or trailer is prohibited in the front yard area. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
No commercial vehicles or commercial equipment shall be parkedor stored on any lot in any residential district, except when suchvehicle is actually engaged in loading and unloading passengers, merchandise or materials. This subsection shall not apply to apublic utilities truck engaged in repairs or to a truck parked orbeing used during the construction or renovation process of a residential building. 
One inoperative or untagged motor vehicle may be parked or stored on any lot of less than two acres for a continuous period of no more than six months. Two inoperative or untagged motorvehicles may be parked or stored on any lot of two acres or morefor a continuous period of no more than six months. Open storage requires a permit issued by the Department of Planning andCommunity Development. Inoperative or untagged vehicles which 
1:293 

are stored completely within an enclosed building are not subjectto these restrictions. 
(11)No more than four yard sales per year shall be conducted on aresidential property in any residential district. 
(12)Temporary storage containers or trailers may not be placed on grass or pervious surface. No such storage may be located on aresidential parcel for more than 15 days unless permitted by theZoning Administrator based on hardship or practical difficulty not caused by the property owner. [Added 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 783-18] 
C. 	Business and industrial districts. Customary accessory uses are permitted in commercial or industrial districts, including the following: 
(1) 	
The storage of goods normally carried in stock, used in, or produced by commercial or industrial uses, unless the storage of particular goods is prohibited under the commercial or industrialdistrict regulations. No refuse or recycling enclosures or storageshall be permitted within the front yard, and all enclosures and storage facilities must be effectively screened as stipulated inArticle VIII of this Part 2. Storage facilities shall be located withina fully enclosed area, and such facilities shall not include tractor-trailer bodies. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 

(2) 	
Satellite receiving dishes may be installed on roofs in the business and industrial districts, and those over 24 inches in diameter shall require a building permit for installation. [Amended 11-25-2011 by Ord. No. 744-11] 

(3) 	
Incidental repair facilities, unless expressly prohibited under thecommercial or industrial regulations, may be permitted by theZoning Administrator. 

(4) 	
Canopies and awnings may be permitted with a minimum eight-footclearance from the lowest edge of the canopy/awning to sidewalkor grade level, whichever is applicable. 

(5) 	
In commercial and industrial districts, one inoperative or untaggedmotor vehicle may be parked or stored on any lot of less than twoacres for a continuous period of no more than six months. Two inoperative or untagged motor vehicles may be parked or storedon any lot of two acres or more for a continuous period of nomore than six months. Open untagged vehicle storage requires a permit issued by the Department of Planning and CommunityDevelopment. Vehicles that are stored within a completely enclosedbuilding or on a lot that is approved for motor vehicle sales, service and storage are permitted as of right. 


1:294 

§ 165-69. Fences and walls. 
Fences, walls and hedges may be located in required yards as follows: 
A. 	Fences, walls and hedges not exceeding four feet in height above theelevation of the surface of the ground may be located in any yard orcourt unless the property is located at a roadway intersection, in which case, the requirements noted in § 165-65 of this Part 2 shall apply.Ornamental gates, fence post caps or finials may exceed the height limitby no more than 12 inches. 
B. 	Fences and walls not exceeding six feet in height above the elevation ofthe surface of the ground may be located in any rear yard or side yardarea for a residential use. Ornamental gates, fence post caps or finials may exceed the height limit by no more than 12 inches. If the propertyabuts a business or industrial district, a fence or wall, not to exceed eight feet, may be erected. [Amended 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 783-18] 
C. 	Business and industrial uses may locate fences or walls, not to exceed10 feet in height, in any yard area if necessary for safety or security reasons and said reasons are documented to the satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator. [Amended 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 783-18] 
D. 	In no instance shall barbed wire fencing be used alone or in combination with other fence materials, except when the Zoning Administrator determines, through the administrative waiver process,that, due to the character or use of a parcel, the additional security ofsuch fencing is necessary. 
§ 165-70. Handicap ramps. 
Handicap ramps shall be provided as required by the Americans With Disabilities Act75 and applicable Town building regulations. 
§ 165-71. Temporary uses. [Amended 1-7-2013 by Ord. No. 758-12;4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
A. 	Temporary uses shall be permitted as specified in Articles III, VII and XI of this Part 2. A permit may be issued by the Zoning Administrator ifall the specific requirements as stated below are satisfied: 
(1) 	Performance standards. 
(a) 	
A temporary use permit application shall be filed specifying theuse, dates and hours of operation of the activity/event. 

(b) 	
Adequate arrangements for temporary sanitary facilities must be approved by the State or County Department of Health andMental Hygiene, if applicable. 


75.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq. 
1:295 
(c) 	
No permanent or temporary lighting shall be installed withoutan electrical permit. 

(d) 	
Adequate off-street parking shall be provided, and a stabilizeddrive to the parking areas shall be maintained. 

(e) 	
The site shall be cleared of all debris at the end of the event and cleared of all temporary structures within three daysthereafter. 

(f) 	
It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to guide traffic to parking areas and to provide adequate parking control. 

(g) 	
The applicant shall be responsible for adequate crowd control. 

(h) 	
Any signs posted shall conform to all applicable sign restrictions for the district. 

(i) 	
The use/event shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation. 

(j) 	
A description of means to provide any necessary sanitation/maintenance provisions shall be provided to the reviewingagency for approval. 

(k) 	
A certificate of insurance shall be provided to the reviewing agency. 


B. 	Modular classrooms, modular sales/construction office/sales trailers. 
(1) 	
Such modular facilities shall be subject to performance standards as specified below. A permit may be issued by the ZoningAdministrator if applicable requirements are satisfied. 

(a) 	Performance standards. 
[1] 	Modular classrooms. 
[a] 	The applicant shall fully describe the proposed use/ activity to the satisfaction of the reviewing agency,including the means to prevent interference with traffic, both pedestrian and vehicular, and shall specify the precise time during which the use shall bein operation. 
[b] 	The applicant shall specify the method for and ensure that removal of trash and clearing of debris andrestoration of the site is to be accomplished. 
[c] 	The unit shall be totally removed from the site and returned to the exact previous appearance once classroom use is abandoned. 
1:296 

[d] 	Setback requirements for the district shall apply.However, in no case shall the setback be less than 10 feet. 
[2] 	Sales/construction trailers. 
[a] 	The applicant shall fully describe the proposed use/ activity to the satisfaction of the reviewing agency,including the means to prevent interference with traffic, both pedestrian and vehicular, and shall specify the precise time during which the use shall bein operation. 
[b] 	The applicant shall specify the method for and ensure that removal of trash and clearing of debris andrestoration of the site is to be accomplished. 
[c] 	The unit shall be totally removed from the site and returned to the exact previous appearance within thetime frame specified by the reviewing agency. 
[d] 	If longer duration than 18 months is required, the Board of Appeals may approve the use for no morethan a one-year period for good cause shown. 
[e] 	Modular sales or construction trailers shall be removed within 15 days of completion of constructionor within 18 months of installation, whichever is less. 

C. 	
Outdoor promotional event/sales event/yard sale. 


(1) 	Such events shall be subject to performance standards as specifiedbelow. A permit may be issued by the Zoning Administrator if allapplicable requirements are satisfied. 
(a) 	Performance standards. 
[1] 	General. 
[a] 	With the exception of special promotional or sales events requiring street closure, no goods shall belocated closer than six feet to the curb. No goods ormerchandise shall be displayed within the intersection sight triangle, as defined in § 165-65 of this Part 2. 
[b] 	Any proposed display area shall be limited to 10% ofthe lot area or 500 square feet, whichever is greater. 
[2] 	Promotional event. 
[a] 	Events shall be permitted for a maximum of 30 days ina calendar year. 
[3] Yard sale. 

1:297 

[a] 	Private yard sales shall not be held for more than fourcontinuous days or more than four separate times in a calendar year. 
[4] 	Outdoor sale event. 
[a] 	The number and type of motor vehicle sales shall be determined by the provisions in Chapter 272, Itenerant Dealers, Peddlers and Solicitors. 
[b] 	Christmas tree sales (nonprofit organizations) shall be permitted for a maximum period of 45 days. 
[c] 	Temporary outdoor sales events sponsored by for-profit groups or individuals other than the established on-site business, as provided in Article XI of this Part2, may be approved for no more than 14 days percalendar year. 
[d] 	Tent sales and outdoor events sponsored by for-profitgroups or individuals shall be permitted in business orindustrial districts only. 
[e] 	Yard sales in residential areas are exempt from theprovisions of this section. 
[f] 	A temporary banner not to exceed 36 square feet is permitted during the period of the sale event. [Added4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 783-18] 
[5] 	Snowball stands. 
[a] 	The applicant shall fully describe the proposed use/activity to the satisfaction of the reviewing agency,including the means to prevent interference with traffic, both pedestrian and vehicular, and shall specify the precise time during which the use shall bein operation. 
[b] 	Hours of operation shall be specified. 
[c] 	Trash and debris shall be removed from premises, andlots shall be cleared of same daily. 
D. 	Sidewalk cafe. 
(1) 	
This section is only applicable to sidewalk sales and service in thepublic right-of-way. Exterior dining or bar service on a lot record are addressed in § 165-53I(2)(i). 

(a) Performance standards. 
[1] 	Outdoor sidewalk cafe. 
1:298 

[a] 	No building exit, entrance, or fire escape shall be obstructed by cafe fixtures, seating or landscape materials. 
[b] 	Lighting, except for existing building lighting, shall berestricted to tabletops and shall be very low intensity. 
[c] 	Planters, if displayed, shall be in scale with the spaceof the adjacent sidewalk and the adjacent building.Materials shall be compatible with the adjacent building facade. 
[d] 	Sidewalk cafes shall be open to adjacent walks and may be partially enclosed by fences, planters, barriers, lattice, railings or ropes of any type. 
[e] 	The outdoor sidewalk cafe area shall be restricted to areas with a minimum sidewalk width of eight feet. A five-foot sidewalk area must be maintained to allow adequate pedestrian circulation. 
[f] 	Stacking of tables and chairs on sidewalks for storage is prohibited. 
[g] 	Proof of liability insurance and submission of an agreement to hold the Town harmless in case of accidents, losses, claims, etc., is required. 
[h] 	Submission of a detailed plan and design for thefacility outlining plans for operation or management, proposed use, materials, colors and signage shall besubmitted for Zoning Administrator for review andapproval. 
[i] 	A description of proposed hours of operation, servicesto be provided, maintenance, cleaning and storageplans shall be submitted for Zoning Administrator review and approval. 
[j] 	Should seating area extend in front of adjacentproperty, written permission from the property owner is required. 

E. 	
Itinerant dealer, peddler and solicitor. 


(1) 	Sales from any cart, wagon, trailer, or vehicle; any distribution of samples, pamphlets or sales in a public place; and any personseeking sales by going place to place must adhere to requirementsof the Town Code, Chapter 272, Itinerant Dealers, Peddlers and Solicitors, which shall be satisfied prior to operation. 
1:299 

ARTICLE XI 
Permits and Procedures 
§ 165-72. Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide a guide which outlines the general procedural requirements for land use, zoning and annexation requests inBel Air. These procedures are detailed in an effort to assist the public andto simplify the development process as recommended in the Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan. 
§ 165-73. General procedural requirements. 
A. 	Land use. The use of property may not be substantially changed, substantial clearing, grading or excavation may not be commenced,and buildings and structures may not be constructed, erected, moved,demolished or substantially altered, except in accordance with procedures and permit requirements specified by the Town of Bel AirDevelopment Regulations. The required permits and procedures maybe determined through review of Article III, Establishment and Regulation of Zoning Districts, Article IV, Overlay Districts, Article VI,Environmental Regulations, and Part 4, Subdivision of Land, of theseregulations and other applicable requirements or regulations. 
B. 	Zoning cases. 
(1) 	
Any application in a zoning case, and any amendment thereto, shallcontain a specific explanation outlining the reasons or basis for granting the request. 

(a) 	
The applicant shall submit with the application the names and addresses of all persons or entities having any legal or equitable interest in the property which is the subject of thezoning case. 

(b) 	
This requirement, as to entities owning the property which is subject to the zoning case, shall include the disclosure ofshareholders owning more than 5% of the stock in a corporation, except those corporations which are listed and regularly traded on a recognized stock exchange, any partnerof any partnership entity, and members of a limited-liability company. 



(2) 	
The record in all zoning cases shall include the application, alldocuments or communications submitted for the consideration bythe Department of Planning and Community Development and/or of the body hearing the case, the recorded testimony received atany hearing, any reports to or from any public officials or agencyconcerning the application, and the final decision of the Department of Planning and Community Development and/or bodyhearing the case. 


1:301 

(3) 
The burden of proof in any zoning case shall be upon the applicant. 


(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

(7) 

(8) 

(9) 

(10) 



The final decision in a zoning case shall be based solely upon record evidence and shall be supported by specific written findingsof fact and law. 
The votes or abstentions thereon of all members of any reviewing bodies deciding the case must be recorded. 
No person shall influence or attempt to influence, directly or indirectly, any member of the deciding body in arriving at a decision in any pending zoning case, except as that person mayappear before the deciding body at a public hearing and as a partyor as a representative or witness on behalf thereof. 
To ensure compliance herewith, any person contacting a member ofa deciding body in violation of Subsection B(6) shall be immediatelyinformed of the provisions of this section. 
Any person who knowingly and intentionally violates any of theprovisions of this section shall be guilty of a municipal infractionand subject to penalties for same as specified in § 165-20D of this Part 2. 
Unless otherwise provided in the Town of Bel Air DevelopmentRegulations, approval of a zoning case shall be effective for 24 months from the date of issuance. Applications for an extensionshall be in writing to the Department of Planning and CommunityDevelopment and received prior to the expiration of the approval period. An application for extension shall be considered by theoriginal approval body/bodies, even though, at the time of suchconsideration, the approval period may have expired. Only one twelve-month extension of the original approval shall be granted.Whenever litigation is commenced challenging a zoning case orseeking an injunction prohibiting construction or similarly prohibiting the issuance of a building permit, the term of theapproval shall be automatically extended so that the developershall have a twenty-four-month period, excluding the period of the litigation, including appeals, in which to proceed with the approvedproject. Should construction cease for a period of 12 months beforea project is issued a final use and occupancy certificate, the zoning approval for the unfinished portion of the project shall expireunless an extension is granted in accordance with the provisions of this section. [Amended 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 754-12] 
Decisions of the Zoning Administrator in enforcement of the Townof Bel Air Development Regulations and decisions of the Historic Preservation Commission may be appealed to the Bel Air Board ofAppeals. Special development, special exception, variance, HistoricPreservation Commission decisions and Zoning reclassification decisions may be appealed to the Circuit Court of Harford County 
1:302 

in the manner set forth in the Land Use Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, as amended from time to time. [Amended4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
(11)Zoning approvals/permits may be revoked by the Board of TownCommissioners in accordance with § 165-20E for failure to comply with conditions of approval or at such time as the approval periodlapses. 
(12)Substantially identical requests shall not be resubmitted for a period of one year after a final decision denying the application. 
§ 165-74. Preliminary conference. 
A. 	A preliminary conference with the Zoning Administrator and Director of Public Works is advisable for all new development or substantialimprovements in the Town of Bel Air. Before undertaking the preparation of any plat of a property or taking action to develop property in any manner, the applicant or representative should consultwith the Zoning Administrator and Director of Public Works to ascertainthe zoning, subdivision, or stormwater management requirements or other regulations applicable, given the nature and location of theproposed development. The applicant shall provide, at the time ofthe preliminary conference, a sketch of the property, to approximate scale, showing the boundaries, general topography, important physicalfeatures, proposed stormwater management options, and other significant information, as well as his/her ideas or general intentions for the development of the property. The Zoning Administrator and Director of Public Works shall assist the applicant by furnishinginformation and advice to promote the best coordination between the plans of the applicant and the requirements and objectives of theTown. The Zoning Administrator and Director of Public Works will notundertake to design the proposed development or to perform other services for which a professional land planner should be more properlyengaged. 
B. 	The preliminary conference review shall include consideration of the appropriateness of the proposed development for the area and zoningdistrict within which the development is proposed. SpecialDevelopment Regulations applicable to the proposal, as described by the applicant, shall be identified. The need for rezoning, specialdevelopment, special exception, variance approval, a traffic impactanalysis (TIA) and/or a Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan amendment shall also be ascertained so as to promote the best coordinationbetween the plans of the applicant and those of the Town. If a TIA isrequired, the Zoning Administrator and the Director of Public Works shall assist the applicant in determining the scope of the TIA at thisconference. If a TIA is required, it shall include a study of intersectioncapacity for study intersections, as well as an analysis of street operational issues on streets adjacent to the site and to the nearest 
1:303 

collector or higher-functioning classification road, as measured fromeach point of entrance to the site. 
§ 165-75. Concept plan review. 
A. 	Concept plan review shall be required for all proposed commercial,industrial and institutional development in excess of 5,000 square feet, and residential developments including 25 units or more. Developersof other types of development may request concept plan review. Theconcept plan review brings representatives from all reviewing agencies together to assist developers through the zoning and permit processes.
[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
B. 	The applicant shall provide a sketch of the property, to approximate scale, showing the boundaries, general topography, important physicalfeatures, site and resource mapping, protection and conservation strategies, including preliminary stormwater management/ environmental site design, and other significant information at the timeof concept plan review. The Concept Plan Review Committee shall assistthe applicant by furnishing information and advice to promote the best coordination between the plans of the applicant and the requirementsand objectives of the Town. Meeting minutes and any pertinentcommittee recommendations will be forwarded to the applicant and all reviewing agencies. 
C. 	The Concept Plan Review Committee will not design the proposeddevelopment or perform other services for which a professional land planner should be more properly engaged. The concept plan review willprovide the following assistance to the developer: 
(1) 	
Evaluate the appropriateness of the proposed development for the area and zoning district in which it is located. 

(2) 	
Identify any special Development Regulations or applicable Boardof Appeals action required. 

(3) 	
Identify the need for rezoning, special development approval and/or Bel Air Comprehensive Plan amendment. 

(4) 	
Identify all pertinent reviewing agencies and application procedures relevant to the proposed development. 

(5) 	
Provide feedback on design, infrastructure (roads, water, sewer,stormwater management, etc.), applicable permitting and hearing processes and any assistance programs, if applicable. 

(6) 	
Ensure that all important resources have been mapped and protected and all opportunities to enhance natural areas have been explored early in the design process. 


1:304 

(7) 	
Assist in establishing the footprint of the proposed project andevaluation of the relationship between proposed impervious surfaces and existing natural conditions. 

(8) 	
Provide direction for preparation of detailed designs, computationsand grading plans for concept stormwater management plan review and approval prior to preliminary site plan review. 


§ 165-76. Preliminary plan review. 
A. 	Application for all new development or substantial improvement or change in the Town of Bel Air shall include a completed preliminaryplan checklist, as shown in Appendix A,76 and a preliminary plan, drawnto scale, depicting the shape and size of the lot upon which application is being made. All dimensions on the plan relating to the location andsize of the lot to be built upon shall be based upon an actual survey. Theapplicant shall submit an engineered site plan, landscape plan, lighting plan, a forest conservation plan as required in Chapter 216, ForestConservation, of the Bel Air Town Code, and a stormwater managementplan as required by Chapter 405, Stormwater Management, of the Bel Air Town Code for the Zoning Administrator's review. Applicationshould include all pertinent background information, a written statement discussing the proposed use and any proposed accessory uses. The plan shall fulfill all requirements itemized on the preliminaryplan checklist. All proposed projects to be reviewed by the PlanningCommission shall be accompanied by colored renderings prepared by an architect and/or firm licensed in the State of Maryland showing allfour sides of the building elevation. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No.780-17; 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 783-18] 
B. 	The preliminary plan, after having been determined to be completeby the Zoning Administrator and the Director of Public Works, shallbe reviewed for conformance with the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. The plan will then be processed as follows: 
(1) 	
The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the plan iscomplete and in conformance with checklist requirements. 

(2) 	
If application is complete, plans are forwarded and reviewed byappropriate Town, county and state agencies. These may include,but are not limited to, the Department of Planning and Community Development, Public Works, Soil Conservation Service, Fire Department, Harford County, Fire Marshal's Office, and, whereapplicable, the State Highway Administration. The Zoning Administrator receives and coordinates various agency responsesfor submission to reviewing bodies. 

(3) 	
If applicable, plans are forwarded to the Town Planning Commission for review at a public meeting, along with a staff 


76.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter. 
1:305 
report prepared by the Zoning Administrator, including, but notlimited to, pertinent background information, concept plan minutes, if applicable, any review agency comments and otherdata, as appropriate. For historically designated properties,Historic Preservation Commission review is required. 
(4) 	
The Planning Commission may approve, deny or approve with conditions a preliminary plan. If approved with conditions, thePlanning Commission's approval letter shall state the basis for any required improvements. At any time, it may table any matter forfurther discussion or to acquire additional information. A decisionshall be rendered within 60 days of the last Planning Commission review, unless an extension is agreed upon, in writing, by all partiesinvolved in the hearing, or the plan shall be deemed approved.The Zoning Administrator may approve, deny or approve with conditions, a preliminary plan for buildings of less than 2,000square feet in area, or expansion of less than 5% of the existingstructure. If approved with conditions, the Zoning Administrator's approval letter shall state the basis for any required conditions.A decision shall be rendered within 60 days of the date of thesubmission of a complete preliminary plan to the Zoning Administrator, unless an extension is agreed upon, in writing, bythe Zoning Administrator, the applicant and property owner or the plan shall be deemed approved. [Amended 11-25-2011 by Ord.No. 744-11; 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 

(5) 	
Approval of the preliminary site plan or subdivision plan shallbe set forth in a letter from the Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator. This letter will include any conditions of approvaland must be countersigned by the applicant and returned to theDepartment of Planning within 60 calendar days indicating acceptance of terms. [Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-1777] 

(6) 	
Any change to the preliminary plan that alters the size, elevation, location or orientation of a building, stormwater managementfacility, a road or parking area or other site feature visible fromthe public right-of-way shall be subject to analysis by the original reviewing agency. A revised preliminary plan shall be submitted for review and approval prior to any further action. [Amended4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 


§ 165-77. Final site development plan. 
If a preliminary site plan is approved or approved conditionally, the applicant must provide a final site development plan and all associated plans for applicable signatures. A plan is not determined to be final until allsuch plans are executed. 
77.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection B(5) as SubsectionB(6). 
1:306 
§ 165-78. Subdivision record plat. [Amended 11-25-2011 by Ord.No. 744-11] 
If a preliminary subdivision plan is approved or approved conditionally, afinal plat of the subdivision plan must be submitted for recordation, alongwith a final forest conservation plan as required by Chapter 216, Forest Conservation, of the Bel Air Town Code. If approved with conditions, thePlanning Commission’s approval letter shall state the basis for any requiredimprovements. Upon verification of adequacy, the plan shall be signed by the Chairman of the Planning Commission, the Director of Public Works,and the Health Department. A second original Mylar of the plat recorded inthe Harford County land records shall be provided for the files of the Town Department of Planning and Community Development. All amendments toany record plat shall be copied to the Town as well. 
§ 165-79. Landscape plan/forest conservation plan. [Amended4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
A landscape plan is required for all development projects. Larger lotdevelopment plans, as discussed in Article VI of this Part 2, may also require a forest conservation plan. The plans shall be submitted with thepreliminary plan and shall meet requirements set forth in Article VIII of thisPart 2 and the latest edition of the Town Landscape Manual. The review process is as follows: 
A. 	The applicant shall submit a landscape plan, including a forest standdelineation or environmental assessment, identifying all streams, floodplain zones, and nontidal wetlands, along with the preliminaryplan. 
B. 	Plans will be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator for completeness and conformance with Article VIII of the Town of Bel Air DevelopmentRegulations. 
C. 	Plans will then be submitted to the Planning Commission, if applicable, for final review. 
D. 	A forest conservation plan shall be submitted in accordance with TownCode requirements and in conformance with Article VI of this Part 2. 
E. 	Approved plans shall be fully implemented and certified prior to issuance of a use and occupancy certificate. Surety shall be providedprior to notice to proceed. 
§ 165-80. Stormwater management permit. [Amended 4-3-2017 byOrd. No. 780-17] 
A stormwater management permit is required for all development unless specifically exempted. Variances are delineated in Chapter 405, StormwaterManagement, of the Bel Air Town Code. The stormwater management permit process is as follows: 
1:307 

A. 	For any proposed development, the owner/developer shall submitphased stormwater management plans to the Town for review and approval. At a minimum, plans shall be submitted for the concept, sitedevelopment and final stormwater management construction phasesof project design. Each plan submittal shall meet the requirements of the Design Manual and other provisions of Chapter 405, StormwaterManagement, of the Bel Air Town Code. 
B. 	The applicant's engineer shall submit a cost estimate with the final stormwater management review documents. 
C. 	The applicant's engineer shall certify construction of all stormwatermanagement facilities upon completion of the facilities. 
D. 	The applicant shall submit a maintenance schedule and execute a maintenance agreement for the facility(ies) which shall be recorded inthe land records of Harford County. 
§ 165-81. Public works agreement. 
A public works agreement (PWA) is required for any subdivision or development project where it is necessary for the developer/owner to construct roads, utilities or other facilities which will be conveyed to theTown for ownership, operation and maintenance. The PWA shall specifythe necessary improvements and construction methods by reference to an engineering plan approved by the Town. 
A. 	The necessary roads, utilities and/or facilities shall be as required bythe Director of Public Works and approved by the Planning Commission and/or the Board of Town Commissioners. 
B. 	The necessary roads, utilities and/or facilities are first identified duringthe concept plan review meeting, if applicable, and further detailed as part of the preliminary site plan review process. 
C. 	After the final site plan is approved, the PWA is drafted by the Directorof Public Works and reviewed by the developer/owner. 
D. 	Prior to executing the PWA, the developer/owner shall have: 
(1) 	
Final construction drawings approved by the Town; 

(2) 	
A grading permit approved by the Town; 

(3) 	
A stormwater management permit and maintenance agreement forprivate stormwater management systems (if applicable) approvedby the Town (the stormwater maintenance agreement must be entered in the Harford County land records); 

(4) 	
Sewer and/or water construction permits (as applicable) approvedby the State of Maryland; 

1:308 

(5) 	
A cost estimate for the total scope of construction for publicimprovements approved by the Town; 

(6) 	
All necessary easements, cross easements and other agreementswith the Town and/or third parties, signed and entered in theHarford County land records, as necessary; 

(7) 	
A properly executed payment and performance bond for the totalcost of the construction; and 

(8) 	
The developer/owner shall have satisfied any other requirements as previously determined by the Director of Public Works. 



E. 	
The Board of Town Commissioners shall approve the PWA and authorizethe Town Administrator to execute the PWA for the Town. 

F. 	
The developer/owner and the Town shall execute the PWA. 

G. 	
No construction is to start until the Director of Public Works issues a written notice to proceed. 


§ 165-82. Building permit. [Amended 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 754-12;4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
A building permit is required for the construction, alteration, demolition (or movement) or change of use of a structure, as well as the installationor alteration of any regulated equipment. A shed permit is required for astructure under 200 square feet and is regulated as an accessory structure. Except single-family dwellings, new construction and/or renovations exceeding 2,000 square feet or expansion of more than 5% of an existingstructure require Planning Commission approval. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to review, approve or disapprove projects under 2,000 squarefeet or less than 5% of the existing structure. Once an application for abuilding permit has been submitted to the Department of Public Works, the Department of Planning and Community Development reviews to determinewhether all requirements of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulationsare met. Before a building permit is issued by the Building Official, all required easements, property conveyances (including deeded rights-of­way), stormwater management permits, grading permits, other state andlocal permits, cross-easement agreements, fees, bonds, etc., must be executed and, if applicable, entered into the land records of Harford County. 
§ 165-83. Sign permit. 
An approved sign permit is required prior to placement or action toward placement of any sign as specified in Chapter 165, Part 3, of the Townof Bel Air Development Regulations. Application for a sign in an historicdistrict or on a designated historic site is subject to approval by the Historic Preservation Commission prior to issuance of the permit. The sign permitprocess is as follows: 
1:309 

A. 	The applicant shall submit a formal application accompanied by a scaledrawing showing size, location, design, color scheme and footings, if applicable, for approval of the proposed signage. 
B. 	The applicant shall provide any additional information determined necessary by the Zoning Administrator in order for the Zoning Administrator to make a determination of the request's merit. The review shall be based on Article XV, Sign Regulations, of Chapter165, Part 3, of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations and any pertinent design standards as specified in Article IV, Overlay Districts,or Article V, Historic Resource Conservation Regulations, in the Townof Bel Air Development Regulations. 
C. 	The request is approved or denied by the Zoning Administrator and theHistoric Preservation Commission, if applicable. 
D. 	Aggrieved parties may file an appeal to the Board of Appeals within 30 days of the decision. 
§ 165-84. Use and occupancy certificate. 
A. 	A use and occupancy certificate shall be issued by the Town of Bel Air Building and Zoning Officials prior to the use or occupancy ofany structure. Property owners shall be responsible for submittinga request for a use and occupancy certificate prior to occupying a property in order to ensure that all zoning, building and Fire Coderequirements are satisfied. Requests are submitted to the Departmentof Public Works. Both the Department of Planning and Community Development and the Public Works Department review the request toensure all Code requirements are satisfied. The property owner of amultitenant commercial and/or industrial structure shall be responsible for applying for a use and occupancy certificate each time the use ofthe structure or the occupant of any tenant space changes, except ashereinafter provided. 
B. 	A corporate center, as defined in Article XIV hereof, shall be issued ablanket use and occupancy certificate for the primary office business. Aseparate use and occupancy certificate would not be required for each tenant space, provided the tenant space is occupied only by tenantsin the same use classification as approved on the blanket use andoccupancy certificate. However, notwithstanding the foregoing, any substantial alteration of a tenant space shall require a separate use andoccupancy certificate prior to occupancy as provided above. 
§ 165-85. Home occupation/professional office certification. 
Home occupations and professional offices occupying not more than 300square feet and employing only persons who are members of the household are permitted as of right. Such uses are considered an accessory use per Article X of this Part 2. A home occupation certificate is required. 
1:310 

Certification of home occupation and professional office uses is subject tothe following procedures and requirements: 
A. 	The applicant shall submit a formal application for approval of theproposed accessory use, along with an annotated list of applicableperformance standards as outlined in Article VII of this Part 2, to the Town Department of Planning and Community Development. 
B. 	The applicant shall provide any additional information determined necessary by the Zoning Administrator in order for the Zoning Administrator to make a determination of the request's merits. Thereview shall be based upon the performance and developmentstandards specified in Article VII of this Part 2. 
C. 	The request is approved or denied by the Zoning Administrator. 
D. 	Aggrieved parties may file an appeal to the Board of Appeals within30 days of the decision. Home occupations and professional offices occupying more than 300 square feet or employing a person not amember of the household may be permitted as a special exception ifDevelopment Regulations criteria are satisfied and the application is approved by the Board of Appeals. One employee who is not a memberof the household is permitted by right in the Transition Overlay District.Three employees or tenants who are not members of the household are permitted as a special exception in the Transition Overlay District. Thecertification procedures remain the same. [Amended 2-21-2012 by Ord. No. 748-12] 
§ 165-86. Fence permit. 
An approved fence permit is required prior to construction of a fence, asspecified in Article X of this Part 2. The fence permit process is as follows: 
A. 	The applicant shall submit a formal application to the ZoningAdministrator, accompanied by a sketch showing the plan of the proposed fence. 
B. 	The applicant shall provide any additional information determined necessary by the Zoning Administrator in order for the ZoningAdministrator to make a determination of the request's merit. The review shall be based on the accessory use requirements as describedin Article X of this Part 2 and any pertinent design standards as specified in Article V, Historic Resource Conservation Regulations, in this Part 2. 
C. 	The request is approved or denied by the Zoning Administrator. 
D. 	Aggrieved parties may file an appeal to the Board of Appeals within 30 days of the decision. 
1:311 

E. 	Application for a fence in an historic district or on a designated historicsite is subject to approval of the Historic Preservation Commission prior to issuance of the permit. 
§ 165-87. Temporary permit. 
A. 	Temporary permits may be approved by the Zoning Administrator for specific uses identified in Articles III and X of this Part 2. Permit applications are available at the Department of Planning and Community Development. The temporary permit process is as follows: 
(1) 	
The applicant shall submit a formal application for approval of theproposed temporary use or temporary event at least 10 days priorto the proposed event. 

(2) 	
The applicant shall provide any additional information determinednecessary by the Zoning Administrator in order for the ZoningAdministrator to make a determination of the request's merits. The review shall be based on the performance and developmentstandards specified in Article VII of this Part 2. 

(3) 	
The request is approved or denied by the Zoning Administrator. 

(4) 	
Aggrieved parties may file an appeal to the Board of Appeals within30 days of the decision. 


B. 	Temporary outdoor sales events or tent sales which are directly related to the established, on-site business and nonrelated sales events for fewer than 14 days may be approved by the Zoning Administrator. Allapplicable performance standards as cited in Article VII and temporary use requirements as specified in § 165-71 shall be satisfied. 
C. 	Temporary outdoor sales events or tent sales sponsored by for-profitorganizations, except those specifically exempted in § 165-71D(4) of this Part 2, which are not directly related by product and ownership tothe established on-site business may not be conducted for more than 14days per calendar year. The Zoning Administrator may approve no more than four for-profit outdoor sales events per property per year. Anyadditional requests shall be subject to special exception requirementsas cited in Article XII of this Part 2. Other temporary events and uses may be approved by the Zoning Administrator as specified in Article Xof this Part 2. 
§ 165-88. Annexation. 
Annexation of properties into the Town shall be initiated in accordancewith Maryland state law. Initiation may occur through two means, pursuant to the Annotated Code of Maryland: initiative of the Board of Town Commissioners or request by the property owner. The process is as follows: 
A. The applicant shall submit written consent from the owners of 25% ofthe assessed value of land in the area to be annexed and/or 25% of 
1:312 

B. 

C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
G. 
H. 
I. 
J. 
the voters in the area in the form of a petition in order to initiate theannexation process. 
If the petition is accepted by the Board of Town Commissioners, anannexation plan, in accordance with the Local Government Article,of the Annotated Code of Maryland, shall be adopted by the Board of Town Commissioners. The annexation plan shall be forwarded toHarford County, Maryland Department of Planning and the BaltimoreMetropolitan Council for comments at least 30 days prior to the required public hearing. Copies of the annexation plan shall also beavailable for public review. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
The annexation plan shall include a description of the area to be annexed, a description of available land for public services neededto service the proposed use, a statement describing the schedule for extending services to the area to be annexed, and a general descriptionof the methods anticipated to finance the extension of municipal services into the area. 
Following the review period, a resolution for the annexation shall beintroduced, which shall include a description of the land to be annexed,any proposed conditions and the proposed zoning designation of the property. 
Notice of the annexation proceeding shall be published for four weeksat weekly intervals, or, if 25 acres or less, two times at weekly intervals, prior to public hearings. Appropriate intergovernmental bodies shallalso be advised and involved. 
Public hearings shall be held at least 15 days after the last newspaper notice. 
The Board of Town Commissioners approve/disapprove the resolution. 
If approved, a summary of final resolution of the Board of Town Commissioners shall be published four times in four consecutive weeks. 
The Town shall submit information to the State Department of Legislative Services as required by the Local Government Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland. [Amended 11-25-2011 by Ord. No.744-11; 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
For 45 days following approval, referendum may be initiated. If disapproved by the Board of Town Commissioners, the annexation process is terminated. 
1:313 

ARTICLE XII 
Appeals; Variances; Special Exceptions; Special Developments 
§ 165-89. Purpose. 
Certain uses require additional analysis due to their size, scale, or possible impact on adjoining properties. Also, on occasion, it is necessary to providevariances from the specific requirements of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations due to the configuration or specific conditions of a parcel. This article outlines the procedures the reviewing agencies mustfollow in considering such development proposals. These procedures areintended to ensure that the following development objectives are satisfied: 
A. 	Meet the goals and objectives of the Land Use Element of the Town ofBel Air Comprehensive Plan. 
B. 	Establish adequate land use controls while protecting the public interest. 
C. 	Facilitate development that is responsive to current and future marketconditions. 
D. 	Permit flexible development, scale and configuration on individual lotswhere standard regulations would create practical difficulty or hardship. 
E. 	Provide a process and standards whereby the Zoning Administrator may grant limited adjustments to the strict application of the development standards of this Part 2. 
§ 165-90. Applications to Board of Appeals; appeals; hearings; stayof proceedings. 
A. 	Applications: when and by whom taken. In cases in which the Board of Appeals has original jurisdiction under the provisions of the Townof Bel Air Development Regulations, an application may be made byany property owner(s) or his/her representative(s) or by any contract purchaser, optionee or tenant, along with the consent of the recordowner(s), or by a governmental officer, department, board or bureau.Such application shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator, who shall transmit the same to the Board of Appeals. The petitioner shall beresponsible for providing the name and mailing address of all adjoiningproperty owners. Written notice shall be mailed by the Department of Planning and Community Development to all adjoining property owners(based on information provided by applicant) 10 days prior to publichearing. 
B. 	Appeals: when and by whom taken. An appeal to the Board of Appeals may be requested by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the municipality affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator. Such appeal shall be taken within30 days after the decision by filing an application to the Board of 
1:315 

Appeals specifying the grounds for appeal. The Zoning Administratorshall transmit to the Board of Appeals all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
C. 	Hearings. The Board of Appeals shall schedule the hearing of theapplication or appeal, give public notice of the same by not less than two publications in a paper of general circulation in Bel Air, the secondof which shall be at least 10 days before the hearing, post a notice onthe property in question at least 10 days before the hearing, give at least 15 days' notice to applicant and adjoining property owners, anddecide the same within 60 days of the closing of the public hearing,unless an extension, detailed in writing, is agreed upon by all parties. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney.Any party adversely affected by a decision of the Board of Appeals mayappeal to the Circuit Court for Harford County in the manner set forth in the Land Use Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, as amendedfrom time to time. This appeal must be filed within 30 days of the Boardof Appeals written decision. The Court may affirm, reverse, vacate or modify the decision complained of in the appeal. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
D. 	Stay of proceedings. An appeal made to the Board of Appeals shall stay all proceedings in the furtherance of the action appealed from unlessthe Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board of Appeals, after noticeof appeal shall have been filed, that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In suchcase, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining orderwhich may be granted by the Board of Appeals or by the Circuit Court for Harford County, upon application after notice has been properlymade and due cause has been shown. The Maryland Rules shall applywhen an appeal is taken to the Circuit Court or beyond. 
E. 	Action of the Board of Appeals. In exercising its powers, the Board ofAppeals may, in conformity with the provisions of statute and of theTown of Bel Air Development Regulations, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determinationappealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision, ordetermination as ought to be made and, to that end, shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. 
§ 165-91. Powers of Board of Appeals. 
A. 	Administrative. The Board of Appeals shall have the power to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order,requirements, decision, or determination made by an administrativeofficial and/or the Historic Preservation Commission in the enforcement of the provisions of said Land Use Article and of the Town of BelAir Development Regulations adopted pursuant thereto. [Amended4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
B. 	Limitations, guides and standards. 
1:316 

(1) 

(2) 


(3) 



In the case of special exceptions and variances, which requireBoard of Appeals approval, and whenever in the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations certain powers are conferred upon theBoard of Appeals, or the approval of the Board of Appeals isrequired before a permit may be issued, or the Board of Appeals is called upon to decide certain issues, the Board of Appeals shall: 
(a) 	
Cause the property to be posted in a conspicuous place. 

(b) 	
Hold a public hearing, consider all testimony and data submitted, and hear any person for or against the issuance ofthe permit. 

The application for a permit shall not be approved where the Board of Appeals finds a proposed building, addition, extension ofbuilding or use, sign, use or change of use would: 

(a) 	
Adversely affect the public health, safety, security, or general welfare. 

(b) 	
Result in dangerous traffic conditions. 

(c) 	
Jeopardize the lives or property of people living in the neighborhood. 

In deciding an appeal, the Board of Appeals shall giveconsideration, among other things, to the following information, when applicable: 

(a) 	
The number of people residing, working or studying in theimmediate areas. 

(b) 	
Traffic conditions, including facilities for pedestrians, such assidewalks and safety zones, availability of parking facilities,impact of ingress, egress, and level of service of nearby intersections. 

(c) 	
Potential impact upon the orderly growth of the neighborhoodand community. 

(d) 	
Potential impact upon the needs of the entire community andparticular neighborhoods. 

(e) 	
The purpose of these regulations as provided in § 165-5. 

(f) 	
The effect of odors, dust, gas, smoke, fumes, vibrations, glareand noise upon the use of surrounding properties. 

(g) 	
Facilities for sewers, water, trash and garbage collection and disposal, and the availability of such services. 

(h) 	
Availability of fire-fighting equipment and accessibility to thesite for such equipment. 


1:317 

(i) 
Decisions of the public courts of Maryland. 


(j) 	
The effect of such use upon the peaceful enjoyment of people in their homes. 

(k) 	
The most appropriate use of land and structures as determinedand indicated by the Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan and other neighboring uses. 

(l) 	
The type and kind of structures in the vicinity where peopleare apt to gather in large numbers, such as schools, churches, theaters, hospitals and the like. 

(m) 
The Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan component for landuse, transportation, housing, economic development, urban design and community facilities. 

(n) 	
The preservation of cultural and historic landmarks and significant archeological features. 

(o) 	
The conservation of property values. 

(p) 	
The contribution, if any, such proposed use, building or addition would make toward the deterioration or improvement of areas and neighborhoods. 

(q) 	
The effect of the proposed use on light and air in the neighborhood. 

(r) 	
The potential danger of fire or explosion associated with theproposed structure or use. 

(s) 	
All applicable Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. 


C. 	Decisions of Board. The Board of Appeals shall render its decisionbased upon its review of the information submitted by the applicant,along with any staff comments or opinions which the Zoning Administrator may submit, as well as comments received from proponents and opponents in attendance at the public hearings. 
§ 165-92. Variances. 
A. 	General. The Board of Appeals is authorized to grant variances fromthe terms of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations as providedin the Land Use Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland. Minor variances as specified in Subsection H of this section may be approvedby the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
B. 	Special regulations. 
(1) 	
In order to grant a variance, the Board of Appeals or the ZoningAdministrator or his/her designee, whichever is applicable, must find, by clear and convincing evidence, each of the following: 

1:318 

(a) 	
Uniqueness. The subject property has an inherent characteristic or condition not generally shared by other surrounding properties, i.e., its shape, topography, subsurfacecondition, environmental factors, historical significance,practical restrictions imposed by abutting properties or the uses thereon, or other restrictions. 

(b) 	
Practical difficulty. 


[1] 	Strict compliance with the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations would unreasonably prevent the applicantfrom using the property for a permitted purpose or wouldrender conformity with such restrictions unnecessarily burdensome; however, that the granting of the variancewould make the property more profitable is not sufficientreason to grant a variance. 
[2] 	Granting the variance would do substantial justice to theapplicant, as well as to other property owners in the area. 
[3] 	The variance can be granted in such a way that the spirit of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations will beobserved and public safety and welfare secured. 
[4] 	The practical difficulty is caused by the property's uniqueness and is not personal to the applicant nor theresult of acts of the applicant, the property owner, or his/her predecessor in title. 
(2) 	If a lesser relaxation than that applied for will give substantialrelief to the applicant and be more consistent with justice to otherproperty owners, the Board of Appeals is authorized to grant that lesser relief. 

C. 	
Conditions of approval. In authorizing a variance, the Board of Appealsor Zoning Administrator or his/her designee, whichever is applicable, may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, characterand other features of the proposed structure or use as may be deemednecessary in the interest of the furtherance of the purposes of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations and in the interest of the public. Inauthorizing a variance with attached conditions, the Board of Appealsor Zoning Administrator or his/her designee, whichever is applicable, shall require such evidence and guarantee or bond as may be deemednecessary to ensure that the conditions attached are being and will becomplied with. 

D. 	
Lapse of variance. After the Board of Appeals or Zoning Administratoror his/her designee, whichever is applicable, has granted a variance,the variance so granted shall lapse two years from the date of the final decision. However, no lapse shall take place if the change of usehas taken place, if the construction of buildings has been completedor if a good faith commencement of construction has occurred and 


1:319 

E. 
F. 
G. 
H. 
substantial, visible construction has taken place in accordance withthe plans for which such variance was granted. Within 30 days of the expiration of the two-year period, or any extension previously granted,the property owner may submit an application to the Board of Appealsor Zoning Administrator or his/her designee, whichever is applicable, requesting one additional extension for a period of one year. The Boardof Appeals or Zoning Administrator, whichever is applicable, may grantan extension upon good cause shown. 
Existing variance modifications and amendments. The requirementsof the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations shall not apply toany variance approved prior to enactment of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations or amendments thereto. Any modifications oramendments to a variance approved prior to the enactment of the Townof Bel Air Development Regulations which are not in accordance with the terms of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations shall requirethe approval of the Board of Appeals pursuant to Subsection C of thissection. 
Resubmission of variance. Substantially identical variance requestsmay not be resubmitted for a period of one year after the final decision. 
Modification of a variance. The procedure for modification of a variance already approved or a request for a change of conditions attached to anapproval shall be the same as for a new application. 
Administrative variance approvals. 
(1) 	
The Zoning Administrator is authorized to hear variance requestsfor minor screening, landscaping, fencing provisions related to type, location and height of these accessory uses and for modifications of setback or lot width requirements of not morethan 10%. Upon receipt of an application, a public hearing shallbe scheduled before the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee. The property would then be posted, with a notice of the request andhearing date, at least seven days before the hearing. The applicantand adjoining property owners shall be given notice of the hearing date and time at least 10 days prior to the public hearing. 

(2) 	
In determining his/her decision, the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee shall follow the Board of Appeals procedures outlined in Subsections A through G of this section. A written decision shallbe provided to the applicant within 30 days of the closing of thepublic hearing, unless an extension, detailed in writing, is agreed upon by all parties. At the hearing, any party may appear in personor by agent or attorney. Any party adversely affected by a decisionof the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee may appeal to the Board of Appeals. The appeal must be filed within 30 days of theZoning Administrator's decision. The Zoning Administrator wouldthen schedule a new hearing before the Board of Appeals which 


1:320 

would be heard in the same manner as an original application tothe Board of Appeals (de novo). 
§ 165-93. Special exceptions. 

A. 	General. Recognizing that a special exception is a use legislativelypredetermined to be conditionally compatible with the uses permitted as of right in a particular zone, the Board of Appeals shall have thepower to hear and decide special exception requests in accordancewith the provisions of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. Additionally, prior to approving a special exception request, the Boardof Appeals must find that there would be no adverse impact caused byapproval of the request. 
B. 	Conditions of approval. 
(1) 	
In connection with any approval of any request, the Board ofAppeals may require the installation of such devices and methods of operation as may be reasonably required to prevent adverseeffects from the proposed use, including but not limited to hazardous or congested traffic conditions, odor, smoke, dust, gas, noise or other similar nuisances. The Board of Appeals may imposesuch other conditions as may be necessary to protect adjacentproperties and neighborhoods from adverse effects of the use. 

(2) 	
The conditions may include but are not limited to: 

(a) 	
Prohibition against outside signs or advertising structures,except professional or directional signs. 

(b) 	
Limitation of signs as to size, type, color, location or illumination. 

(c) 	
Specification of the amount, direction and location of outdoor lighting. 

(d) 	
Number and location of off-street parking and loading space. 

(e) 	
Requirements related to the building construction, design and materials, including, but not limited to, roof design, buildingconnection and disconnection with other units, location of exits, doors and windows and cleaning or painting of building. 

(f) 	
Requirements related to paving, shrubbery, landscaping,ornamental or screening fences, walls and hedges. 

(g) 	
Specification of permitted hours of operation. 

(h) 	
Prohibition of structural changes. 

(i) 	
Requirements related to the control and elimination of smoke,dust, gas, noise or vibration caused by the use. 




1:321 

C. 

D. 

E. 
F. 
G. 
(j) 	
Requirements for termination of a use, based on a lapse oftime, as permitted by law. 

(k) 	
Specification of required improvements to ingress and egress. 

(l) 	
Specification of required improvements to street frontage. 

(m) 	
Requirements of specific fire and safety improvement. 

(n) 	
Requirements for improvements to intersections adjacent tothe proposed development. 


(3) 	In authorizing a special exception, the Board of Appeals shall require such guarantee or bond as it may deem necessary to ensurecompliance with all the conditions imposed on the approval. 
Lapse of special exception. After the Board of Appeals has approved a special exception, the special exception so approved or granted shalllapse two years from the date of the final decision. However, no lapseshall take place if the change of use has taken place, if the construction of buildings has been completed or if a good faith commencementof construction has occurred and substantial, visible construction has taken place in accordance with the plans for which such special exception was granted. Within 30 days of the expiration of the two-yearperiod, or any extension previously granted, the property owner maysubmit an application to the Board of Appeals requesting an additional extension or extension for a period of one year. The Board of Appealsmay grant an extension upon good cause shown. 
Existing special exception: modifications and amendments. The requirements of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations shallnot apply to any special exception approved prior to enactment of theTown of Bel Air Development Regulations or amendments thereto. Any modifications or amendments to a special exception approved priorto the enactment of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulationswhich are not in accordance with the terms of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations shall require the approval of the Board ofAppeals pursuant to this section. 
Revocation of permits. Special exception approvals may be revoked by the Board of Town Commissioners, in accordance with the provisions of§ 165-20E herein, for failure to comply with conditions of approval orapplicable regulations. 
Guarantees. The Board of Appeals may require a bond, irrevocableletter of credit, or other appropriate guarantee as may be deemednecessary to ensure satisfactory performance with regard to all or some of the conditions of the special exception. 
Discontinuance of use. When an approved special exception of a building, structure or land has ceased operation for one year, the 
1:322 

special exception approval of the building, structure or land shall automatically expire. 
H. 	Resubmission of special exception. Substantially identical specialexception requests may not be resubmitted for a period of one yearafter the final decision. 
I. 	Modification of special exception. The procedure for modification ofa special exception already approved, or a request for a change ofconditions attached to an approval, shall be the same as for a new application. 
§ 165-94. Special developments. 
A. 	General. Recognizing that certain uses are compatible with other uses permitted in a district, with or without the imposition of conditions, thespecial developments listed in the district regulations of the Town ofBel Air Development Regulations may be permitted in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section. A development plan shall besubmitted for an approval of a special development. The developmentplan should be considered a part of a special development. Special development shall be considered by the Planning Commission to determine the compliance of the development with the appropriateregulations. The Planning Commission may approve, with or without conditions, or deny the request for special development approval. 
B. 	Specific regulations. The following procedures shall be followed inreview of applications for special development approvals: 
(1) 	
The applicant shall submit a formal application stating the request,along with plans as prescribed in the Town checklist. (SeeAppendix A.78) Additionally, applicants shall provide the name and mailing address of all adjoining property owners. 

(2) 	
A preliminary site plan complying with the requirements of Chapter165, Part 4, of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations shall accompany an application for approval of a special developmentunder this Part 2, together with such information as may berequired for a determination of the nature of the proposed use and its effect on the Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan, theneighborhood, and surrounding properties. 

(3) 	
Requests shall be reviewed by the appropriate Town, county and state agencies, as appropriate. 

(4) 	
A public hearing shall be scheduled before the PlanningCommission, and notice of the hearing placed in a local paper for two consecutive weeks. The first notice shall appear at least 14days prior to the hearing. Property shall be posted 10 days priorto the public hearing. Written notice shall be mailed to all abutting 


78.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter. 
1:323 
property owners (based on information provided by applicant) 10days prior to the public hearing. 
(5) 	
Public hearing held. 

(6) 	
The special development is approved, denied, or approved subjectto conditions. The Planning Commission may table the matter for further discussion or to gather additional information. In any case,a decision shall be rendered within 60 days of the first hearingdate, unless an extension is agreed upon by the applicant and the Town. 


C. 	Conditions of approval. The Planning Commission may imposeconditions upon an approval of a special development request. 
(1) 	
The conditions may include, but are not limited to: 

(a) 	
Requirements related to the building construction, design andmaterials, including, but not limited to, roof design, building connection and disconnection with other units, enclosure, location of exits, doors and windows and cleaning or paintingof building. 

(b) 	
Requirements related to paving, shrubbery, landscaping,ornamental or screening fences, walls and hedges. 

(c) 	
Specification of the amount, direction and location of outdoor lighting. 

(d) 	
Specification of permitted hours of operation. 

(e) 	
Limitations on the location of signs. 

(f) 	
Prohibition of structural changes. 

(g) 	
Requirements related to the control and elimination of smoke,dust, gas, noise or vibration caused by the use. 

(h) 	
Requirements for termination of a use, based on a lapse oftime, as permitted by law. 

(i) 	
Specification of required improvements to ingress and egress. 

(j) 	
Specification of required improvements to street frontage. 

(k) 	
Requirements for specific fire and safety improvements. 

(l) 	
Requirements for improvements to intersections and roadways affected by traffic generated by the proposed development.Developers shall maintain level-of-service standards as set forth in Chapter 165, Part 4, § 165-118D, Circulation system design. 

(m) 
Requirements for parking lots, property maintenance and security, including litter and trash removal. 

1:324 


(2) 	
Unless otherwise specified in the Town of Bel Air DevelopmentRegulations, or specified as a condition of approval, the height limits, yard spaces, lot areas and sign requirements shall be the same as for other uses in the district in which this specialdevelopment is located. 



D. 	
Lapse of special development approval. After the Planning Commissionhas approved a special development, the special development approvalshall lapse two years from the date of the final decision. However, no lapse shall take place if the change of use has taken place or ifthe construction of the building has been completed or if a good faithcommencement of construction has occurred and substantial, visible construction has taken place in accordance with the plans for whichsuch special development was granted. Within 30 days of the expirationof the two-year period, or any extension previously granted, the property owner may submit an application to the Planning Commissionrequesting an extension for a period of one year. The PlanningCommission may grant an extension upon good cause shown. 

E. 	
Existing special developments. The requirements of the Town of Bel AirDevelopment Regulations shall not apply to a preexisting conditionaluse or special development approved prior to enactment of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations or amendments thereto. 

F. 	
Revocation of approvals. Special development approvals may be revoked by the Board of Town Commissioners, in accordance with the provisions of § 165-20E herein, for failure to comply with conditions ofapproval or applicable regulations. 

G. 	
Guarantees. The Town may require a bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or other appropriate guarantee as may be deemed necessary to ensuresatisfactory performance with regard to all or some of the conditions ofthe special development. 

H. 	
Discontinuance of use. When an approved special development use hasceased operation for one year, the special development approval for theuse of a building, structure or land shall automatically expire. 

I. 	
Modification or amendment of approval. A special developmentapproval may not be transferred to another property, nor may theuse category be changed, without further approval of the Planning Commission. A building expansion of 5% or 2,000 square feet, whichever is less, on a previously approved special development shallrequire modification of that approval of the Planning Commission. The procedure for such a request shall be the same as for a new application.


[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
J. 	Resubmission of special development. Substantially identical special development requests may not be resubmitted for a period of one yearafter the final decision. 
1:325 

§ 165-95. Appeals to court. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
Any person adversely affected by a special development decision of the Planning Commission may appeal to the Circuit Court of Harford Countyin the manner set forth in the Land Use Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, as amended from time to time. The Court may affirm, reverse, vacate or modify the decision complained of in the appeal. Such appeal shallbe filed within 30 days of the Planning Commission's decision. 
§ 165-96. Fees. 
A fee shall be charged for filing and handling each application or appealprovided for in this Part 2, in an amount to be determined from time to timeby the Board of Town Commissioners. 
§ 165-97. Adjustment of district boundaries. 
The Board of Town Commissioners may authorize, after notice to the ownersof the properties affected and/or by a notice published in a paper of general circulation in Bel Air and after public hearing, adjustments of districtboundaries as follows: 
A. 	Where the street or lot layout actually on the ground, or as recorded, differs from the street and lot lines as shown on the Zoning Maps, theBoard of Appeals shall interpret the maps in such a way as to carry outthe intent and purpose of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations for the particular section or district in question. 
B. 	The Board of Appeals may permit the extension of a district, where theboundary line of a district divides a lot held in single ownership on the effective date of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations, by notmore than 100 feet beyond the boundary line. 
§ 165-98. Nonconforming uses. 
The Board of Appeals may hear and decide requests relating to nonconforming uses, buildings and structures as authorized and describedin Part 3, Signs, and Part 2, Article III, Establishment and Regulation of Zoning Districts, and Article IX, Special Provisions and Modifications, of theTown of Bel Air Development Regulations. 
1:326 

ARTICLE XIII 
Amendments 
§ 165-99. Purpose. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
This article provides for periodic amendment or repeal of zoning regulations in accordance with the Land Use Article, of the Annotated Code of Maryland. It is intended to provide an outline of procedures necessaryto effect changes to regulations and to meet the changing development requirements of the Town and its citizens. 
§ 165-100. Authorization; Planning Commission recommendation. 
A. 	The Board of Town Commissioners may, by ordinance, amend, supplement, or change the regulations, district boundaries, or classifications of property now or hereinafter established by the Townof Bel Air Development Regulations or amendments thereof. Initiation of such amendment, supplement, or change is by resolution of theBoard of Town Commissioners, motion of the Planning Commission,or by petition of any property owner. Petition shall be addressed to the Board of Town Commissioners. The Board of Town Commissioners may also designate a property, site or group of properties as historic,based on the Historic Preservation Commission's recommendation and the requirements noted in Article V, Historic Resource ConservationRegulations, in this Part 2. 
B. 	Any proposed amendment, supplement or change to the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations text, district boundaries or classificationof property originating with or received by the Board of Town Commissioners may be referred by them to the Planning Commission for an investigation and recommendation if the Board of Town Commissioners decides to proceed with further action on the request.The Planning Commission in such case shall cause an investigation to be made as it deems necessary. 
(1) 	
For this purpose, the Planning Commission: 

(a) 	
May require the submission of all pertinent data and information by any person concerned. 

(b) 	
May hold public hearings as provided by its own rules. 

(c) 	
Shall submit its report and recommendation to the Board of Town Commissioners within 60 days, unless an extension oftime is granted. 



(2) 	
Alternatively, the Board, at its discretion, may dismiss the request with no further action. 


§ 165-101. Review and approval process. 

1:327 

A. 	After receiving the recommendation of the Planning Commission onany proposed amendment, supplement, or change, and before adopting such amendment, the Board of Town Commissioners shall hold a publichearing in relation thereto, at which time parties in interest and citizensshall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of the public hearing, together with a summary of the proposedregulation, restriction, or boundary, shall be published in at least onenewspaper of general circulation in the jurisdiction, once each week for two successive weeks, with the first such publication of noticeappearing at least 14 days prior to the hearing. 
B. 	In case of any amendment which would alter the Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan Land Use Map, the Zoning Map79 or would otherwise have the purpose and effect of changing the zoningclassification of any specific property, the Board of Town Commissioners must include the recommendation of the PlanningCommission in the findings of fact on which it bases such amendment.For all Zoning Map amendment requests, the following procedures shall be followed: 
(1) 	
The applicant submits a formal application for hearing before thePlanning Commission and the Board of Town Commissioners indicating existing and proposed zoning designation, along witha plat prepared in conformance with the Town checklist80 and a written statement describing how rezoning satisfies conditions set forth in the Land Use Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland.Additionally, the applicant shall provide the name and address of all adjoining property owners. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 

(2) 	
The request is reviewed by appropriate Town, county and stateagencies. 

(3) 	
The request is reviewed by the Planning Commission, which submits a written recommendation for approval or denial to theBoard of Town Commissioners. The Planning Commission may table the matter for further discussion or to gather additionalinformation. In any case, a decision shall be rendered within 60days of the initial hearing before the Planning Commission, unless an extension is agreed upon by the applicant and the Town. 

(4) 	
A public hearing is scheduled before the Board of Town Commissioners, and public notice placed in a local paper for two consecutive weeks. The first notice shall appear at least 14 daysprior to the hearing. Property shall be posted 10 days prior tothe public hearing. Written notice shall be mailed to all adjoining 


79.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included as an attachment to this chapter. 
80.Editor's Note: See Appendix A, Checklist for Site Plan Review, which is included as anattachment to this chapter. 
1:328 property owners (based on information provided by applicant) 10days prior to the public hearing. 
(5) 	
A public hearing is held before the Board of Town Commissioners.The applicant is responsible for meeting requirements of the LandUse Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland and for presenting evidence necessary to meet legal requirements for rezoning. Priorto making its decision, the Board of Town Commissioners shallmake findings as to whether change or mistake has occurred and make findings as specified in the Land Use Article of the AnnotatedCode of Maryland. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 

(6) 	
The Board of Town Commissioners approves or denies the request.The Board of Town Commissioners may table the matter for furtherdiscussion or to gather additional information. In any case, a written decision shall be rendered within 60 days of the firsthearing date, unless an extension is agreed upon by all partiesinvolved. 

(7) 	
If approved, the rezoning becomes effective 21 days after Board ofTown Commissioners approval. 

(8) 	
Any person adversely affected by a rezoning decision, map amendment or historic site/district designation of the Board ofTown Commissioners may appeal to the Circuit Court of HarfordCounty in the manner set forth in the Land Use Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, as amended from time to time. TheCourt may affirm, reverse, vacate or modify the decision complained of in the appeal. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 


§ 165-102. Resubmission of amendment requests. 
When the Board of Town Commissioners has officially adopted or rejected an application to amend, supplement, or change these regulations or theboundaries of any district or classification of any amendment thereof, itshall not be required to consider another application which, in its opinion, is for substantially the same change until at least one year has elapsed sincethe time of final decision. 
1:329 

ARTICLE XIV 
Definitions 
§ 165-103. Purpose. 
This article is intended to clarify the meaning of specific terms used throughout the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. The meaning andconstruction of words and phrases defined in this article apply throughoutthe Development Regulations, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning or construction. Any word or term not defined in thisarticle shall have the ordinarily accepted definition as set forth in the most recent edition of Webster's International Dictionary of the English Language. 
§ 165-104. Terms defined. 
The following definitions shall be used in the interpretation and construction of the Development Regulations: 
ABANDON — The relinquishment of the right to use or cessation of the useof property for a period of one year or more. 
ABUTTING — To physically touch, border upon or share a common propertyline. 
ACCESS — A means of vehicular or pedestrian approach, entry to or exit from a property. 
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A subordinate structure detached from, but located on the same lot as, a principal building, the use of which is incidental to that of the principal structure.[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
ACCESSORY USE — A use that is customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or of a building on the same lot. 
ADDITION — Any construction that increases the size of a building. 
ADJACENT — To be situated near, but not necessarily touching, a common property line (i.e., separated by a street, alley or highway). 
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CENTER — An entity or establishment that, asits principal business purpose, offers for sale, rental, exhibition or viewing any printed, recorded, digitally analogued or otherwise viewable matter, any kind of sexual paraphernalia or any kind of live performance,entertainment or exhibition that depicts, describes or relates to sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sadomasochistic abuse. For purposes of thisdefinition, "sexual conduct" means human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or the touching of or contact with genitals, pubic areas or buttocks of a human, or the breasts of a female, whether alone or between members of the same or opposite sex, or between humans and others; "sexual excitement" means the condition of human genitals, or the breasts of a female, when in a state of sexual stimulation, or the sensual experiencesof humans engaging in or witnessing sexual conduct or nudity; and 
1:331 

"sadomasochistic abuse" means flagellation or torture by or upon a humanwho is nude or clad in undergarments or in a revealing or bizarre costume, or the condition of one who is nude or so clothed and is being fettered,bound or otherwise physically restrained. "Adult entertainment center" includes an adult bookstore.[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent within the means of a low-or moderate-income household, as defined by state or federal legislation. 
AFFORESTATION — The establishment of a forest on an area from which forest cover has been absent for a long period of time in accordancewith an approved landscape plan; planting of open areas which are not presently in forest cover in accordance with an approved landscape plan;or establishment of a forest in accordance with an approved landscapeplan according to procedures set forth in the Maryland Forest Conservation Technical Manual. 
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCT PROCESSING — Use that serves to supportagricultural production such as timber processing, milling, canning and wool or textile processing.[Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
AISLE — That portion of a parking area reserved for ingress and egress ofvehicles to/from parking spaces; not to include any portion of street rights­of-way. 
ALLEY — A public or private way, other than a street, affording secondarymeans of access to the side or rear of abutting properties. 
ALTER — To change the exterior appearance or supporting members of a structure, such as bearing walls, columns or beams, or to modify the areafrontage or depth of a lot, landscaped open space or parking area. 
AMUSEMENT CENTER — An establishment or arcade offering five or more amusement devices, including but not limited to coin-operated electronicgames, shooting galleries, table games, computer games, pool/billiards,movie theater and similar amusement diversions, within an enclosed building.[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
ANIMAL, DOMESTIC — Any animal that has been bred and/or raised to live in or about the habitation of humans and is dependent on people for foodand shelter, excluding horses, cows, sheep, goats, pigs and fowl. 
ANIMAL, FARM — Any animal customarily raised in an agricultural setting, including but not limited to poultry, pheasants, cows, livestock, chinchillas,horses, goats, sheep, monkeys and other similar animals and fowl. 
APARTMENT BUILDING — A structure containing three or more dwelling units with a common entrance or access. (See "dwelling, multifamily.")[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
APPROVAL BODY — The agency, board, commission, group or other legallydesignated individual or agency that has been charged with the review and approval of plans and applications. 
1:332 

APPURTENANCES — The visible, functional or ornamental objectsaccessory to the environmental setting of a structure. These include paving, trees, landscaping, waterways, etc.81 
ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE — Ornamentation or decorative features attached to or protruding from an exterior wall. 
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY — A facility that provides supervision,monitoring or assistance with the activities of daily living for elderly ordisabled persons in a residential setting. 
AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC — Average number of cars per day that pass overa given point. 
AWNING — A roof-like cover, often of fabric, metal or glass, designed and intended for protection from the weather or as a decorative embellishmentand which projects from a wall or roof of a structure over a window, walk,door or the like. 
BANQUET HALL — A building or establishment maintained in whole or inpart as rental space for the purpose of private events where access by the general public is restricted.[Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
BAR — A portion of an establishment where the sale or dispensing of liquorby the drink for on-site consumption is undertaken and considered separate from dining, dancing and banquet areas.[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The elevation at which a flood has a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
BASEMENT — A portion of a building located partly or entirelyunderground but having no more than 1/2 of its floor-to-ceiling height above the average grade of the adjoining ground.[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — A dwelling containing eight beds or rental units or fewer, where lodging is offered to the traveling public for temporaryoccupancy, and where breakfast is provided as part of the room rental charges.[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
BERM — An earthen mound formed to obstruct undesirable views or noise as a buffer. 
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — A combination of conservation measures, structures or management practices that reduces or avoids adverse impacts of development on adjoining sites, land, water or waterways and controls soil loss and reduces water quality degradationcaused by nutrients, animal waste, toxins and sediment. 
BILLBOARD — A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity,service, entertainment, event, or other activity conducted, sold or offered ina location other than the property on which the sign is located. 
81.Editor's Note: The former definition of "arcade," which immediately followed thisdefinition, was repealed 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17. 
1:333 BLOCK — A tract of land bounded by a combination of streets and/or publicparks, cemeteries, rights-of-way, waterways, or boundaries of the Town or any other barrier to the continuity of development. 
BOARDINGHOUSE — A dwelling unit, other than in a hotel, motel, grouphome, halfway house, apartment building or facility for foster care as defined in the Family Law Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland,in which lodging and meals are provided for compensation to three or more adult persons not related to the owner by blood, marriage or adoption.[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
BODY-PIERCING SERVICE — A skin-penetrating adornment procedure which involves piercing or entering the skin or the mucous membrane of anindividual for the purpose of inserting pigmented patterns, jewelry or otherforms of body decoration. "Body piercing" includes skin-penetrating body adornment procedures and tattooing, but does not include piercing of anearlobe using a properly disinfected ear-piercing gun and single-use, sterilestuds and clutches. 
BUFFER — A landscaped area intended to separate and partially obstructthe view of two adjacent land uses or properties from one another. See "screening." 
BUILDING — A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, usedor intended to be used for the shelter, storage, or enclosure of any person,animal, process, equipment, or goods and materials of any kind or nature. Where divided by party walls, each portion shall be deemed a separatebuilding. 
A. 	BUILDING AREA — The area of a lot remaining for buildings and structures after the minimum yard, open space, floodway and otherdevelopment constraints have been excluded. 
B. 	BUILDING COVERAGE (ENVELOPE) — Total square footage of a lot covered by a building. 

Figure165-104.I 
1:334 

C. 	BUILDING FRONTAGE — That portion of a structure extending along a street. 
D. 	BUILDING FRONTAGE, MULTIPLE — That portion of a structure extending along two or more streets. 
E. 	BUILDING FRONTAGE, PRIMARY — That portion of a structure extending along a street and containing the major entrance(s) to the structure. 
F. 	BUILDING, HEIGHT OF — The vertical distance to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deckline of mansard roofs, and to the average height between eaves and the ridge for gable, hip and gambrelroofs, measured from the average point of grade. 

Figure
165-104.II 
G. 	BUILDING LINE — A building limit fixed at a specific distance from thefront, rear or side boundaries of a lot beyond which a structure cannotextend. 
H. 	BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — The primary building on a lot, or a buildingthat contains a principal use. 
BUILDING OFFICIAL — The administrative official charged with enforcement of the Building Code as described in Chapter 145, BuildingConstruction, of the Bel Air Town Code. 
BUSINESS INCUBATOR — A facility dedicated to the startup and growth of small businesses, accomplished through management and facility supportsystems. For purposes of this definition, "management support systems"includes access to professional advice, information on small business regulations, management, advertising, promotion, marketing, sales, inventory, employees, labor relations and financial counseling. "Facilitysupport systems" includes clerical and reception staff, cleaning and building security and access to copy and facsimile machines, computers, faxes andother electronic equipment. 
BUSINESS SERVICE — Services rendered to a business establishment or individual on a fee or contract basis, including, but not limited to, actuarial,advertising, credit reporting, janitorial, secretarial/stenographer services,computer and data-processing services, photofinishing, broker services, 
1:335 

window cleaning, blueprinting and photocopying, tag and title services,telephone sales and other similar general office services. 
BUSINESS SERVICE, GROUP — A business service establishment consisting of five or more full-time equivalent employees. 
BUSINESS SUPPORT SERVICE — Establishments or places of business engaged in the provision of services used by office, professional and serviceestablishments. Typical uses include blueprint/photocopying, janitorialservices, photo finishing, window cleaning, protective services and other similar services. 
CALIPER — The diameter of a tree trunk measured in inches, six inches above ground level for trees up to four inches in diameter and 12 inches above ground level for trees over four inches in diameter. (See also "DBH.") 

Figure
165-104.III 
CANOPY — A fixed roof-like structure, other than an awning, which projectsfrom a wall of a building and extends along all or a majority of the wall's length to provide shelter over an entryway or walkway. 
CAR WASH/AUTO DETAILING SERVICE — An area of land or a structure with machine-or hand-operated facilities used principally for the cleaning, polishing, washing or hand washing of motor vehicles. 
CATERING — A service providing meals and/or refreshments for public orprivate entertainment for a fee. 
CLUSTER MAILBOX — A grouping of mailboxes at a central location toserve several units within a development. 
COMMERCIAL EQUIPMENT OR TRAILER — See Town Code Chapter 450, Vehicles and Traffic.[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — See Town Code Chapter 450, Vehicles and Traffic.[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA — Any device used to collect or radiateelectromagnetic waves including directional and omnidirectional antenna,whip, dish or panel not exceeding six feet in height attached to a tower, pole or structure.[Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
1:336 

COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — Tower, pole structure or platform that holds antenna or antennas, used for cellular communications or similar uses exceeding 35 feet in height.[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
COMMUNITY — The citizens of the Town of Bel Air. 
COMMUNITY CENTER — A building used for public, cultural, educational,recreational, or civic purposes, usually owned and operated by a public or nonprofit group or agency.[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
COMMUNITY SHELTER — A group housing facility intended to provide temporary board, lodging and personal services to homeless persons andthose requiring protection from physical or psychological harm.[Amended4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
COMPATIBILITY — The characteristics of different uses or activities that permit them to be located near each other in harmony and without conflict.Elements affecting compatibility include density; floor area ratio; pedestrian or vehicular traffic generated; volume of goods handled; andsuch environmental effects as noise, vibration, glare, air pollution, or radiation. 
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The currently adopted version of the Town ofBel Air Comprehensive Plan. 
CONCEPT PLAN — A preliminary presentation and attendant documentation of a proposed subdivision or site plan of sufficient accuracyto be used for the purpose of discussion and classification. 
CONSTRUCTION/SALES TRAILER — Any structure to conduct business, trade, or occupation, or for use as a selling or advertising device, and sodesigned that it is or may be mounted on wheels and used as a conveyanceon highways and streets, propelled or drawn by its own or other motor power. 
CONSTRUCTION SUPPLY SERVICES — The performance of work by, orfurnishing of supplies to, members of building trades, including building contractors; carpentry and wood flooring services; electrical services; energy systems services and products; general contracting; masonry,stonework, tile setting and plastering services; plumbing, heating and air-conditioning services; roofing and sheet metal services; and other suchservices. 
CONTIGUOUS — Next to, abutting or touching and having a boundary or portion thereof which is common or coterminous.82 
CONVENIENCE GOODS — A retail store generally containing less than3,000 square feet of gross floor area that is designed and stocked to sell primarily food, beverages, and other household supplies to customers. Itis designed to attract a large volume of stop-and-go traffic. Illustrativeexamples of convenience stores are those operated by the "7-11" and "Royal Farm Store" chains. 
82.Editor's Note: The former definition of "continuing care retirement facility (CCRC)," whichimmediately followed this definition, was repealed 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17. 
1:337 
CORPORATE OFFICE — A business which offers general office space and attendant support services for those businesses located within the center.[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
COTTAGE HOUSING — A second dwelling on a single residential lot for occupancy only by immediate family members of the residents of theprincipal dwellings on the lot. 
COURT — An open, unoccupied and unobstructed space on the same lot with and bounded on two or more sides by the walls of a building. "Outercourt" is a court having at least one side thereof opening onto a street, alley,yard, or other permanent open space. 
CREMATORIUM — A building fitted with the proper appliances for thepurposes of cremation of human remains. 
CRITICAL ROOT ZONE (CRZ) — The area around the trunk of a tree where the bulk of the root system is located. This area is measured as a circlearound the tree trunk one foot in radius for each one inch in tree diameter at breast height (DBH).[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
CROSSWALK — A roadway or street passageway through a block at ground level or overhead, designed exclusively for pedestrians. 
DAY-CARE CENTER, FAMILY — A person, agency or institution licensed bythe state to provide day care for no more than eight unrelated individuals in a residence for a portion or all of a day and on a regular schedule moreoften than once a week. 
DAY-CARE CENTER, GROUP — A person, agency or institution licensed by the state to provide group care in a residence for between nine and 12adults or children who do not all have the same parentage, or care of 13 ormore adults or children in facilities other than a private home setting, for a portion or all of a day and on a regular schedule more often than once aweek. 
DBH (DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT) — The diameter of a tree measured at 4.5 feet from grade. 
DECK — An open, above-grade platform or structure immediately adjacentor attached to the principal structure. The structure may be covered with a roof or similar covering and/or screened. 
DEMOLITION — The deliberate removal or destruction of the frame or foundation of any portion of a building or structure, including willful neglect on the maintenance and repair of a structure. 
DENSITY — The number of dwelling units permitted per acre. 
DEVELOPMENT — The construction, reconstruction after demolition of more than 50% of an existing structure, conversion, relocation or enlargement of any structure; the division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels; and any use or extension of the use of land.[Amended4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
1:338 

DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS — A document outlining the Town of BelAir Zoning, Signage and Subdivision Regulations. 
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS — Regulations and requirements addressingspecific needs and concerns for provision of facilities, protection of environmental and other resources, and fulfillment of goals of the Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan. These are in addition to specific regulationsfor individual zoning districts. 
DISTRICT, ZONING — A portion of the incorporated territory of the Town of Bel Air within which certain uniform zoning regulations and requirementsor various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this chapter. 
DORMITORY — A building on or near a school campus designed to accommodate students actively attending the school.[Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains, grading or other means. 
DRIPLINE — Vertical line extending from the outermost tree canopy to theground. 
DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES — An establishment that, by design, physicalfacilities, service or by packaging procedures, encourages or permits customers to receive services, obtain goods or be entertained while remaining in their motor vehicles. 
DRIVEWAY — An accessway for cars leading from a street or alley to agarage, house, group of houses, or business. 
DUST-FREE MATERIAL — A durable surface which is paved with bituminous concrete, portland cement, bituminous tar and chip or similarmaterial acceptable to the Director of Public Works. 
DWELLING — A structure or portion thereof that is used exclusively forhuman habitation, but not including a tent, cabin, trailer, recreational vehicle, or a room in a hotel.[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
A. 	DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — Three or more dwelling units withcommon access constructed on a permanent foundation, designed for three or more families and located on a single lot or parcel. 
B. 	DWELLING, SEMIDETACHED — A building containing two single-family dwelling units totally separated from each other by an unpierced wall extending from ground to roof and which are on separate lots. 
C. 	DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A building containing onedwelling unit that is not attached to any other dwelling by any means and is surrounded by open space or yards. 
D. 	DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE — A single-family attached dwelling in arow of at least three such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside. 
1:339 

E. 	DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building on a single lot containing twodwelling units, each of which is totally separated from the other by an unpierced wall extending from ground to roof or an unpiercedceiling or floor extending from exterior wall to exterior wall, exceptfor common stairwells exterior to both dwelling units; does not include semidetached dwellings. 
DWELLING UNIT (HOUSEKEEPING UNIT) — One or more rooms physically arranged so as to create an independent housekeeping establishment consisting of a separate kitchen or cooking facility and provisions for living, sleeping, eating and sanitation. 
EASEMENT — A right of use over the property of another. 
ELECTRIC SUBSTATION — A substation whose purpose is to transformvoltage to a level so this power can be consumed in the general vicinity ofthe substation. 
ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT SUPPLY/SERVICE — A facility that stocks andsupplies electronics and associated equipment for distribution or installation.[Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREA — An area with one or more of the following environmental characteristics: 
A. 	Steep slopes; 
B. 	Floodplains; 
C. 	Soils classified as having high-water tables; 
D. 	Soils classified as highly erodible, subject to erosion, or highly acidic; 
E. 	Land formerly used for landfill operations or hazardous industrial use; 
F. 	Stream corridors; 
G. 	Mature stands of native vegetation; 
H. 	Wetlands and wetland transition areas; and 
I. Habitats of endangered species. FAMILY — 
A. 	Any number of persons related by blood, marriage or adoption; 
B. 	Up to three adult persons maintaining a common household together with any adult dependents (as defined by the United States InternalRevenue Code) or minor children, including foster children, of such persons; 
C. 	No more than eight persons residing together in a nonprofit privatefacility in order to provide or obtain residential care and treatmentfor persons with developmental disabilities, as defined in the Health­
1:340 

General Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland; [Amended7-16-2012 by Ord. No. 753-12; 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
D. 	No more than eight persons who are or have been under treatmentfor a mental disorder, as defined in the Health-General Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and who reside together in a facility that is not organized wholly or partly to make a profit; [Amended7-16-2012 by Ord. No. 753-12; 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
E. 	No more than eight persons in recovery for drug, alcohol, and/or similar addictions residing together in a nonprofit private facility in orderto receive counseling and other rehabilitative services. [Amended7-16-2012 by Ord. No. 753-12] 
FEASIBLE — Capable of being accomplished in a successful manner aftera reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental,social and technological factors. 
FEED/GRAIN MILL — A building equipped to process agricultural productssuch as grain into flour, meal or feed products.[Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
FENESTRATION — The arrangement of windows and architectural detailson a building. 
FIFTY-FIVE-AND-OVER HOUSING — A residential structure or group of residential structures with four or more dwelling units, each of which isintended for, and occupied by, at least one individual 55 years of age orolder. 
FINAL DECISION — The last unappealable decision. 
FITNESS CENTER — A facility, including health clubs and athletic clubs,that is equipped for the conduct of sports, exercise, leisure-time activities or other customary recreational activities. 
FLOODPLAIN — Any floodplain referenced in a floodplain ordinance forthe purpose of applying floodplain regulations. (See "one-hundred-year floodplain.") 
FLOODWAY — The channel of a stream or watercourse and the adjacentland areas that must be reserved to discharge the one-percent-probability flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more thana designated height, generally one foot. 
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of all horizontal areas of all floors of a building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from thecenter line of walls separating two buildings, but excluding any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than six feet.[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
FLOOR AREA, NET — The total of all floor areas of a building, excludingvestibules, elevator shafts, janitorial closets, mechanical/electrical rooms,interior vehicular parking and loading. Multi-tenant buildings also exclude 
1:341 

stairwells, common hallways, common restrooms and common reception areas.[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
FOOTCANDLE — A standard measurement of illumination over a surface area of one square foot. 
FOREST CONSERVATION PLAN — A plan approved pursuant to the NaturalResources Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, and Chapter 216, Forest Conservation, of the Bel Air Town Code.[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
FOREST STAND DELINEATION — The methodology for evaluating theexisting vegetation on a site proposed for development, as provided in the Forest Conservation Technical Manual. 
FORTUNE TELLING — A person or group of persons who engage in thepractice or profess to practice the business or act of prophecy, intuitive counseling, cartomancy, divination, clairaudience, necromancy, astrology,phrenology, life reading, fortune-telling, clairvoyance, crystal gazing,palmistry, numerology, or reading of tarot or similar cards for any form of compensation.[Added 5-2-2011 by Ord. No. 741-11] 
FRONTAGE — Any/all sides of a lot abutting on a street. 
FRONTAGE, PRIMARY — The side of a structure that provides the mainaccess for the use or tenant space. 
FUEL STORAGE FACILITY — Any premises or units where gasoline,propane, natural gas or other petroleum products are stored in bulk for thepurpose of sale or distribution. 
FULL-TIME EQUIVALENT EMPLOYEE — The number of persons necessaryfor forty-hour-a-week coverage is equal to one full-time employee. 
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building or portion of a main building designed, arranged, or used primarily for the housing or storage of privatemotor vehicles. 
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building or portion thereof, other than an automobile salesroom, used or held out for the housing or storage of six or more motorvehicles, where service or repair facilities, if any, are incidental to theprincipal use of storage. A public garage may be a principal or accessory use. 
GENERAL MERCHANDISE — Any use characterized by the sale of bulkyitems and/or outside display/storage of merchandise or equipment, such as lumber and building materials, farm and garden supplies, marineequipment sales and service and stone monument sales. 
GOOD CAUSE SHOWN — A substantial and compelling reason or reasons to be used as a basis to permit modification to a provision of the DevelopmentRegulations or to grant an extension of a prior approval. 
GREEN BUILDING/GREEN DESIGN — Building design that yields environmental benefits, such as savings in energy, building materials, waterconsumption or reduced waste generation. 
1:342 

GREENHOUSE AND NURSERY, COMMERCIAL — A building used for thecultivation and sale of plants grown on the premises or as nursery stock and for accessory items directly related to plant care and maintenance, suchas pots, soil, mulch, fertilizers, insecticides, rakes or shovels.[Amended4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
GROUND COVER — A low-growing perennial plant with a mature height ofsix inches to 18 inches. 
GROUP HOME — A dwelling unit other than a halfway house, a community shelter or a unit in an apartment building in which persons who do notconstitute a family, as that term is defined in these regulations, live togetherand maintain a common household. 
GROWING SEASON — The period of consecutive frost-free days as statedin the current soil survey for this county published by the NationalCooperative Soil Survey Program, 16 U.S.C. Chapter 3B, generally the period from April through November.[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
HABITABLE SPACE — Actual living space of the principal use and structure, not including basement, porches, decks, garage areas or other accessory uses or structures. 
HALFWAY HOUSE — A dwelling unit or part thereof in which lodging, meals and some combination of personal care, social or counseling services, ortransportation are provided in exchange for compensation to three or morepersons in the custody of the state or federal correctional or juvenile justice systems.83 
HELIPAD — Area designed to accommodate touchdown and liftoff of helicopters for the purpose of picking up or discharging passengers, patients or cargo.[Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
HIGHWAY — Any thoroughfare, freeway, or arterial carrying traffic, including any thoroughfare having a Maryland primary highway number ora United States highway number. 
HISTORIC DISTRICT — A group of properties officially designated by the Board of Town Commissioners as an historic area within predeterminedboundaries having historic significance as defined in Chapter 246, HistoricPreservation, of the Bel Air Town Code. 
HISTORIC SITE — An individual property officially designated by the Boardof Town Commissioners as having historic significance as defined in Chapter246, Historic Preservation, of the Bel Air Town Code. 
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — A structure of historical, architectural, archeological, or cultural significance which is eligible for designation onthe National or State Register of Historic Places, as a Harford County landmark or as a Bel Air historic site or district. 
83.Editor's Note: The former definition of "hawkers or peddlers," which immediately followedthis definition, was repealed 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17. 
1:343 
HOME OCCUPATION — Any activity carried out for gain by a resident andconducted as a customary, incidental and accessory use in the resident's dwelling unit. A home occupation may include a for-profit home business orhome office for a resident who may work for another employer or contractor consult with another company or individual. A home occupation does not include goods, wares or merchandise offered, displayed or kept for salewithin the dwelling unit. For purposes of this chapter, "home occupation"shall include the following: 
A. 	Artists not employing industrial fabrication techniques. 
B. 	Authors and writers. 
C. 	Dressmakers, seamstresses and tailors. 
D. 	Model making, weaving, custom woodworking and other home craftsnot involving industrial fabrication techniques. 
E. 	Music and dance teachers having classes of fewer than four pupils at any one time. 
F. 	Offices of a person practicing a trade/profession from a residence. 
G. 	Repairs of bicycles (but no other vehicles), cameras, clocks, jewelry and small appliances not involving industrial fabrication techniques. 
H. 	Tutering or instruction of fewer than four pupils at any one time. 
[Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-1784] 
I. 	Other uses as may be found by the reviewing authority to be consistentwith the purpose of the district in which the use is located. [Amended4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
HOSPITAL — An institution providing inpatient health care services and medical or surgical care, including general hospitals and specializedmedical institutions. 
HOTEL — A building in which lodging and/or boarding is provided forcompensation and in which access to and from all rooms is made throughan inside lobby or office. 
HOUSE OF WORSHIP — A building, structure or group of buildings orstructures that, by design and construction, are primarily intended forconducting organized religious services and associated accessory uses. 
ILLUMINATION, DIRECT — Lighting that travels directly from its source tothe viewers eye. 
ILLUMINATION, INDIRECT — Lighting cast upon an opaque surface from a concealed source. 
84.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection H as Subsection I. 
1:344 
IMPACT FEES — Costs imposed on new development to fund public facilityimprovements required by new development and to ease fiscal burdens on localities. 
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any surface through which rainfall cannot passor be effectively absorbed (roads, bridges, paved parking lots, sidewalks, etc.). 
IMPROVEMENT, PUBLIC — Includes but is not limited to the following: astreet pavement, with or without curbs and gutters; sidewalks; crosswalks; water and gas mains and other public utilities; sanitary sewers and stormdrains, with appurtenant construction; street trees; street signs. 
INDOOR RECREATION — An establishment providing completely enclosed recreational activities. Accessory uses shall be permitted to include thepreparation and service of food and/or the sale of equipment related toenclosed uses. Included in this definition shall be bowling, roller skating or ice skating, laser tag, miniature golf, batting cage and related athletic-oriented games, including arenas/stadiums.[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
INDUSTRIAL USE — An establishment primarily engaged in manufacturing,construction, communication, transportation, electric, gas or sanitaryservices, and/or wholesale trade. 
INFILL DEVELOPMENT — Construction of any residential, commercial,institutional or industrial structure located in an existing developed area. 
INFRASTRUCTURE — Water-and sewer lines, roads, schools and other public facilities needed to support developed areas. 
INSTRUCTIONAL SERVICES — A for-profit educational facility offeringclasses to the public. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, martial arts, drivers education, real estate classes, arts and crafts classes and computer classes. 
INTERSECTION — The crossing of two or more roads at grade. 
ISLAND — An area within a right-of-way or parking area upon whichvehicular traffic may not traverse. The area is to provide for pedestriansafety, separation of vehicles and/or landscaping and is formed by curbing or painted markings. 
ITINERANT DEALERS, PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS — See Town Code Chapter 272.[Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
JUNKYARD — Any area where waste or scrap material, including but notlimited to scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles, is bought, sold, exchanged, baled, packed, stored, disassembled or handled,but not including areas where such uses are conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building. Not included are pawnshops and establishments for the sale, purchase or storage of used furniture andhousehold equipment, used cars in operable condition, salvaged machineryand the processing of used, discarded or salvaged materials as part of manufacturing operations. 
1:345 

KENNEL — An establishment, not part of an agricultural use, in which sixor more domestic animals, such as cats, dogs and other pets, more than six months old are kept, groomed, bred, boarded or trained. 
LANDMARK BUILDINGS — A structure with significant historic, architectural or cultural meaning or importance. 
LAND TRUST — A public or private nonprofit organization which holdsconservation easements donated for the purpose of open space preservationor forest conservation. 
LEADERSHIP IN ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL DESIGN (LEED) — TheGreen Building Rating System, which is a nationally accepted bench markfor design, construction and operation of high-performance green buildings. 
LEASABLE AREA/SPACE — The total floor area designed for owner or tenant occupancy and exclusive use. It is expressed in square feet, measured from the center lines of joint partitions and exteriors of outside walls.[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
LEVEL OF SERVICE — A measurement tool designed to calculate the maximum number of vehicles that have a reasonable expectation of passingover a given section of roadway or through an intersection in a given periodof time under prevailing roadway and traffic conditions. For purposes of this Part 2, "level of service" is categorized in a series of letter grades, "A"through "F." Level of Service "A" denotes the best traffic conditions whileLevel of Service "F" indicates gridlock.85 
LIQUOR STORE — A retail establishment that sells packaged liquor, wine orbeer for consumption off premises which possesses the appropriate license from the State of Maryland.[Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
LOCAL LEGISLATIVE BODY — The Board of Town Commissioners for Bel Air. 
LOCATION — A lot, premises, building, structure, wall or any place whatsoever upon which development of any type regulated by the Development Regulations is proposed or exists. 
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by plat,subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be used, developed or built upon a unit. 
A. LOT AREA — The total horizontal area located within the property lines. 
85.Editor's Note: The former definition of "life care facility," which immediately followed thisdefinition, was repealed 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17. 
1:346 

Figure
165-104.IV 

B. 	LOT, CORNER — A lot situated at the intersection of two or more streets or upon two parts of the same street forming an interior angle of 135° or less. 
C. 	LOT DEPTH — The average horizontal distance between the front lotline and the rear lot line or other parallel lot line of a lot, measured within the lot boundaries. 
D. 	LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE — A lot having frontage on two nonintersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot. 
E. 	LOT FRONTAGE — That portion of a lot extending along a street. 
F. 	LOT, INTERIOR — Any lot other than a corner lot. 
G. 	LOT LINE — A line of record bounding a lot which divides one lot from another lot or from a public or private street or waterway or any otherpublic space. When a lot line is curved, all dimensions related to saidlot line shall be based on the chord of the arc. 
H. 	LOT LINE, FRONT — The lot line separating a lot from a street right-of­way. On a through lot, both lines adjacent to the street shall be deemedfront lot lines. On a corner lot, all lot lines which face a street right-of­way shall be considered front lot lines. 
I. 	LOT LINE, REAR — Except in the case of corner lots, the line oppositeand most distant from the front lot line. 
J. 	LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line connected to a front or rear lot line. 
K. 	LOT LINE, STREET OR ALLEY — Any lot line separating the lot from astreet or alley. 
1:347 

L. 	LOT, PANHANDLE — A lot with the appearance of a frying pan orflagstaff in which the handle is most often used as the point of access to a road. 
M. 	LOT SIZE REQUIREMENTS — Restrictions on the dimensions of a lot, to include a specified zoning district size, lot area and lot width, all established to limit the minimum size and dimension of a lot in a givenzoning district. 
N. 	LOT, THROUGH — A lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two more or less parallel public streets and which is not a corner lot. 
O. 	LOT WIDTH — The width of the lot measured at right angles to itscenter line at the front building line. 
MANUFACTURING, PRIMARY — Establishments engaged in the initialprocessing or treatment of raw materials or manufacturing of products thatrequire additional processing, fabrication or assembly for ultimate use by the consumer. These shall include, but not be limited to, chemical and allied products, fabricated metal products, food and kindred products, lumber andwood products, furniture stripping, machinery production, miscellaneous manufacturing, paper and allied products, petroleum and coal products,rubber and miscellaneous plastics, stone, clay and glass manufacturing andtransportation equipment manufacturing. 
MANUFACTURING, SECONDARY — Establishments engaged in the manufacture of products for final use or consumption. This usually involvesthe secondary processing, fabrication or assembly of semifinished products from a primary manufacturing industry. These shall include, but not be limited to, the following: apparel and other textile manufacturing, furnitureand fixtures, instruments and related products, leather and leather products, office computing and accounting equipment manufacturing. 
MATURE TREE — A tree of any species which measures a minimum of 10inches in diameter at breast height (DBH) or greater. 
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE (MEP) — Designing, construction,renovation and restoration projects so that all reasonable opportunities forusing building techniques and treatments for reducing the carbon footprint of new development are exhausted. 
MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSARY — Establishment licensed by the Stateof Maryland to acquire, process, possess, transfer, transport, sell, distribute and administer cannabis and related products for use by a qualified patientor caregiver.[Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
MEDICAL SERVICES — The provision of medical, dental, surgical, or otherhealth-related services to individuals, including medical outpatient clinics,medical laboratories, dental clinics, dental laboratories, hospital supplies and opticians. 
MICROBREWERY/WINERY/DISTILLERY — Facility used for the productionof beer, hard cider, wine or other alcoholic beverages where such beverages are brewed, fermented or distilled for consumption on site, sale as 
1:348 

packaged goods or distribution wholesale and which possesses the appropriate license from the State of Maryland.[Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
MINI STORAGE — Facility that contains various sizes of individual compartmentalized and controlled access stalls for the storage of customer's goods and wares.[Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
MITIGATION — Process or projects replacing lost or degraded resources, such as wetlands or habitat, at another location. 
MIXED-USE CENTER — A building or structure containing both commercialand residential floor space, conceived and designed as a single environment in which both commercial and residential amenities are provided.86 
MOTOR VEHICLE SALES, SERVICE AND STORAGE — A lot, building, premises or portion thereof, other than a private or storage garage, designed or used for equipping, servicing, repairing, hiring, selling, or storing motor-driven vehicles, including, but not limited to, filling, repairand service stations, commercial vehicle construction and industrial sales, service and storage facilities from vehicle sales and service facilities, motorvehicle rental and leasing facilities and public garages. 
NEIGHBORHOOD — An area of a community with characteristics that distinguish it from other areas and that may include distinct economiccharacteristics, housing types or boundaries defined by physical barriers,such as roads or natural features; for purposes of annexation and/or zoning review, an area two blocks from the applicable site in all directions. 
NONCONFORMING — 
A. 	NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A legally preexisting building or structure that was lawful when constructed andcontinues to be lawful, even though it no longer conforms to the bulkarea and/or setback requirements of the zone in which it is located because of the adoption or amendment of the Development Regulationsor Zoning Maps.87 
B. 	NONCONFORMING USE — A legally preexisting use which was lawful when established and continues to be lawful, even though it no longerconforms to the requirements of the zone in which it is located becauseof the adoption or amendment of the Development Regulations or Zoning Maps. 
NONTIDAL WETLANDS — All palustrine aquatic bed, palustrine emergent,palustrine forested and palustrine scrub-shrub wetlands as defined by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, except tidal wetlands regulatedunder Title 9 of the Natural Resources Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland. These nontidal wetlands are lands where the water table is usually at or near the surface (i.e., periodically saturated) or areas where 
86.Editor's Note: The former definition of "motel," which immediately followed thisdefinition, was repealed 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17. 
87.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included as an attachment to this chapter. 
1:349 the substrate or soil is covered by shallow water at some time duringthe growing season. They are further characterized by one or both of the following two attributes: 
A. 	The land supports predominantly obligate or facultative wet hydrophyteplant species cited in the Department of Natural Resources publication entitled "Vascular Plant Species Occurring in Maryland Wetlands." 
B. 	The substitute is predominantly hydric soil. 
NURSING HOME — A use providing bed care and inpatient services for persons requiring regular medical attention, but excluding a facilityproviding surgical or emergency medical services and excluding a facilityproviding care for alcoholism, drug addiction, mental disease or communicable disease. 
OFFICE — A building or portion of a building wherein services are performed involving predominantly administrative, professional or clerical operations. 
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOODPLAIN — The channel and the relatively flatarea adjoining the channel of a natural stream or river that has been or may be covered by floodwater which has a one-percent chance of being equaledor exceeded in any given year. 
OPEN SPACE — Any area of land or water set aside, dedicated, designed, or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoymentof owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space. 
OUTDOOR DINING OR BAR — An outdoor dining area or bar accessory to restaurant or tavern located on the same property.[Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
OUTDOOR PROMOTIONAL EVENTS — Carnivals, craft shows, flea markets and similar events. 
OUTDOOR SALES EVENTS — Tent sales, temporary sidewalk sales, Christmas tree sales, flower sales, inventory reduction or liquidation sales, distressed merchandise sales, seasonal merchandise sales, yard sales orsimilar short-term events. 
OVERLAY DISTRICT — A specially mapped district which is subject to supplementary regulations or requirements for development. 
PARCEL — Any contiguous area, site, or portion of land under common ownership. 
PARKING DECK — See "garage, storage." 
PARKING IMPACT STUDY — A documented analysis, prepared by a professional transportation consultant or engineer, delineating the effects of a development on area parking facilities based on the parking needsgenerated by the proposed use. 
1:350 

PARKING, COMMERCIAL — An off-street parking structure or surface lotused for the daily or long-term storage of motor vehicles, with or without payment of a fee.[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
PARKING, MUNICIPAL — An off-street parking structure or surface lot, other than a private lot, that is available to the general public for use.[Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
PARKING SPACE — An area designated and used for parking space, as specified in Article VII, for normal, handicapped or compact-sized vehicles.88 
PERFORMANCE STANDARD — A minimum requirement or maximum allowable limit on the effects of a use. Such standards are placed on individual uses in addition to the general zoning requirements. 
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, incorporated association, firm,partnership, sole proprietorship and any other recognized legal entity. 
PERSONAL SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in providingservices involving the care of a person or his/her personal goods or apparel,including catering, clothing alteration, formal wear/rental, funeral home/ morticians, interior decorating, pet grooming, photo studio, shoe repair andwatch/jewelry repair. 
PHARMACY — Retail establishment engaged in the preparation and sale of prescription, nonprescription drugs, related health aids, and medicalequipment. Convenience goods are considered as accessory retail.[Added4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Town of Bel Air Planning Commission. 
PLANT UNIT — A deciduous tree at least two inches in caliper or greater, anevergreen tree at least five feet in height, or a suitable shrub, as approved by the Planning Commission. 
PLAT — A map showing the location, boundaries and ownership of individual properties planned and developed as a single project. 
PLAT, FINAL — A surveyor's precise drawing that fixes the locations andboundaries of lots and streets. 
PRINTING/PUBLISHING SERVICES — A commercial use that designs, produces, or distributes printed material.[Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
PROFESSIONAL SERVICE, GROUP — Professional service establishment consisting of three or more professionals.[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES — The service by members of any profession, including but not limited to accountants, architects, chiropractors, doctors,lawyers, dentists, financial service practitioners, insurance agents, 
88.Editor's Note: The former definition of "peddler," which immediately followed thisdefinition, was repealed 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17. 
1:351 engineers, opticians, optometrists, osteopaths, real estate agents, travelagents or social workers. 
PROJECTION — The distance by which a sign, canopy, marquee, rooflineand the like extends over public property or beyond the building line. 
PUBLIC — Open to common use, whether or not government ownership is involved. 
PUBLIC ART — A park, plaza, mural, sculpture, fountain, street furniture,bas-relief, painting or similar decorative element which is located in an area where the public is directly or indirectly invited to visit or permitted to congregate. 
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A person regularly engaged in a business for pay or as a means of livelihood for a minimum of three years, whethercertified or not. 
QUALITY OF LIFE — Aspects of the economic, social and physical environment that make a community a desirable place in which to live or dobusiness. 
RATED CAPACITY — Factor used to calculate parking demand for uses specified in Article VII, § 165-51H, of this Part 2. 
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAILER — See Town Code Chapter 450, Vehicles and Traffic.[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
RECREATION, OUTDOOR — An area free of buildings, except for restrooms, dressing rooms, equipment storage, maintenance building, open-air pavilions, picnic grounds and similar structures, used primarily forrecreational activities. 
RECYCLING/REUSE CENTER — A designated facility which accepts donations of used goods for recycling, resale or free distribution.[Amended4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
REDEVELOPMENT — Construction activity in a previously developed area including the demolition, rehabilitation or structural alteration of an existing structure. May also include the reconstruction of a structure afterdemolition of less than 50% or reconstruction using 100% of the existing foundation.[Added 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
REFORESTATION — The creation of a biological community dominated bytrees and other woody plants containing at least 100 live trees per acre,with at least 50% of those trees having the potential of attaining a two-inch or greater diameter, measured at 4.5 feet above the ground, withinseven years; or the establishment of a forest according to procedures setforth in the Maryland Forest Conservation Technical Manual. This includes landscaping of areas under an approved landscaping plan establishing aforest at least 35 feet wide and covering 2,500 square feet or more of area. 
RESTAURANT — A commercial establishment where food and beverages are prepared and served for consumption on or off the premises. However,a snack bar or refreshment stand shall not be deemed a restaurant. 
1:352 

REVIEWING AGENCY — Includes any of the primary agencies or individualsinvolved in the administration of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. 
RIGHTS-OF-WAY — A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription, or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, waterline,sanitary or storm sewer or similar uses. 
ROAD — See "street." 
ROAD FRONTAGE — That portion of a lot abutting a street or highway andsituated between lot lines intersecting such street or highway. 
ROADWAY — The actual road surface area from curbline to curbline, which may include travel lanes, parking lanes, and deceleration and accelerationlanes. Where there are no curbs, the roadway is that portion between theedges of the paved or hard surface width. 
ROOFLINE — That part of the roof or parapet which covers the major areaof the building which is the highest point as viewed in elevation from thefront or side. (See "building, height of" illustration.) 
ROUTINE MAINTENANCE — Work that does not alter the exterior fabric or features of a site or structure and has no material effect on the historical, architectural or archeological significance of a site or structure. 
SATELLITE RECEIVING DISH — A device used or designed to receive electromagnetic signals from earth-orbiting satellites and other extraterrestrial sources and is external to or is attached to the exterior of any building. The term "satellite receiving dish" includes satellite earthstations, satellite television antennas, satellite dish antennas or any otherdevices designed to receive signals from satellites in the manner described above. For the purposes of these regulations, accessory satellite receivingdishes shall not be considered as wireless transmitting and receivingstructures, rigid-structure antennae or long-wire antennae. 
SCREENING — A method of visually shielding or obscuring one abutting ornearby structure or use from another by fencing, walls or berms. 
SEASONAL MERCHANDISE — Products that are primarily sold during a particular season of the year, e.g., Christmas trees, locally grown produce,holiday flowers, snowballs and similar products. 
SETBACK — The minimum distance by which any building or structure must be separated from a street right-of-way or lot line. 
SHED — A permanent storage facility exceeding 25 square feet and lessthan 200 square feet constructed as an accessory structure incidental to the use of the principal building, not to include shipping containers or tractor-trailer bodies.[Amended 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 783-18] 
SHOPPERS' MERCHANDISE — Commodities which tend to be purchasedon a comparison basis, including, but not limited to, apparel/accessories,automobile supplies, business equipment, china/glassware, commercial art, communications equipment, computers/calculators, drugstores, fabrics/ 
1:353 

upholstery, floor coverings, hardware, home appliances, home improvementsupplies, home furnishings/furniture, import stores, liquor stores, luggage/ leather goods, musical instruments/supplies, paint/wall coverings, partysupplies, photographic equipment sales, radios, records and tapes, sportinggoods, television/stereo sales and service, variety stores and toy/game stores. Establishments commonly referred to as "catalog showrooms," "department stores," "discount stores," and "supermarkets" shall be regulated as shoppers' merchandise. 
SHOPPING CENTER — A group or assemblage of four or more retail tradeand service uses exceeding 20,000 square feet in aggregate developedunder a uniform plan or scheme of development and serviced by a common, integral parking facility.[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
SIDEWALK CAFE — A portion of a food establishment or eating or drinking facility located contiguous to a restaurant on a public sidewalk or public open space.[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
SIGHT TRIANGLE — The area at the corner of a lot fronting on two streets,which shall remain unobstructed for sight distance purposes, as specified in Article IX of this Part 2. 
SIGN — A structure which consists of a device, light, letter, word, model, barrier, logo, insignia, or representation, including any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display illustration or insignia used to advertiseor promote the interest(s) of any person when the same is placed outof doors in view of the general public, but excluding window displays or merchandise and signs which are incidental to the display of merchandise. 
A. 	SIGN, AREA — 
(1) 	
For a sign, either freestanding or attached, the area shall be considered to include all lettering, wording and accompanyingdesigns and symbols, together with the background, whether openor enclosed, on which they are displayed, but not including any supporting framework and bracing incidental to the display itself. 

(2) 	
For a sign consisting of individual letters or symbols attached to orpainted on a surface or window, the area shall be considered to be that of the smallest rectangle or other shape which encompassesall the letters and symbols. 


B. 	SIGN, BANNER — A temporary sign displayed on cloth or similar flexible material and designed to be mounted on an open framework orhanging from posts, poles or wall-mounted, used as an advertisement.
[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
C. 	SIGN, CONSTRUCTION — A temporary sign erected on the premises on which construction is taking place, during the period of suchconstruction, indicating the names of the architects, engineers, landscape architects, contractors or similar artisans and the owners,financial supporters, sponsors, and similar individuals or firms having arole or interest with respect to the structure or project. 
1:354 

D. 	SIGN, DIRECTIONAL — Signs limited to directional messages,principally for pedestrian or vehicular traffic, such as "one-way," "entrance," and "exit." 
E. 	SIGN, DIRECTORY — A self-supporting sign in a fixed location listingthe names and/or logos of businesses and located at the entrance to a property on which groupings of business, commercial or industrial useshave been concentrated. 
F. 	SIGN, ELECTRIC — Any sign containing electric wiring. This does not include signs illuminated by an exterior floodlight source. 
G. 	SIGN, FREESTANDING — A self-supporting sign in a fixed location andnot attached to any building or structure. 
H. 	SIGN, ILLUMINATED — A sign lighted by or exposed to artificiallighting, either by lights on or in the sign or directed toward the sign. 
I. 	SIGN, MARQUEE — A sign which has a reader board for the display of text information in which each alphanumeric character, graphic orsymbol is defined by objects, not consisting of an illumination deviceand may be changed or rearranged manually without altering the face or surface of the sign. 
J. 	SIGN, ON-PREMISES — Sign or other advertising device which advertises or indicates only the person occupying the premises on which it is located, the merchandise for sale, or the activity conductedthereon. 
K. 	SIGN, POLITICAL — A sign designed to influence the action of voters for the passage or defeat of a measure or the election of a candidate fornomination or election to public office at a national, state, or other localelection. 
L. 	SIGN, PROJECTING — A permanent sign that is hung at a ninety-degreeangle from the face of and affixed to a building or structure and extends12 inches or beyond the building wall, structure or parts thereof. 
M. 	SIGN, SANDWICH BOARD — An A-frame or easel sign used for advertising in front of a specific business. 
N. 	SIGN, TEMPORARY — A banner, pennant, poster or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, plastic sheet, cardboard, wallboard orother like materials and intended to be displayed for less than six months. [Amended 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 783-18] 
O. 	SIGN, VEHICLE — Any sign exceeding 10 square feet in area, mounted,painted, placed on, attached or affixed to a trailer, watercraft, truck, automobile or other form of motor vehicle so parked or placed thatthe sign thereon is discernible from a public street or right-of-way, andwhich, by its size, location and manner of display, acts as a means of communication calculated to exhibit advertising of an on-site or off-sitebusiness. 
1:355 

P. SIGN, WALL (FLAT) — One affixed directly to the exterior wall orscreening surface and confined within the limits thereof and which projects from that surface 12 inches or less at all points. 
SIGNIFICANT CHANGE — A modification to a structure, natural feature or function that alters the location, size or orientation of a building, stormwater management facility, road, parking area or a feature that isvisible from the public right-of-way. 
SITE PLAN — A plan, to scale, showing uses and structures proposed for a parcel of land as required by the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations.It includes lot lines, streets, building sites, reserved open space, buildings,major landscape features (both natural and man-made), and existing and proposed utility lines. 
SMOKING LOUNGE — An establishment which is dedicated in whole or in part to the sale and smoking of tobacco products or other legal substances on its premises. Includes establishments such as cigar bars, hookah cafes,tobacco clubs, and smoking rooms associated with tobacco retail sales.[Added 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 754-12; amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT — A use permitted in a zoning district uponshowing that such use in a specified location will comply with all conditions and standards for the location or operation of the use as specified inthis Part 2 and authorized by the Planning Commission. (See Article XII,§ 165-94.) 
SPECIAL EVENTS — Circuses, fairs, carnivals, festivals, outdoor sales events, or other types of temporary outdoor uses that run for a limitedtime, but not more than six weeks; are intended to or are likely to draw substantial crowds or a steady flow of customers; and are unlike the customary or usual activities generally associated with the property wherethe special event is to be located. 
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use which is conditionally compatible with otheruses in the district in which it is permitted. (See Article XII, § 165-93.) 
SPECIALTY FOOD STORE — A retail establishment which primarily carries only one type of interrelated goods, including a bakery, candy/nutconfectionery, dairy food store, delicatessen, product store, health foodstore, ice cream parlor, meat/fish store and wine and cheese shops. 
SPECIALTY SHOPS — A retail store which carries only one type ofinterrelated goods, including but not limited to bookstores, candle shops,cosmetic shops, florist shops, gift shops, hobby and craft supply shops, novelty shops, jewelry shops, key shops, newspaper/magazine shops, petshops, photographic shops, plant shops, print stores, secondhand merchandise, souvenir shops, stationery shops, tack shops, telephone stores and tobacco shops. 
STABLE, PRIVATE — A structure designed to shelter not more than two animals. 
1:356 

STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of anyfloor and the surface of the floor next above it, or, if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
STORY, HALF — A partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wallplates of which, on at least two opposite exterior walls, are not more than four feet above the floor of such story. 
STREET — A public or private right-of-way which provides a public means ofaccess to an abutting property. The term "street" shall include road, avenue, drive, circle, highway or similar term. 
A. 	STREET, ARTERIAL — A street designed to carry large volumes oftraffic, normally controlled by traffic signs and signals, and serves a major portion of the vehicular traffic entering and leaving the Town. 
B. 	STREET, COLLECTOR — A street designed to carry moderate volumesof traffic, which, in addition to providing access to abutting properties, is intended to collect traffic from, and distribute it to, a series of local streets within a neighborhood. 
C. 	STREET, LOCAL — A street designed to carry limited volumes of traffic and intended to serve and provide access primarily to the propertiesabutting thereon or to provide a cross-connection between other local streets. 
STREET FURNITURE — Structures placed within the street right-of-wayfor the purpose of amenity or service, including but not limited to benches,trash receptacles, information boards, bollards, and decorative light fixtures. 
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change in the structural members of abuilding, such as walls, columns, beams, girders, or rafters. 
STRUCTURE — Anything built or constructed. 
SUBDIVIDER — Any person or agent thereof who subdivides any land asdefined herein or undertakes any of the activities covered by the subdivision regulations of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. The term"subdivider" includes the term "developer," even though the personsinvolved in successive stages of a project may vary. 
SUBDIVISION — The division of any lot, tract or parcel of land into twoor more lots, parcels, plats or sites, or the division of any land by thelaying out or creation of any new public street, road, alley, public use, parking area, easement, or any other public place, space, or building site,for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership orbuilding development. It includes resubdivision, lot consolidation and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of resubdivision or to theland or territory subdivided. 
SUBSTANTIAL CONSTRUCTION — Completion of footings and foundation in new construction, with walls at least partially erected, or any alterationof a structural member in existing construction. 
1:357 

SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT/CHANGE — Any addition to a propertyand/or any extension, repair, reconstruction, or other improvement of a property, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the fair market value ofa property before the improvement is made.[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
SUPERMARKET — A retail establishment which sells dry groceries, produce, household items and limited baking or delicatessen items prepared on premises having a gross floor area (exclusive of basement) exceeding 3,000 square feet. 
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT — Development with the goal of preservingenvironmental quality, natural resources and livability for present and future generations. Sustainable initiatives work to ensure efficient use of resources. 
TATTOO SERVICE — See "body-piercing service." 
TAVERN — An establishment used primarily for the dispensing of alcoholfor consumption on premises to the general public where food is sold orserved as accessory to the primary use and which possesses the appropriate license from the State of Maryland.[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
TAVERN WITH ENTERTAINMENT — A tavern (as defined separately in Article XIV) in which dancing, gaming or live entertainment are provided.[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
TOWN STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DETAILS — Current standards, specifications and details for water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains,streets and roads, as adopted by the Board of Town Commissioners, and all amendments thereto. 
TRANSITION AREA — Properties located on the fringe of the downtown commercial districts which are significantly impacted by commercial development and traffic patterns. 
USE — The purpose or activity for which land, buildings, or structures aredesigned, arranged, intended, occupied or maintained. 
USE CATEGORY — A group of similar use types that are associated witheach other to such an extent that they perform a specific land use function.For the purposes of this Part 2, use categories are: 
A. Amusements/entertainment; 
B. Industrial; 
C. Institutional; 
D. Natural resources; 
E. Residential; 
F. Retail uses; 
1:358 

G. 	Service uses; and 
H. 	Temporary uses. 
VARIANCE — An adjustment in the application of specific area, bulk ordensity regulations of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations becauseof special circumstances applicable to a particular property. See Article XII, § 165-92. 
VEHICLE ACCOMMODATION AREA — That portion of a lot that is usedby vehicles for access, circulation, parking, and loading and unloading. It comprises the total of circulation areas, loading and unloading areas, andparking areas. 
WAREHOUSING — A commercial facility used for the storage and handling of freight or merchandise. Storage incidental to retail sales not in excess of50% of the total gross square feet of the establishment is excluded.[Added4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
WATERSHED — The geographic area which drains into a specific body ofwater. A watershed may contain several subwatersheds. 
WETLANDS — Natural areas, as determined by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, that have a predominance of hydric soils and thatare inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency andduration sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. 
YARD — An open area between the lot line and setback or existing building line within which no structures shall be located. 
A. 	YARD, FRONT — A yard extending the full width of the lot betweenany building and the front lot line and measured perpendicular to the building at the closest point to the front lot line. 
B. 	YARD, REAR — A yard extending the full width of the lot betweenany building and the rear lot line and measured perpendicular to the building at the closest point to the rear lot line. 
C. 	YARD, SIDE — A yard extending from the front yard to the rear yardbetween any building and the side lot line and measured perpendicular to the building at the closest point to the side lot line. Side yarddimensions may be averaged as stated in Article IX. 
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR — The administrative officer charged with enforcement of the requirements specified in the Land Use Article of theAnnotated Code of Maryland and the requirements of the Town of Bel Air'sDevelopment Regulations. The Zoning Administrator is also known as the Director of Planning and Community Development.[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
ZONING CASE — Any request for subdivision, site plan approval, special exception, special development, variance, interpretation, annexation or rezoning or amendment, modification or clarification of the same. 
1:359 

ZONING MAP — The Zoning Map89 of Bel Air, Maryland, dated November 28, 2016, together with all amendments thereto subsequently adopted.[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
89.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included as an attachment to this chapter. 
1:360 
Part 3 
Signs 

ARTICLE XV 
Sign Regulations 
§ 165-105. Purpose; intent. 
A. 	The purpose of this Part 3 is to regulate all exterior signs placedfor observance in an effort to protect property values, to protect the character of the various neighborhoods in the Town, to protect health,safety and to promote the public welfare. The principal features ofthese regulations are the restriction of advertising to the business or use of the premises on which the sign is located and the restrictionof the total sign area permissible per site. Signs have a direct andsubstantial impact on traffic safety, pedestrian safety, community aesthetics and property values. While recognizing the importantfunction signs serve for the community and the economy, the Townalso recognizes the need to control location, size, brightness, legibility, operational characteristics and maintenance of signs. 
B. 	The sign regulations are intended to: 
(1) 	
Eliminate or restrict signs which constitute an actual or potential distraction or other hazard to safe operation of motor vehicles orsafe passage of pedestrians. 

(2) 	
Encourage and protect sound practices in signage, thereby assisting the public to locate facilities, goods and services withoutundue difficulty, danger, or confusion. 

(3) 	
Eliminate unsightly and incongruous signs which tend to depreciate or diminish private and public investments in buildings,sites and highways or hinder or discourage the progressiveimprovement of residential, business and industrial properties. 

(4) 	
Conserve the attractiveness of the natural landscaped and builtenvironment of the Town of Bel Air. 

(5) 	
Ensure that permanent signs within one complex coordinate with the architecture in such a manner that the overall appearance is harmonious in color, form and proportion. [Amended 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 783-18] 

(6) 	
Ensure that all temporary signs shall be limited to the givingof information, and that such signs shall not hinder vehicular or pedestrian traffic movement. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 


1:361 

§ 165-106. Standards by zoning district. [Amended 11-25-2011 byOrd. No. 744-11; 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17; 4-2-2018 by Ord. No.783-18] 
In all zoning districts, any sign placed on land or on a building for thepurpose of identification or for advertising a use conducted thereon or therein shall be deemed to be accessory and incidental to such land,building or use. All other permanent signs, commonly referred to as "billboards," which advertise services, products or businesses not connected with the site or building on which they are located, are prohibited. The following sign standards shall apply to each zoning districtin the Town of Bel Air. The zoning districts are as defined in Article III of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations and on the Official Zoning Map. 
A. 	Residential zoning districts. 
(1) 	R-1 (Low-Density Residential). One unlighted professional home occupation sign not exceeding one square foot in area shall bepermitted per single-family dwelling in conjunction with allowablehome professions and occupations as set forth in the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. Such signs shall be mounted flatagainst the building. Additional signage shall be permitted in theTransition Overlay District as specified below. No signage lighting is permitted in the R-1 District. 
(a) 	
Freestanding signs. The maximum allowable sign area for any one professional office which is the sole occupant of a structure in a Transition Overlay District shall be five squarefeet. However, an additional one square foot of sign area shallbe allowed for each professional office granted a separate use and occupancy certificate for the converted structure, up tothe maximum of three additional square feet. Such signs shallbe limited to six feet in height and set back a minimum of 10 feet from the front property line. Only one freestanding sign ispermitted on each lot. 

(b) 	
Wall-mount and projecting signs. Wall-mounted and projecting signs are permitted for any professional office in the TransitionOverlay District in lieu of a freestanding sign. A wall-mountedsign may be a maximum of five square feet, with one additional square foot of sign area for each professional office granted separate use and occupancy, up to a maximum of three additional square feet. A projecting sign may not exceed five square feet, nor project more than four feet from the building,and shall have a clearance of eight feet from any public orprivate walkway, as measured vertically from the walkway to the bottom of the sign or supporting structure. No projectingsign shall be erected at a height exceeding 10 feet, as measured vertically from the ground to the top of the sign or supporting structure. No window or part of a window shall becovered by the sign or its supporting structure. No projecting 


1:362 

sign or supporting structure shall extend above the eave of theroof. 
(2) 	
R-2 (Medium-Density Residential). Same as R-1 District, exceptthat professional home occupation signs shall not exceed threesquare feet in area. Professional occupation signs, freestanding, wall-mounted and projecting signs in the Transition OverlayDistrict may be externally lit. 

(3) 	
R-3 (High-Density Residential). Same as R-2 District. 

(4) 	
R-O (Residential-Office District). All office buildings, includingconversions, shall be permitted a total advertising area of one square foot for each lineal foot of building frontage. No additional allowance will be permitted for multiple-frontage buildings. Themaximum sign area allotment shall not exceed 32 square feet. Thetotal area of all signs erected on the lot and building shall be determined by the building frontage. Signs may only be externallylit. 

(a) 	
Freestanding sign. The maximum allowable sign area for a freestanding sign in the R-O District is 16 square feet. Suchsigns shall be limited to six feet in height and set back aminimum of 10 feet from the front property line. Only one freestanding sign is permitted on each lot. 

(b) 	
Wall-mounted and projecting signs. Wall-mounted and projecting signs are permitted in the R-O District. Wall-mounted signs may not exceed 16 square feet. A projectingsign may not exceed five square feet, nor project more thanfour feet from the building, and shall have a clearance of eight feet from any public or private walkway, as measured verticallyfrom the walkway to the bottom of the sign or supportingstructure. No projecting sign shall be erected at a height exceeding 15 feet, as measured vertically from the ground tothe top of the sign or supporting structure. No window or partof a window shall be covered by the sign or its supporting structure. No projecting sign or supporting structure shall extend above the roofline. 



(5) 	
Temporary signs. 

(a) 	
Signs not exceeding six square feet may be placed twice in acalendar year for no more than a total of 30 days. No more thanone sign may be placed per lot with a setback of 10 feet. 

(b) 	
No commercial service, product or business may be advertisedin a residential district with the exception of a property forsale, for lease or under active construction. Such a property may be permitted an additional sign not exceeding six squarefeet with a setback 10 feet from all property lines. 


1:363 


(c) 	
Institutional uses in residential districts may place a temporarysign, not exceeding 24 square feet, for no more than 90 days in a calendar year. Signs shall not exceed six feet in height andmust be set back 10 feet from all property lines. No more thanone temporary sign is permitted on a property at any given time. A permit is required from the Zoning Administrator. 

(d) 	
Temporary signs in the R-O District may be 12 square feet inarea, a maximum of six feet in height and set back no less than 10 feet from the right-of-way. 


(6) 	Marquee signs shall be permitted for institutional and governmental uses in residential districts. The maximum area is limited to 24 square feet with a height limit of six feet and a setbackof 10 feet from right-of-way. No letters or symbols other than thosefor which it was specifically designed to hold shall be permitted to be attached to a marquee. 
B. 	Business districts. 
(1) 	
B-1 (Limited Business District). All office buildings, including conversions, shall be permitted a total advertising area of one square foot for each lineal foot of building frontage. No additionalallowance will be permitted for multiple-frontage buildings. The maximum sign area allotment shall not exceed 40 square feet. Thetotal area of all signs erected on the lot and building shall bedetermined by the building frontage. Signs may only be internally lit if an opaque sign face is used with cutout translucent lettering.Projecting signs shall be limited to eight square feet and wall-mounted signs limited to 24 square feet. The maximum allowable area for a freestanding sign may not exceed 24 square feet. Suchsigns shall be limited to eight feet in height. Only one freestandingsign is permitted per lot with a setback of 10 feet from right-of-way. Temporary signs must adhere to requirements in the R-O District. 

(2) 	
B-2 (Central Business District) and B-2 (Central Business GatewayDistrict). A master signage plan is required for multitenant businesses to integrate signs, buildings, landscape, architectureand site design. The plan shall include, as necessary, an accurateplot of the lot, location of buildings, parking lots, driveways and landscape areas, along with the height and location of anyproposed freestanding sign(s) as allowed in the zone, and an accurate indication of the proposed location, color scheme, size and material of each present and future sign of any type andcomputation of the maximum total sign area and the maximum areafor each individual sign. 


(a) 	Advertising area. The total area of all signs erected on the lotand building shall be determined by the building frontage. Atotal advertising area of 1 1/2 square feet for each lineal foot of primary building frontage shall be allowed. Lots which do not 
1:364 

contain buildings shall be permitted 1/2 square foot for eachlineal foot of road frontage, to a maximum of 32 square feet. 
(b) 	Types of signs. 

Figure 165-106.I 
[1] 	Flat wall-mounted signs. Flat wall-mounted signs, to include lettering and track-oriented signs, may be locatedanywhere on any wall of a building. Signs may be externally lit or internally lit if an opaque sign face is used with cutout translucent lettering. No window or partof a window shall be situated within the area, or surface area, as defined herein, of such sign or its supporting structure, nor shall any such sign or part of such signor its supporting structure cover any window or part ofa window. In the case of a multistory building which has screening enclosing elevator shafts, stairs, or heating andair-conditioning units, a flat wall sign may be permittedwithin the area of the screening. 

Figure 165-106.II 

[2] Projecting signs. One projecting sign may be permittedper building. The sign shall not exceed 20 square feet. No 
1:365 

[3] 

projecting sign or supporting structure shall project morethan four feet from the wall of a building, nor have less than an eight-foot clearance from any public or privatewalkway, as measured vertically from the walkway to thebottom of the sign or supporting structure. No projecting sign shall be erected at a height exceeding 15 feet, asmeasured vertically from the ground to the top of the signor supporting structure. No window or part of a window shall be covered by the sign or its supporting structure. Noprojecting sign or supporting structure shall extend abovethe roofline. 
Freestanding sign. 
[a] 	A freestanding sign is permitted if the property hasat least 40 feet of lot frontage or more. The sign shall not exceed 40 square feet. A low silhouette forfreestanding signs is encouraged. Signs may be externally lit or internally lit if an opaque sign face is used with cutout translucent lettering. Only onefreestanding sign is permitted on each lot. One additional freestanding sign may be permitted on through lots fronting on two one-way streets. Theheight of the sign shall be proportional to the setbackin front yard areas and may not exceed a 1:1 ratio. The side yard setback shall be a minimum of 1/2 theminimum building setback. Sign height shall be measured from the average contact grade to the highest point of the sign or supporting structure. Signallotment does not include any portion of the signcontaining architectural features or addresses. Signs shall not prohibit or impede sign visibility at anyingress/egress location. The maximum height allowedfor any freestanding sign is 15 feet above ground level. Permit requests for signs over eight feet inheight shall be submitted with engineer-designed andsealed specifications/drawings. 
[b] 	Signs shall be designed to withstand wind loads inaccordance with the currently adopted version of theNational Building Code, with amendments.90 
[c] 	Freestanding signs in shopping centers shall be limited to the following quantity, area and height. Nomore than one freestanding sign may be placed on any major road on which the shopping center fronts.Shopping center freestanding signs shall be calculated separately from the advertising area permitted for buildings. 
90.Editor's Note: See Ch. 145, Building Construction. 
1:366 
Gross Floor Area of ShoppingCenter 
(square feet) 
Less than 100,000 
100,000 to 400,000 
Greater than 400,000 
Advertising
Area per

Total sign SignNumber of Height
Freestanding(squareSigns feet) (feet) 
1 120 15 2 200 
20 3 250 25 

Figure 165-106.III 
[4] 	Temporary signs. 
[a] 	Freestanding signs or banners attached to a building with a maximum advertising area of 12 square feetmay be displayed four times in a calendar year for atotal duration not to exceed 60 days. 
[b] 	Freestanding signs or banners attached to a buildingwith a maximum advertising area of 24 square feetmay be placed twice in a calendar year for no more than a total of 30 days. 
[c] 	All freestanding temporary signs and banners, withthe exception of sandwich board signs, shall be set back consistent with the requirements of a permanentfreestanding sign and shall have a maximum heightof six feet. A permit is required from the Zoning Administrator or designee for a sandwich board signor any sign exceeding six square feet. 
[d] 	Temporary sandwich board signs shall be displayed only during the hours a business is open. Signs maynot exceed seven square feet and may be no morethan 3.5 feet in height. Signs must be in good repair and shall not create a hazard to the public. Signs 
1:367 

shall be located so as not to inhibit the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic and in front of the specific business that is being advertised. Only onesign is permitted per business. Signs may not beplaced in the public right-of-way or on sidewalks that are less than five feet wide. Signs shall be constructedof safe, durable materials and be securely erected soas not to create a hazard to the public. 
[e] 	Hot and cold air balloons may only be permitted withthe height restricted to 30 feet. No more than oneballoon shall be permitted per tenant per calendar year, and limited to a period not to exceed 15 consecutive days. 
[f] 	Any property for sale, for lease or under active construction may place one additional sign not toexceed 10 square feet provided the height is limited toeight feet. 
[5] 	Marquee signs are limited to 24 square feet with a heightlimit of six feet and a setback half of the required frontyard setback. No letters or symbols other than those for which it was specifically designed to hold shall be permitted to be attached to a marquee. 

Figure 165-106.IV 
[6] 	Roof signs. No roof-mounted sign or supporting structureshall extend above the parapet wall or roofline of the building to which it is attached. 
[7] 	Awning/canopy signs. Such signs are limited to identification or an enterprise sign consisting of no morethan four copy lines. In no instance shall wording or logos extend either above or below the canopy/awning. 
[8] 	Lettered or mounted sign area may be included on entrance gates or walls. 
[9] 	Gasoline pricing signs. Each retail service station dealershall be permitted one permanent gasoline pricing signon the premises. The gasoline pricing sign shall not be 
1:368 

included in determining sign size allocation and shall bepermitted in combination with or in addition to the one freestanding sign per lot permitted in the district. Suchsigns shall be permanently installed so as to be readableby the passing motorist. In no case, however, shall such signs encroach over any public rights-of-way. LED signsfor gas pricing which are operated by remote control arepermitted. LED signs must be stationary and only used for gasoline prices; no other advertisement is permitted. 
(3) 	B-3 (General Business District), B-3A (General Business GatewayDistrict) and M-1 (Industrial District). 
(a) 	
Advertising area. A total advertising area of 2 1/2 square feetfor each lineal foot of primary building frontage shall beallowed. Lots which do not contain buildings shall be permitted 1/2 square foot for each lineal foot of road frontage, to a maximum of 36 square feet. The total area of all signs erectedon the lot and building shall be determined by the primary building frontage. Multitenanted buildings shall be required tosubmit a comprehensive sign package for all tenant locations,indicating size, general style, and location of all proposed building signage, prior to issuance of any sign permits, in orderto ensure compatibility and adequate signage allotment per tenant. 

(b) 	
Types of signs. 


[1] 	Flat wall-mounted signs. Flat wall-mounted signs, to include lettering and track-oriented signs, may be located anywhere on any wall of a building. Signs may be externally lit or internally lit if an opaque sign face isused with cutout translucent lettering. No window or part of a window shall be situated within the area, or surface area, as defined herein, of such sign or its supportingstructure, nor shall any such sign or part of such sign or its supporting structure cover any window or part ofa window. In the case of a multistory building which hasscreening enclosing elevator shafts, stairs, or heating and air-conditioning units, a flat wall sign may be permittedwithin the area of the screening. 
[2] 	Projecting signs. One projecting sign may be permitted per building. The sign shall not exceed 20 square feet. Noprojecting sign or supporting structure shall project morethan four feet from the wall of a building, nor have less than an eight-foot clearance from any public or privatewalkway, as measured vertically from the walkway to thebottom of the sign or supporting structure. No projecting sign shall be erected at a height exceeding 15 feet, asmeasured vertically from the ground to the top of the sign 
1:369 

or supporting structure. No window or part of a windowshall be covered by the sign area or its supporting structure. No projecting sign or supporting structure shallextend above the roofline. 
[3] 	Freestanding sign. 
[a] 	A freestanding sign is permitted if the property hasat least 40 feet of lot frontage or more. This signshall not exceed 52 square feet. A low silhouette for freestanding signs is encouraged. Signs may be externally lit or internally lit if an opaque sign faceis used with cutout translucent lettering. Only one freestanding sign is permitted on each lot. One additional freestanding sign may be permitted on through lots fronting on two one-way streets. The side yard setback shall be a minimum of 1/2 the minimumbuilding setback. Sign height shall be measured tothe highest point of the sign or supporting structure. Sign allotment does not include any portion of thesign containing architectural features or addresses.Signs shall not prohibit or impede sign visibility at any ingress/egress location. The maximum height allowedfor any freestanding sign is 15 feet above the nearestpublic road grade. Permit requests for signs over eight feet in height shall be submitted with engineer-designed and sealed specifications/drawings. 
[b] 	Signs shall be designed to withstand wind loads in accordance with the currently adopted version of theNational Building Code, with amendments.91 Only onefreestanding sign is permitted on each lot, except as otherwise provided herein. One additional freestanding sign may be permitted on through lotsfronting on two one-way streets. Maximum freestanding sign area shall not exceed 100 squarefeet. A low silhouette for freestanding signs is encouraged. The front and side yard setbacks shall be a minimum of 1/2 the minimum building setback.Sign height shall be measured to the highest pointof the sign or supporting structure. Sign allotment does not include any portion of the sign containingarchitectural features or addresses. Signs shall notprohibit or impede sight visibility at any ingress/ egress location. 
[4] 	Temporary signs shall adhere to § 165-106B(2)(b)[4], B-2and B-2A Districts, with the following exceptions: 
91.Editor's Note: See Ch. 145, Building Construction. 
1:370 
[a] 	Freestanding signs or banners attached to a buildingwith a maximum advertising area of 18 square feet may be displayed four times in a calendar year for atotal duration not to exceed 60 days. 
[b] 	Freestanding signs or banners attached to a building with a maximum advertising area of 36 square feetmay be placed twice in a calendar year for no morethan a total of 30 days. Shopping centers may be permitted one additional temporary sign or banner forevery 100,000 square feet of gross square feet not toexceed a total of four signs in a calendar year. 
[c] 	Any property for sale, for lease or under active construction may place one additional sign not toexceed 16 square feet provided it is located 10 feet from right-of-way and the height is limited to 10 feet. 
[5] 	Marquee signs shall adhere to § 165-106B(2), B-2 and B-2A Districts. 
[6] 	Roof signs, awnings/canopy signs shall adhere to § 165-106B(2), B-2 and B-2A Districts. 
[7] 	Gasoline pricing signs shall adhere to § 165-106B(2), B-2 and B-2A Districts. 
[8] 	Directory signage. One freestanding directory sign shallbe permitted for each industrial park or office. The sign shall not exceed 32 square feet. Freestanding directorysigns shall not exceed eight feet in height and shall belocated at the main entrance to the industrial park. The directory sign shall be compatible in quality, size, style,color and materials with the industrial park and shall belocated so as to not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic movement or visibility. Ground spotlighting or backlit lettering is permitted. Illuminated sign boxes are prohibited. A public directory sign may be permitted on industrial blocks at the discretion of the ZoningAdministrator. 
§ 165-107. Signs permitted in all zoning districts. [Amended4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17; 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 783-18] 
Subject to the other conditions of this Part 3, the following signs shall bepermitted anywhere within the Town: 
A. 	Temporary signs. 
(1) 	One temporary residential subdivision identification sign not exceeding 32 square feet in area and located on the property shall 
1:371 

be permitted for no more than six months without approval by theZoning Administrator. 
(2) 	
A temporary directional sign may be erected on private propertyat an intersection or on an approach to a destination. Signs shallnot be located within a right-of-way area. No more than one sign shall be permitted with a duration of no more than six monthswithout approval of the Zoning Administrator. Each sign shall be nomore than three feet long and one-foot high and shall not exceed four feet in overall height above grade. No illumination shall bepermitted. 

(3) 	
Street banners. Temporary street banners may be erected in compliance with standards established by the Town, in approvedlocations in accordance with the Town banner policy, which requires a sign permit. 

(4) 	
Decorative banners. Temporary decorative banners may be erectedon streetlights in the public right-of-way with the approval of theDirector of Public Works to enhance the appearance of commercial districts, celebrate holidays and special events. 

(5) 	
Promotional banners. Temporary banners may be located on publicbuildings or other Town-approved locations in accordance with the Town banner policy, which requires a sign permit. No commercialadvertisement shall be included on the face of the banner. 


B. 	Permanent identification signs. One sign of a permanent nature setting forth the name of a destination or community shall be permitted. Suchsigns shall not exceed 24 square feet in area and shall not exceed sixfeet in overall height. Signs shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet in residential districts and 1/2 of the required front building setback inbusiness/industrial districts. Signs may only be externally illuminated. 
1:372 


Figure
165-107.I 
§ 165-108. Calculation of advertising area. 
A. 	Double-faced signs. Only one face of a sign having obverse and reverse faces shall be considered in calculating advertising area. In the eventthat the faces of such a sign are of different area, the face having thelarger area shall determine the advertising area of the sign. 
B. 	Multifaced or curved surface signs. The advertising area of a multifacedor curved surface sign shall be calculated from dimensions derivedfrom its greatest plane projection. 
C. 	Irregularly shaped signs. The advertising area of irregularly shapedsigns shall be calculated by totaling the area of one or more horizontallydescribed rectangles completely enclosing the extremities of the sign. 
1:373 


Figure
165-108.I 

D. 	Tracked, carved or painted signs. The advertising area of a signconsisting of two or more individual letters, characters, numbers or other figures shall be determined by the area of a horizontallydescribed rectangle completely enclosing the extremities of all of theindividual letters, characters, numbers or figures; provided, however, that if such individual modules are mounted on a background otherthan an integral structure component of a building, the entire area ofsuch a background shall be calculated as advertising area. 
E. 	Cylindrical signs. The advertising area of cylindrical signs shall becomputed by multiplying 1/2 the circumference of the sign by theheight of the sign. 
§ 165-109. Exemptions. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
The following types of signs are exempted from all the provisions of thisPart 3, except for construction and safety regulations and the following standards. Submission of a sign permit is not required. 
A. 	Public signs. Signs of a noncommercial nature and in the furtherance ofa governmental or public interest, such as directional signs, regulatory signs, warning signs, and informational signs. Public signs shall not 
1:374 

exceed eight feet in area for each sign. Horizontal directional signson and flush with paved areas are exempt from this size restriction. All traffic-related signs must meet Maryland Uniform Traffic ControlDevices (MUTCD) Specifications. [Amended 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 783-18] 
B. 	Integral signs. Names of buildings, dates of erection, monumentalcitations, commemorative tablets and the like when carved into stone, concrete or similar material or made of bronze, aluminum or other permanent type of construction and made an integral part of the structure. 
C. 	Homeowner's identification signs. Signs identifying the name and address of residents shall not exceed one square foot. Such signsshall be allowed on mailboxes, but shall otherwise be mounted on the building. [Amended 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 783-18] 
D. 	Window signs. Temporary signs shall be allowed in a window or interiordisplay of merchandise. The total area of all window signs shall not exceed 20% of all the window glass area. 
E. 	Murals. An artistic representation, sculpture or painting. Anycommercial image, message or advertisement shall be included as part of the sign square footage. [Amended 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 783-18] 
§ 165-110. Prohibited signs. 
The following signs are prohibited in all zoning districts and shall beremoved immediately in accordance with this Part 3: 
A. 	Billboards, a permanent sign including but not limited to all signageadvertising products or services not located on site. [Amended4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 783-18] 
B. 	Signs containing statements, words, or pictures of an obscene, indecent, or immoral character, such as will offend public morals ordecency. 
C. 	Signs which imitate an official traffic sign or signal or which containthe words "stop," "go slow," "caution," "danger," "warning," or similarwords. 
D. 	Signs which are of a size, location, movement, content, coloring, ormanner of illumination which may be confused with or construed as atraffic control device or which hide from view any traffic or street sign or signal or which obstruct the view in any direction at a street or roadintersection. 
E. 	Permanent signs which advertise an activity, business, product or service no longer produced or conducted on the premises on whichthe sign is located. Such signs may remain in place for not more than 
1:375 

60 days from the date of vacancy. [Amended 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 783-18] 
F. 	Signs which contain or consist of pennants, ribbons, streamers, spinners, strings of light bulbs, rotating signs, searchlights, LED lightsigns and electronic reader boards (except for gasoline signs) or other similar or moving devices including commercial signs held bypedestrians. These devices, when not part of any sign, are similarly prohibited. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
G. 	Signs which are placed on municipal, county, or state property or rights-of-way, except as provided in § 165-109 of this Part 3. [Amended4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
H. 	Signs which are pasted or attached to utility poles, trees, fences orother signs, except those specifically permitted under the provisions of the banner permit policy. 
I. 	All signs of a temporary or portable nature, except those specificallyallowed under the provisions of this Part 3. 
J. 	Signs which produce odor, sound, smoke, fire or other such emissions. 
K. 	Vehicle signs, signs affixed to automobiles, trucks, trailers or othervehicles on public or private property for the basic purposes of advertising, identifying or providing direction to a person, businessor activity not related to the lawful use of the vehicle for deliveringmerchandise or rendering service for a use associated with the property on which it is parked. [Amended 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 783-18] 
§ 165-111. Illumination. 
A. 	Internally illuminated signs are permitted in the B-1, B-2, B-2A, B-3,B-3A and M-1 Districts only. If interior lighting is used, sign facematerial must be opaque, with no translucent materials other than individual letters. 
B. 	The light from any illuminated sign or from any light source, includinginterior of a building, shall be so shaded, shielded or directed that the light intensity or brightness shall not adversely affect surrounding orfacing premises nor adversely affect safe vision of operators of vehiclesmoving on public or private roads, highways, or parking areas. Light shall not shine or reflect on or into residential structures. Illumination projected onto a sign must be confined as completely as possible to theface of the sign. 
C. 	No illuminated signs shall cast light to exceed 0.4 maintained footcandle illumination onto a residential zoning district. All internalillumination shall not exceed 10 footcandles, measured at a distance of 10 feet from the sign. 
1:376 

D. 	No sign shall have blinking, flashing, or fluttering lights or other illuminating devices which have a changing light intensity, brightness or color, or which are so constructed and operated as to create anappearance or illusion of writing or printing. Nothing contained in thisPart 3 shall, however, be construed as preventing the temporary use of lights or decorations related to religious and patriotic festivities.Beacon lights or searchlights shall not be permitted as a sign or for advertising purposes. [Amended 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 783-18] 
E. 	No exposed reflective-type bulbs and no strobe lights or incandescentlamps which exceed 15 watts shall be used on the exterior surface of any sign so as to expose the face of the bulb, light or lamp to any public street or adjacent property. [Amended 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 783-18] 
§ 165-112. Permits and fees. 
A. 	Permit requirements. No sign shall be erected, altered or relocated without a permit issued by the Zoning Administrator unless specificallyexempted in this chapter. 
B. 	Applications. All permit applications shall be signed by the applicant, and, when the applicant is any person other than the owner of theproperty, the permit application shall also be signed or so authorizedby the owner of the property and shall contain the location of the sign structure, the name and address of the sign owner and of the signerector, drawings showing the design, dimensions and locations of thesign and such other pertinent information as the Zoning Administrator may require to ensure compliance with the laws of the Town of Bel Air. 
C. 	Nullification. A sign permit shall become null and void if the work forwhich the permit was issued has not been completed within a period of 12 months after the date of the permit. A permit may be renewed fora period of six months, and no additional fee shall be collected for therenewal. 
D. 	Permit exceptions. The following operations shall not be considered ascreating a sign and shall not require a sign permit: 
(1) 	
Replacing copy: the changing of the advertising copy or message on marquees and similarly approved signs which are specificallydesigned for the use of replaceable copy. 

(2) 	
Maintenance: painting, repainting, cleaning and other normal maintenance and repair of a sign or sign structure, unless a structure or electrical change is made. 


E. 	Revocation. The Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized and empowered to revoke any permit issued upon failure of the permitteeto comply with any provision of this chapter. 
F. 	Fees. Fees for sign permits shall be as established by the Board of Town Commissioners. 
1:377 

§ 165-113. Inspection; maintenance; removal; abandoned signs. 
A. 	Inspection. Signs for which a permit is required may be inspected periodically by the Zoning Administrator for compliance with thischapter. 
B. 	Maintenance. All signs and components thereof, but not limited to the sign surface, supporting structure, lighting mechanisms and sign copy,shall be kept in good repair and in safe, neat, clean and attractivecondition. 
C. 	Removal of unsafe or unlawful signs. The Zoning Administrator shallorder the removal of any sign erected or maintained in violation of thisPart 3. In the case of a permanent sign, 10 days' notice, in writing, shall be given to the owner of such a sign, or of the building, structure orpremises on which such a sign is located, to remove the sign or to bringit into compliance with this Part 3. All portable or temporary signs, pennants, ribbons, streamers, spinners, strings of light bulbs or othersimilar or moving devices erected in violation of this Part 3 shall beremoved immediately upon receipt of written notice from the Zoning Administrator. Upon failure to remove the sign or to comply with thisnotice within the time specified, the Zoning Administrator shall requirethe sign to be removed. The Zoning Administrator shall require the sign to be removed immediately and without notice if it reasonably appearsthat the condition of the sign is such as to present an immediate threatto the safety of the public. Any costs of removal incurred by the Town of Bel Air shall be assessed to the owner of the property on which suchsign is located and may be collected in the manner of ordinary debt orin the manner of taxes, and such charges shall be a lien on the property. Notwithstanding the above, the owner of the sign may file an appeal,in writing, to the Board of Appeals within 30 days of the date of theviolation notice. 
D. 	Abandoned signs. A sign shall be removed by the owner or lessee ofthe premises upon which the sign is located when the business whichit advertises is no longer conducted on the premises. If the owner or lessee, after notice, fails to remove the sign, the Zoning Administratorshall require it to be removed in accordance with this Part 3. Theseremoval provisions shall not apply where a succeeding owner or lessee conducts the same type of business and agrees to maintain the signsto advertise the type of business being conducted on the premises andprovided the signs comply with the other provisions of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. A temporary sign shall be deemedabandoned on and from the seventh consecutive day following theconclusion of the event or activity to which it pertains. A permanent sign shall be deemed abandoned on and from the 180th consecutiveday after the enterprise to which it was accessory permanently ceasesoperation on the premises on which the sign is located. 
§ 165-114. Nonconforming signs; variances; administration;violations and penalties. 
1:378 

A. 

B. 
C. 
All signs or other advertising structures lawfully in existence upon theeffective date of this Part 3, or any applicable amendment thereto, which, by reason of their size, height, area, location, design or construction, do not conform to the requirements of this Part 3 shallconstitute nonconforming signs. Nonconforming signs that were otherwise lawful on the effective date of this Part 3, or any applicableamendment thereto, may be continued if properly repaired and maintained as provided in this Part 3, until such time as the use is discontinued. A change in the information on the face of an existingnonconforming sign is allowed. However, any nonconforming sign shalleither be eliminated or made to conform with the requirements of this Part 3 when any proposed change, repair or maintenance wouldconstitute a physical change to the sign box or modification to thesupport structure. If a change to the height, location or advertising area reduces the nonconformity by 50% then a one-time modification to thebox or structure may be permitted. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
Variance. The Board of Appeals may grant a variance from the provisions of this Part 3 pursuant to the requirements outlined in§ 165-92. Minor variances may be permitted by the Zoning Administrator in accordance with Article XII of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. 
Administration and penalties. 
(1) 	
The decision of the Zoning Administrator denying an applicationfor a sign permit or requiring a sign to be removed, relocated oraltered may be appealed by the sign owner or the owner of the property upon which the sign is located. An appeal is taken by filinga notice of appeal, in writing, to the Board of Appeals within 30days of the date of the decision of the Zoning Administrator. 

(2) 	
Violations and penalties. 

(a) 	
Whenever the provisions of this Part 3 have been violated,the Zoning Administrator shall give notice by first-class mail to the owner and occupant of the property alleged to be inviolation, stating the nature of the violation and ordering thatany unlawful activity be abated. 

(b) 	
Any property owner or occupant of the property who permitsthe use of land, building or structures contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a municipal infraction and shall be subject to a fine of not more than $400for each violation, in accordance with Chapter 1, Article II,§ 1-10, of the Town Code. 




1:379 

Part 4 
Subdivision Of Land 

ARTICLE XVI 
Subdivision and Site Development 
§ 165-115. Purpose; intent; applicability. 
A. 	The purpose of this Part 4 is to establish requirements and regulationsgoverning the subdivision and/or site development of land falling under the jurisdiction of the Town. Such requirements and regulations areintended to control the division of land for building and developmentpurposes; establish standards for design and layout of lots, streets, utilities and public improvements; and to protect natural resources byintegrating erosion and sediment control practices with stormwatermanagement practices, thereby minimizing impervious surfaces and protecting streams and waterways from the impact of land development. 
B. 	These regulations and requirements shall apply to all development of land on a single lot, including the revision of existing development,as well as to subdivisions of land creating two or more lots. Theseregulations shall be in addition to any other applicable regulations promulgated by other agencies. Generally, in case of conflict or overlapwith other regulations of this chapter or any other ordinance, the morestringent requirement shall apply. 
C. 	These regulations shall also be used as one basis for Town reviewof Harford County site plan and subdivision proposals as describedin § 165-3 of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. Where discrepancies occur, the Town shall identify these and advise the countyof any potential conflicts. 
§ 165-116. General requirements. 
The applicant for subdivision and/or site development of land in the Townshall be responsible for preparation, submission and/or recordation of applications, plans, plats and all other information determined to be necessary for the review of and determination on the application by theTown. A site plan is required for issuance of permit approvals for newconstruction or expansion of existing uses. Completeness and adequacy of the applications, plans, plats and other information shall be determined bythe Zoning Administrator in conjunction with the Director of Public Works.Incomplete applications shall not be accepted. 
A. 	Submittal requirements. 
(1) 	Preparation, submission and/or recordation of applications, plans,plats and other information shall be in accordance with Article XI of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations, as well as 
1:381 

any additional forms and checklists determined necessary by theZoning Administrator and the Department of Public Works. 
(2) 	Preparation, submission and/or recordation of plats shall be inaccordance with the Real Property Article of the Annotated Codeof Maryland, as well as any statute enacted by the Maryland State Legislature intended to supplement and/or supersede such sectionof such article. Record plats shall be recorded in the office of theClerk of the Circuit Court of Harford County, Maryland, and a second Mylar original and two paper copies of said plat shall besubmitted by the applicant for the files of the Town, along witha digital submission of the property line/lot changes in a form compatible with the Town's GIS. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
B. 	No subdivision plat shall be recorded and no development of property shall commence until complete applications, plans, plats and other information, as determined necessary, have been submitted to and approved by the Bel Air Town Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator, whichever is applicable. In approving applications forsubdivision, lot consolidation and/or development, the reviewingagency shall ensure that the requirements of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations have been observed. 
C. 	Transfers, sales and building permits. No lot or any section thereof,except a subdivision legally created prior to the adoption of this Part 4, shall be transferred, nor shall a building permit be issued for astructure thereon, until a record plat of such subdivision and/or lotconsolidation shall have been recorded in accordance with the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations and Maryland law. 
§ 165-117. Application procedure. 
The applicant for subdivision and/or site development in the Town of Bel Air shall follow procedures specified in Article XI of the Town of Bel AirDevelopment Regulations. 
A. 	Steps in this procedure, detailed in Article XI, include: 
(1) 	
Preliminary conference with Department of Planning and Community Development and Department of Public Works. 

(2) 	
Grading, sediment/erosion control and stormwater management concept plan. 

(3) 	
Planning concept plan meeting. 

(4) 	
Forest conservation plan/environmental assessment. 

(5) 	
Landscape plan (in accordance with Article VIII of the Town of BelAir Development Regulations). 

(6) 	
Traffic impact analysis. 

1:382 

(7) 	
Preliminary plan/plat (Planning Commission submission). 

(8) 	
Erosion/sediment control and stormwater management site development plan. 

(9) 	
Final erosion/sediment control and stormwater management plan. 


(10)Final site development plan. 
(11)Record plat (for site plan review involving subdivision). 
(12)Public works agreement (PWA). 
(13)Building permit. 

B. 	
Applicable procedures depend on the size and type of request. Requiredprocedures will be identified during the preliminary conference. 

C. 	
The applicant shall be notified, in writing, of the determination of Town reviewing agencies regarding approval or disapproval of completeapplications, plans and/or plats within 60 days of receipt of completesubmission. 

D. 	
To help streamline the process, the developer may submit a buildingpermit application for concurrent review with the preliminary plan. Thedeveloper may need to make some modifications to the plans, based on the preliminary plan approval conditions. 


§ 165-118. Design standards. 
The purpose of good subdivision and site design is to create a functional and attractive development, to minimize adverse impacts, and to ensure aproject that will be an asset to the community without adding unnecessarilyto development costs. 
A. 	General requirements. General requirements for site and subdivisionplans include: 
(1) 	
The site plan and/or subdivision plat shall conform to the currently adopted Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan as well as the requirements of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. 

(2) 	
The developer shall be required to dedicate and plat any opening, widening, or extension of rights-of-way shown on existing state andlocal plats. 

(3) 	
Recreational areas shall be provided where designated by the Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan or where otherwise required bythe nature of the proposed development and by the needs of thecommunity as specified in Article VII of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 


1:383 

(4) 
(5) 

(6) 

(7) 

(8) 

(9) 

(10) 

(11) 


Specific areas shall be preserved and platted as undeveloped openspace, to the extent consistent with the reasonable utilization of land and in accordance with applicable state, local and/or federalregulations and with the environmental regulations stated in Article VI of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. 
The development shall be laid out to avoid adversely affectinggroundwater and aquifer recharge; to minimize cut and fill; toavoid unnecessary impervious cover; to prevent flooding; to provide adequate access to lots and sites; and to mitigate adverseimpacts of shadow, noise, odor, traffic, drainage and utilities onneighboring properties. 
Except for single-family dwellings, site plans for buildings in excessof 2,000 square feet shall include architectural renderings showingall sides of the proposed structure(s). The Town shall submit a copy of the site plan and renderings to an independent architectfor review and comment. These comments shall be provided to thePlanning Commission as part of the site plan review process for use in determining the compatibility of the proposed design withthe applicable zoning district and with standards specified in this article. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
Historically and archaeologically significant sites and structuresshall be preserved in accordance with local, state and federal regulations and with Article V, Historic Resource ConservationRegulations, of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. 
Design of site and subdivision plans shall be subject to requirements for environmental protection of streams, drainageways, wetlands and vegetation, open space and recreationrequirements, landscape requirements, architectural review, and requirements for off-site improvements as specified in Articles VIthrough VIII of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. 
All subdivision and site plans shall comply with applicable regulations for control of temporary flooding or erosion and sediment control both during construction and after completion ofconstruction. 
Any redevelopment or addition that impacts 50% or more of theimproved area of a parcel of land shall require that the entire sitebe brought up to current site plan standards. 
Prior to issuance of any building permits, homeowner associationor condominium documents shall be submitted to the Departmentof Planning and Community Development for review and approval by the Town Counsel. All condominium plats and/or subdivisionplats with passive or active recreation areas, steep slopes, stormwater management facilities or measures, forest conservation areas located on common grounds or other privately 

1:384 

maintained road or amenity areas shall be forwarded for recordation in the Harford County court records. 
(12)All subdivision and site plans shall comply with applicableregulations regarding forest conservation, landscaping, tree protection and public art amenities, where applicable. 
(13)Cost allocation for new or expanded developments requiring off-site infrastructure or other improvements necessitated by thedevelopment will be as specified in this article or other applicable Town regulations. Cost allocation shall be as specified in § 265-4 ofthe Bel Air Town Code. 
(14)A traffic impact analysis (TIA) shall be conducted for any development that generates 25 or more new peak-hour trips for anyone peak period of the day or that generates 249 or more vehicletrips per day. The study shall be completed in accordance with the TIA Guidelines described in § 165-118 of the Town of Bel AirDevelopment Regulations. 
(15)Review and approval by the Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator, whichever is applicable, shall be required for anysignificant change(s) to an approved site plan or subdivision plat.The Zoning Administrator and/or the Director of Public Works shall determine what constitutes significant change based on the definition in Article XIV of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. 
B. 	Residential development design. 
(1) 	
In conventional developments, the Planning Commission may varylot areas and dimensions, yards, and setbacks for the purpose of encouraging and promoting flexibility, economy, and environmentalsoundness in layout and design, provided that the average lot'sareas and dimensions, yards, and setbacks within the subdivision conform to the minimum requirements of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations, as stated herein, and provided that suchstandards shall be appropriate to the type of development permitted. 

(2) 	
Every lot shall have sufficient access for emergency vehicles, aswell as for those needing access to the property in its intended use. 

(3) 	
The placement of units in residential developments shall take intoconsideration topography, privacy, building height, orientation, drainage, and aesthetics. 

(4) 	
Buildings shall be spaced so that adequate privacy is provided forunits. 


C. 	Commercial and industrial development design. Commercial and industrial developments shall be designed according to the same 
1:385 

principles governing the design of residential developments; namely,buildings shall be located according to topography, with environmentally sensitive areas avoided to the maximum extent practicable, factors such as drainage, noise, odor, and surrounding landuses considered in siting buildings, sufficient access shall be provided, and adverse impacts buffered. 
D. 	Circulation system design. 
(1) 	
General. The road system shall be designed to permit the safe, efficient, and orderly movement of traffic; to meet, but not exceed,the needs of the present and future population served; to have a simple and logical pattern; to respect natural features and topography; and to present an attractive streetscape. 

(2) 	
Minimum requirements for a traffic impact analysis (TIA). 

(a) 	
A complete TIA is required for any residential, industrial, institutional or commercial development that is projected togenerate 25 new peak-hour trips or 249 trips per day. If a development will generate fewer than 25 new peak-hour trips or 249 trips per day, the Town may, at its discretion, require a TIA. Trip generation projections shall be determined byutilizing methods set forth in the latest available Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Manuals available. 

(b) 	
The minimum acceptable level of service in a residential district shall be "C." The minimum acceptable level of servicein commercial/industrial districts shall be "D." If anyintersection within the study area has any of the failing conditions listed above, the TIA shall recommend mitigatingimprovements to address the development's impacts. If recommended improvements are approved by the Town, it will be the responsibility of the developer to implement therecommendations in the TIA at the developer's sole expense.




[Amended 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 746-11] 
(c) 	The study area shall be determined by Town staff, who shallconsider the following when determining the parameters of thestudy area: 
[1] 	Study area. The typical study area for a TIA shall consist ofa minimum area encompassed by a radius of one quartermile from the site to be developed and shall include collector or higher-functioning classification road intersections from all approaches to the site as specifiedin the Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan. This area may include intersections which are subject to the jurisdictionof the Maryland State Highway Administration or HarfordCounty. Coordination with these government agencies may 
1:386 

[2] 
[3] 
[4] 

be required. [Amended 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 746-11] 
Design year. The design year shall be the projected dateof completion of the project, which will be discussed atthe preliminary conference. If the projected date of completion is changed significantly, the preliminary planmay be subject to a new TIA, to be determined by theTown. 
Traffic data requirements. 
[a] 	Existing traffic counts shall be conducted within a twelve-month period of the submittal date of the TIA. Traffic counts should be taken on a Tuesday,Wednesday or Thursday, not following a holiday unlessapproved by the Town. If the proposed project is residential or a school is located within the TIA studylimits, then traffic counts must be taken while school is in session. [Amended 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 746-11] 
[b] 	Trip generation for each land use shall be obtainedby utilizing the ITE Trip Generation Manual, current edition. The land use code in the manual shall be indicated for each category. Where a land use is notrecognized within the ITE Manual or where local conditions indicate fewer trips than projected by theITE standard for a particular land use, local trip rates may be developed; however, the data must be submitted to the Town with supporting documentationprior to approval of the rates. 
[c] 	For commercial uses or other uses generating peak trip numbers on weekends, the Town may require theTIA to include traffic counts on either Saturday orSunday (depending upon which day best reflects the proposed land use's peak operation), and the TIA shallinclude a traffic report for a single peak hour. Operational analyses may be required as well. Pass-by and diverted trip reduction factors may be consideredfor certain uses if Town staff permits. 
Trip distribution and assignment. 
[a] 	Any of the following methodologies shall be acceptable for the purpose of determining tripdistribution: 
[i] 	Gravity model. This technique may requirecalibration prior to its use if utilizing an old gravity model for the study area. 
1:387 

[ii] 	Utilization of demographic data. 
[iii] Current directional distribution. (NOTE: This may be unacceptable if the directional distribution willchange before the design year to future changesin the land use or transportation system improvements.) 
[b] 	In any of the above methodologies, Town staff approval is required for use in the study. 
[5] 	Capacity analysis. 
[a] 	Capacity analyses shall be performed for all intersections, roadways, ramps, weaving sections, internal circulation and access points. The analysisshall be in accordance with the latest publishedversion of the Highway Capacity Manual (HCM). Other types of capacity analysis may be requested,such as critical lane, depending on requirements ofother jurisdictions with road systems within the Town of Bel Air. It may also be necessary to complete trafficprogression analysis, utilizing such programs as HCM(Highway Capacity Manual) or Synchro. Queuing analyses may be required to determine both on-andoff-site situations where queuing could impact theroadway/internal site operation. The Maryland State Highway Administration has established acceptablecycle lengths. See below. However, actual field-documented cycle lengths may be used if approved by staff. 
Level of 3 to 5 6 to 8 Service 2 Phases Phases Phases 
A 90 100 120 B 90 100 120 C 100 120 135 D 120 135 150 E 135 150 165 F 150 165 180 
[b] 	Unsignalized intersections not meeting the adoptedlevel of service may be required to complete a traffic signal warrant analysis. Unsignalized intersectionswill be evaluated based on the level of service on the minor approaches to the intersection. Accident history of the intersection may be considered as well. 
1:388 

[6] 
[7] 
[c] 	When analyzing background and future conditions,only capital projects with one-hundred-percent funding may be utilized. Other road improvementsassociated with other developments that have approved plans and an executed public works agreement or state highway access permit may beutilized as well. 
Peak-hour observations. Of particular interest to the Town is the current operation of its roadway system. The Townmay require peak-hour observations be performed by aqualified traffic engineer. The observation shall be conducted at the direction of the Town to address specificoperational issues. The specific traffic concerns of the Town will be presented at the preliminary plan meeting. Documentation of the observations shall be included in the transportation impact analysis, along with recommendations to address traffic deficiencies. 
Recommendations. The TIA shall include recommendations if traffic impacts and conditions so warrant. The improvements shall be described in the TIA and should include a basic concept plan that illustratesthe recommended improvements. The recommended improvements should be achievable utilizing the latest AASHTO, Maryland State Highway Administration or Harford County guidelines. A TIA without specificrecommendations to mitigate negative impacts shall not be considered complete. [Amended 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 746-11] 
[a] 	If the TIA determines the existing LOS does not meet the minimum requirements in § 165-118D(2), the developer need only to mitigate the portion of trafficimpact generated by the development. 
[b] 	If the developer is unable to provide the requiredimprovement due to inability to acquire right-of-way,physical constraints of the property, or state/federal regulations beyond the control of the developer, mitigation shall be provided in accordance with § 265-4C of the Town Code. 
[c] 	If an applicant wishes to install requiredimprovements in phases, all provisions of § 265-5C ofthe Town Code must be met. 
[d] 	All terms and conditions contained in this section must be met to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works prior to issuance of a building permit. 
1:389 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 


Pedestrian circulation. The pedestrian system shall be designed to permit safe, efficient pedestrian movement, connecting neighborhoods and other destination points. Walking trails, as identified in the Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan, shall beprovided by the developer. Developments adjacent to these trails identified in the Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan shall haveconnectivity. ADA-compliant sidewalks should be placed parallel tothe street, with exceptions permitted to preserve natural features or to provide visual interest. Sidewalks proposed to be placedaway from the road system may be required to parallel the streetfor safety reasons. Paving materials and construction shall be in conformance with the Harford County Road Code and State Highway Administration specifications. 
Street arrangement. The arrangement of streets shall conform to the Transportation Element of the Town of Bel Air ComprehensivePlan. 
Streets. 
(a) 	
Wherever a tract of land to be subdivided includes any part ofa road identified in the Transportation Element of the Town ofBel Air Comprehensive Plan, the location and construction of such road shall be incorporated by the subdivider in the layoutplan. 

(b) 	
Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection D(5)(a), when a tract of land to be subdivided abuts an existing Town road,the subdivider shall, as a condition of subdivision approval,deed to the Town a road improvement right-of-way appropriate to the road and its functional classification. When the tract fronts along one side of the existing road, the subdivider shalldeed 1/2 of the required right-of-way, generally calculated from the center line of the existing road. Title to road improvementrights-of-way shall be good and marketable and free of liensand encumbrances. 

(c) 	
For streets not shown on the Town of Bel Air ComprehensivePlan, the arrangement shall provide for the appropriateextension of existing streets. 

(d) 	
Residential streets shall be arranged so as their local functionand place in the street hierarchy discourage excessive speedsand enhance the community's visual image. Traffic-calming techniques shall be incorporated in road design. 

(e) 	
No more than 50 residential units shall be served by one entrypoint. The Planning Commission shall have the authority to grant a waiver of this requirement if it finds that: 

[1] 	An alternative access is unavailable. 
1:390 

[2] 	An independent traffic impact analysis performed by a traffic engineer, to be reviewed and analyzed for sufficiency by the Planning Commission, to be paid forsolely by the property owner, clearly demonstrates that,when the development is fully constructed, an acceptable level of service can be achieved at the entry point to thedevelopment. 
(f) 	
No subdivision or development shall be approved unless it directly accesses an existing paved road network. All roadsproviding access from a subdivision/development to an existingpaved Town, county or state road shall be constructed to the Harford County Road Code by the subdivider/developer, if thesubdivider/developer desires to proceed with the project priorto the Town performing the required construction pursuant to the Town's Capital Improvements Program. If a developerdecides to undertake construction, a public works agreementshall be executed as required by law. 

(g) 	
Any new or existing road rights-of-way or accessways leadingfrom an existing Town, county or state road to the proposedproject and all internal roads, including stub roads, shall be constructed or improved to the prescribed width and roadconstruction as established by the Harford County Road Code unless otherwise specified in this section. [Amended4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 

(h) 	
Proposed developments, including residential, business, industrial or institutional developments, or subdivisions to be constructed along existing roadways not meeting Town roadstandards for existing or contemplated traffic demands will berequired to improve 1/2 of the roadway along their property to required Town, county or state road standards (whichever isapplicable). Should construction of the roadway be consideredinfeasible at the time of development, the developer may deposit the estimated construction cost in an account with theTown of Bel Air for the future improvements of that roadway tothe designated road standards. If not used within 20 years, the funds shall be rebated to the property owner. 

(i) 	
Street frontage improvements are required when a parcel ofland is subdivided or developed for purposes of creating: 


[1] 	Any business, industrial, or institutional use. 
[2] 	Any residential use for more than five dwelling units. 

(6) 	
Street grade and intersections. Street grade and intersection requirements are specified in the Harford County Road Code. 

(7) 	
Street hierarchy. 

1:391 


(a) 	
In conventional developments, streets shall be classified in astreet classification system, with design tailored to function according to the functional classification of the proposed street. 

(b) 	
Proposed streets shall be classified and designed for the entire length to meet the standards established for street typesdefined in this article and according to the Harford County Road Code unless otherwise specified in this section. 


[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
(c) 	The applicant shall demonstrate, to the Planning Commission'ssatisfaction, that the traffic on the existing and proposed street system adjacent to the site and to the nearest collector orhigher-functioning classification road, as measured from eachpoint of entrance to the site, will maintain a Level of Service "C" or better in all residential districts and a Level of Service "D" or better in all commercial/industrial districts. 
(8) 	Rights-of-way. 
(a) 	The right-of-way shall be measured from lot line to lot lineand shall be sufficiently wide to contain the roadway, curbs,shoulders, sidewalks, graded areas, utilities, and shade trees (if they are placed within the right-of-way). The required right­of-way width shall be determined as follows: 
Commercial/Street Type Residential Industrial 
Arterials 60 feet 70 feet Collectors 50 feet 60 feet Local streets 50 feet 60 feet Alleys 20 feet 20 feet Turnarounds 60-foot radius 60-foot radius 
(b) 	
The right-of-way width of a new street that is a continuation ofan existing street shall in no case be continued at a width lessthan that of the existing street. 

(c) 	
The right-of-way shall reflect future development as indicatedby the Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan. 


(9) 	Pavement width. 
(a) 	Pavement widths for each street classification are shown in Subsection D(10), Pavement section, of this section. 
(10)Pavement section. 
(a) 	Street pavement thickness shall vary by street hierarchyclassification, subgrade properties and pavement type. 
1:392 

(b) 	Pavement design for residential access streets, subcollectorsand collectors shall conform to the specifications in the Harford County Road Code unless otherwise specified in thissection. The required pavement width shall be as follows: 
[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
Commercial/Street Type Residential Industrial 
Arterials 	36 feet 40 feet 
Collectors 	30 feet 36 feet to 40 feet 
Local streets 	24-foot minimum, 36 feet exclusive of head-in parking areas in single-family attached areasor multifamily areas; 30-foot minimum in single-family residential areas 
Alleys 	20 feet 20 feet 
Turnarounds 55-foot radius 	55-foot outside radius 
(11)Paving materials. 
(a) 	
Design and choice of paving materials used in pedestrian areasshall consider such factors as function, climate, characteristics of users, availability, cost, maintenance, glare, drainage, noise,appearance and compatibility with surroundings. 

(b) 	
Acceptable materials shall include, but are not limited to, concrete, brick, cement pavers, asphalt and stone. 

(c) 	
Materials shall be in conformance with the Harford CountyRoad Code. 


(12)Curbs and gutters. 
(a) 	
Curbing shall be required at the time of development or redevelopment of any parcel for the purposes of drainage, safety, delineation and protection of pavement edge. Curbingmay be required by the Zoning Administrator and/or the Director of Public Works when the use of a property changes so as to warrant upgrade based on the purposes stated herein. 

(b) 	
Curbs shall be built in compliance with the Harford CountyRoad Code. 

(c) 	
Curbing may also be required: 


[1] 	For stormwater management; 
1:393 

[2] 	To stabilize pavement edge; 
[3] To delineate parking areas; and 
[4] 	Ten feet on each side of drainage inlets. 
(13)Dead-end streets; intersections. 
(a) 	
Dead-end streets (not exceeding 600 feet in length) may be approved where necessitated by topography or where, in thejudgment of the Planning Commission, a dead-end street isappropriate for the type of development contemplated. A turnaround shall be provided at the end of such a street andshall be designed in accordance with the Harford County RoadCode. 

(b) 	
Streets shall intersect one another at as nearly right angles as topography and other limiting factors will permit. Theintersection of more than two streets at one point or approximately so shall be strictly avoided. 


(14)Street names. Street names shall be subject to approval by theTown and the Harford County Emergency OPNS. Names shall not duplicate nor closely approximate existing street names in or nearBel Air, except for the extensions of existing streets. In such cases,the existing street name shall be used. 
(15)Alleys. Alleys shall be provided in all commercial and industrialareas if no other provision is made for adequate access to parkingand loading spaces. Alleys may be approved in residential areas and as extensions to existing alleys. Easements for utilities or drainage shall be provided along rear or side lot lines wherever necessary. Drainage easements shall be provided along all watercourses. 
(16)Sight distance. A triangular open area, as defined in § 165-65 ofthe Town of Bel Air Development Regulations, shall be provided at all intersections and shall remain open so that sight distance atthe intersection is unobstructed, as determined by the Director ofPublic Works. 
(17)Panhandle lots. 
(a) 	
Panhandle lots may be approved by the Planning Commissiononly when it is determined by the Commission that excellence of design will be achieved or that such lots are inaccessible tothe road due to odd shape and/or topographical constraints. 

(b) 	
No more than two panhandle lots may have shared or adjoining driveway entrances to a public right-of-way. 

(c) 	
The stacking of panhandle lots to form more than two tiers oflots is prohibited. 


1:394 

(d) 	
The required width for a panhandle lot shall be a minimum of20 feet. In an instance where two lots share one access drive, each lot shall have a minimum width of 10 feet. No portionof the panhandle may be applied to the required minimum lot size. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17; 4-2-2018 byOrd. No. 783-18] 

(e) 	
Panhandles shall be a maximum of 250 feet in length. ThePlanning Commission shall have the authority to grant a waiver of this requirement if it finds that the topography, naturalfeatures or geometry of the parcel make a longer panhandle necessary. 

(f) 	
Where a common drive is necessary, the owner shall recorddriveway use and maintenance restrictions that shall providefor the construction, type, responsibility for the same, including all costs, and use and maintenance of the commondrive. The subdivision restrictions shall be reviewed by theTown's legal counsel for sufficiency prior to recordation. 


(18)Sidewalks. 
(a) 	
Sidewalks and/or graded areas shall be required and constructed in accordance with the requirements set forth in the Harford County Road Code. 

(b) 	
ADA-compliant sidewalks/ramps shall be placed in the right-of­way, parallel to the street. 

(c) 	
Sidewalks may be located away from the road system to linkdwelling units with other dwelling units, the street, and on-siteactivity centers, such as parking areas and recreational areas. They may also be required parallel to the street for safety andother reasons. 

(d) 	
Pedestrianway easements 10 feet wide may be required by the Planning Commission to provide circulation or access alongroads with insufficient right-of-way and access to schools, playgrounds, shopping, or other community facilities. 


[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
(e) 	
Sidewalk paving shall measure a minimum of five feet in width.Wider sections of pavement may be necessary near pedestrian generators and employment centers. 

(f) 	
Sidewalk patterns shall carry across driveways. 


(19)Bikeways. 

(a) 	Separate bicycle paths may be required if such paths havebeen specified as part of the Town of Bel Air ComprehensivePlan. 
1:395 

(b) 	Bicycle lanes, where required, shall be placed in the outsidelane of a roadway, adjacent to the curb or shoulder. When on-street parking is permitted, the bicycle lane shall be betweenthe parking lane and the outer lane of moving vehicles. Lanesshall be delineated with markings, preferably striping. Raised reflectors or curbs shall not be used. Protective grates shall beprovided over storm drains, as needed. 
(20)Off-street parking. 
(a) 	
An adequate number of off-street parking spaces shall berequired in all developments to accommodate residents andvisitors. 

(b) 	
Parking shall be designed and provided as specified in ArticleVII of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. 

(c) 	
Parking deck and parking garage requirements are specified in Article VII of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. 


(21)Any public road located within the campus of an acute care hospitalshall be subject to review on a case-by-case basis. Applicable road right-of-way and paving requirements may be modified if theapplicant demonstrates to the Planning Commission that the proposed road right-of-way and paving width are sufficient to provide safe, efficient and orderly movement of traffic. Structureslocated along a public road within the campus may be exemptedfrom otherwise applicable setback and yard requirements of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations if the applicantdemonstrates to the Planning Commission that the spirit of theTown of Bel Air Development Regulations will be observed and public safety and welfare secured. The Planning Commission willmake a recommendation, and the Board of Town Commissioners has final approval. 
E. 	Landscape and amenity design. 
(1) 	General. 
(a) 	
Reasonable landscaping should be provided at site entrances, in public areas, and adjacent to buildings. The type and amountof landscaping required shall be in accordance with ArticleVIII, Landscaping Standards, of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. 

(b) 	
The opportunity for the creation of recreational, cultural andartistic resources is diminished as land is developed. As these opportunities are diminished, the need to develop alternate sources for recreational, cultural and artistic assets is increased. The development of these assets should be financed by those whose development diminishes the availability of thecommunity's resources for those opportunities and contributes 


1:396 

to community urbanization. For this reason, an amount equal to or greater than 1/2% of the building cost for all nonresidential development in excess of 10,000 square feetshall be set aside for the inclusion of public art, a publicsquare, passive open space or a park amenity. The total amount shall not exceed $10,000 per project. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 
[1] 	The property owner shall provide an amenity fee based upon a cost estimate of the proposed project for reviewby the Town that may exclude costs associated with redevelopment. This payment shall be placed in the Town's public amenity fund. Monies paid into the fund shall beused only for the purpose of the development of public art,public squares, passive open space and park amenities. If not used within 10 years, the funds shall be rebated to the property owner. 
(2) 	
Open space and recreation. 

(a) 	
Provision of open space shall be in accordance with § 165-52 ofthe Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. Developed openspace shall be designed to provide active recreational facilities to serve the residents of the development. Undeveloped openspace shall be designed to preserve important site amenitiesand environmentally sensitive areas. 

(b) 	
Deed restrictions. Any lands dedicated for open space or forestconservation purposes shall contain appropriate covenants anddeed restrictions approved by the Town Attorney, ensuring that: 

[1] 	The dedicated space area will not be further subdivided inthe future; 
[2] 	The use of the dedicated space will continue in perpetuityfor the purpose specified; 
[3] 	Appropriate provisions shall be made for any requisite maintenance of the dedicated space; and 
[4] 	Common undeveloped open space shall not be turned intoa commercial enterprise admitting the general public at a fee. 

(c) 	
Open space/forest conservation area ownership. The type ofownership of land dedicated for open space or forest conservation purposes shall be selected by the owner, developer, or subdivider, subject to the approval of the Planning Commission. Type of ownership may include, but is not necessarily limited to, the following: 


1:397 

(d) 

(e) 


[1] 	The Town, subject to acceptance by the Board of TownCommissioners; 
[2] 	Other public jurisdictions or agencies, subject to their acceptance; 
[3] 	Quasi-public organizations, subject to their acceptance; 
[4] 	Homeowner, condominium, or cooperative associations ororganizations; or 
[5] 	Shared, undivided interest by all property owners in the subdivision. 
Homeowner/condominium association. If any of the dedicated space is owned and maintained by a homeowner or condominium association, the developer shall file a declarationof covenants and restrictions that will govern the association,to be submitted for Town review prior to execution of the final plan or record plat and, in the case of a condominium, priorto submission to the state for registration. The provisions shallinclude, but are not necessarily limited to, the following: 
[1] 	The homeowner/condominium association must be established before plat recordation; 
[2] 	Membership must be mandatory for each condominium buyer or home buyer and any successive buyer; 
[3] 	The open space restrictions must be permanent, not justfor a period of years; 
[4] 	The association must be responsible for liability insurance,local taxes, and the maintenance of recreational and other facilities; 
[5] 	Homeowner/condominium owners must pay their pro ratashare of the cost, and the assessment levied by theassociation can become a lien on the property if allowed in the master deed establishing the homeowner association; 
[6] 	The association must be able to adjust the assessment tomeet changed needs; and 
[7] 	The association must maintain a reserve fund for maintenance and repair of all private streets and stormwater management facilities. 
Maintenance of open space areas. The person or entityidentified as having the right of ownership or control over anyopen space or forest conservation area shall be responsible for its continuing upkeep and proper maintenance. 
1:398 

(3) 	
Buffers. Buffers, where applicable, shall be provided in accordancewith Article VIII of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. 

(4) 	
Walls and fences. 

(a) 	
Walls and fences shall be erected in compliance with ArticlesIII and X of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations where required for privacy, screening, separation, security,erosion control, or to serve other necessary and reasonablefunctions. 

(b) 	
The design and materials used shall be functional and compatible with existing and proposed site architecture. 

(c) 	
No fence or wall shall be so constructed or installed as to constitute a hazard to traffic or safety. 



(5) 	
Street furniture. 

(a) 	
Street furniture, such as, but not limited to, trash receptacles, newspaper stands, benches and phone booths, shall be locatedand sized in accordance with function, pedestrian safety andtraffic visibility. 

(b) 	
Street furniture components shall be compatible in form,material and finish. Design and materials shall be coordinatedwith existing and proposed site architecture. Selection of street furniture shall take into consideration function, durability, maintenance and long-term cost. Design/materialsand location of street furniture must be approved by the Department of Planning and Community Development and thePublic Works Department. 

(c) 	
Grouping street furniture shall be encouraged. 



(6) 	
Tree/plant buffers. 

(a) 	
Shade trees shall generally be located within the right-of-wayon both sides of and parallel to the street. Shade trees may also be placed outside the public right-of-way. Refer to Article VIII,Landscaping Standards, of the Town of Bel Air DevelopmentRegulations for specific regulations regarding street tree placement. 

(b) 	
Shade tree areas shall be planted with grass or ground coveror treated with other suitable cover material. 

(c) 	
Tree and shrub plantings shall be incorporated throughoutdevelopment sites to buffer the sites from neighboringproperties, to provide pervious surface within parking areas, to define areas by use, to enhance site appearance, and toenhance the site environmentally. 




1:399 

F. 	Utility areas. 
(1) 	
General. 

(a) 	
Utilities shall generally be located within the right-of-way onboth sides of and parallel to the street. 

(b) 	
Utility areas shall be planted with grass or ground cover or treated with other suitable cover material. 

(c) 	
A minimum easement of 10 feet shall be required for all utilityareas. Additional width may be required by the Director of Public Works where necessary. 

(d) 	
A utility and drainage easement area sufficient in width toprovide for a channel or utilities (storm drain, water, sanitary sewer, etc.) to adequately dispose of surface drainage watershall be required where determined necessary by the Directorof Public Works. 



(2) 	
Underground wiring. 

(a) 	
All electric, telephone, television and other communicationslines, both main and service connections, servicing new developments shall be provided by underground wiring within easements or dedicated public rights-of-way, installed in accordance with the prevailing standards and practices of the utility, as well as standards required by the Department ofPublic Works. 

(b) 	
Lots that abut existing easements or public rights-of-way where overhead electric or telephone distribution supply linesand service connections have previously been installed maybe supplied with electric and telephone service from those overhead lines, but the service connections from the utility'soverhead lines shall be installed underground. In the case of existing overhead utilities, should a road widening or an extension of service or other such condition occur as a result of the subdivision and necessitate the replacement or relocationof such utilities, such replacement or relocation shall be underground. 

(c) 	
Where overhead lines are permitted as the exception, theplacement and alignment of poles shall be designed to lessen the visual impact of overhead lines. Alignments and polelocations shall be carefully routed to avoid locations alonghorizons; clearing swaths through treed areas shall be avoided by selective cutting and a staggered alignment; trees shall beplanted in open areas and at key locations to minimize the viewof the poles and the alignments; and alignments shall follow rear lot lines and other alignments. 

1:400 

(d) 	Year-round screening of any utility apparatus appearing abovethe surface of the ground, other than utility poles, shall be required unless the applicant demonstrates that such screening would unduly encumber the apparatus. 

(3) 	
Lighting. [Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17] 

(a) 	
A lighting plan shall be provided at the time of preliminary platsubmission, in accordance with a plan designed by the utility company or using, as a guideline, the standards set forth bythe Illuminating Engineering Society Lighting Handbook. 

(b) 	
The height and shielding of lighting standards shall provide proper lighting without hazard to drivers or nuisance to residents, and the design of lighting standards shall be of atype appropriate to the development and the municipality. 

(c) 	
Spotlights, if used, shall be placed so as not to create a hazardor negative impact on nearby residents or motorists. 

(d) 	
The final lighting plan for a project shall specify proposed type, style, size and location. The plan shall be submitted to theDirector of Public Works for final approval. 






G. 	
Signs. 

(1) 	
Design and placement of traffic signs shall follow state regulationsor the requirements specified in the Manual of Uniform TrafficControl Devices for Streets and Highways, published by the United States Department of Transportation, as well as Article XV of theTown of Bel Air Development Regulations. 

(2) 	
At least two street name signs shall be placed at each four-way street intersection and one at each T-intersection. Signs shall beinstalled free of visual obstruction. The design of street name signsshall be consistent, of a style appropriate to the community, and of a uniform size and color. 


§ 165-119. Improvements. 
A. 	Water supply. 
(1) 	
General. 

(a) 	
All improvements shall be properly connected with an approved and functioning public community water system. 

(b) 	
No proposals for new public community water supplies or extensions to existing public and quasi-public water systemsshall be constructed until such proposals have been reviewed, evaluated and approved by the Director of Public Works. 



(2) 
Capacity. 



1:401 

(a) 	
The water supply system shall be adequate to handle thenecessary flow based on complete development. 

(b) 	
The demand rates for all uses shall be considered in computingthe total system demand. Where fire protection is provided, thesystem shall be capable of providing the required fire demand plus the required domestic demand. 

(c) 	
Average daily demand can be computed in accordance withthe Maryland Department of the Environment 2006 guidance document titled "Water Supply Capacity Management Plans." 

(d) 	
Fire protection shall be furnished for any developmentconnected to the municipal water supply system, and minimum fire flows shall be in accordance with the State of MarylandFire Prevention Code and the Harford County Water and SewerDesign Guidelines. 

(e) 	
The water system shall be designed to carry peak-hour flowsand be capable of delivering the peak-hour demands. 

(3) 	
System design and placement. System design and placement shall comply with the construction specifications set forth in the HarfordCounty Water and Sewer Design Guidelines. 

(4) 	
Fire hydrants. 

(a) 	
Hydrants shall be spaced to provide necessary fire flow. Needed Fire Flow (NFF) requirements shall be determinedbased on Insurance Services Office (ISO) standards, which range between 500 gpm and 3,500 gpm, depending on buildinguse and distance between buildings. The average area perhydrant shall not exceed 120,000 square feet. In addition, hydrants shall be spaced so that each residence shall be within600 feet of a hydrant. Final hydrant locations shall be approved by the Chief of the Bel Air Volunteer Fire Company. [Amended11-25-2011 by Ord. No. 744-11] 

(b) 	
A hydrant shall be located at all low points and at all highpoints, with adequate means of drainage provided. 

(c) 	
Hydrants shall be located at the ends of lines, and valves offull-line size shall be provided after hydrant tees at the ends ofall dead lines that may be extended in the future. 

(d) 	
Size, type and installation of hydrants shall conform to thespecifications set forth in the Harford County Specificationsand Standards for Water and Sewer Mains. 




B. Sanitary sewers. 
(1) 
General. 


1:402 

(a) 	
All installations shall be properly connected to an approvedand functioning sanitary sewer system prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 

(b) 	
No proposals for new public sanitary sewer systems or extensions to existing public sewer systems shall be constructed until such proposals have been reviewed, evaluated and approved by the Director of Public Works. 


(2) 	System design and placement. 
(a) 	
The sanitary sewer system shall be adequate to handle the necessary flow based on complete development. If the projected sewage flow from the development causes any section of the existing downstream sanitary sewer system tobe over capacity, the affected section shall be upsized inaccordance with Town Code Chapter 265, Impact Fees. 

(b) 	
Average daily residential sewer flow data shall be calculatedand submitted for review and verification by the Department ofPublic Works. 

(c) 	
System design and placement shall comply with the specifications set forth in the Harford County Standards andSpecifications for Water and Sewer Mains. 


C. 	
Stormwater management. 

(1) 	General. 
(a) 	
Design of the stormwater management system shall be consistent with general and specific concerns, values, andstandards of the Town of Bel Air Comprehensive Plan, theTown's stormwater management requirements as outlined in Chapter 405 of the Bel Air Town Code, and applicable statestorm drainage control programs. Design shall be based onenvironmentally sound site planning and engineering techniques and shall be in accordance with the Town StandardSpecifications and Details. 

(b) 	
The goal is to manage stormwater by using environmental site design (ESD) to the maximum extent practicable (MEP)to maintain, after development, as nearly as possible, thepredevelopment runoff characteristics and to reduce stream channel erosion, pollution, siltation and sedimentation andlocal flooding and use appropriate structural best managementpractices (BMPs) only when necessary. 

(c) 	
Stormwater management facilities (dry/wet ponds, infiltrationtrenches, water quality inlets, underground storage facilities,etc.) shall be owned and maintained by the developer/ homeowners' association/condominium association, not the 


1:403 

Town. The Town will inspect these facilities from time to timeand provide the developer/homeowners' association/ condominium association with the results and any necessaryactions required. 
(d) 	No dry or wet pond shall be located in the front yard setback in any residential district or commercial/industrial district adjoining a residential district. 
(2) 	System strategy and design. Stormwater management system strategy and design shall comply with Chapter 405, StormwaterManagement, and the floodplain management regulations as outlined in Chapter 210 of the Bel Air Town Code. 
D. 	Improvement guarantees. 
(1) 	
Purpose. Improvement guarantees shall be provided to ensure theproper installation and maintenance of required street, utility, landscape and other public improvements. The nature and durationof the guarantee shall be structured to achieve this goal withoutadding unnecessary costs to the developer. 

(2) 	
Application. 

(a) 	
Before the recording of final subdivision plats, or as a conditionof final site plan approval, the developer shall post a bond or letter of credit acceptable to the Town for requisite publicimprovements. The performance guarantee shall meet the following standards: 

[1] 	The furnishing of payment and performance bonds or other forms of security acceptable to the Town (i.e., letterof credit), in an amount not to exceed 100% of the cost of installation for public improvements. 
[2] 	Provision for a maintenance guarantee for a period ofone year (In certain circumstances, a maintenance period exceeding one year may be required, at the discretion ofthe Director of Public Works.) after final acceptance of theimprovement, in an amount not to exceed 15% of the cost of the improvement. In the event that other governmentalagencies or public utilities automatically will own utilitiesto be installed, or the improvements are covered by a performance or maintenance guarantee to another governmental agency, the performance or maintenance guarantee, as the case may be, may be waived by the Board of Town Commissioners for such utilities or improvements. 

(b) 	
The time allowed for installation of the improvements for which the performance guarantee has been provided may beextended by the Board of Town Commissioners by resolution. 

1:404 

(c) 	
Upon substantial completion of all required improvements, thedeveloper may notify the Director of Public Works, in writing, by certified mail, of the completion or substantial completionof improvements. The Director of Public Works shall inspectall improvements of which such notice has been given and shall approve, partially approve, or reject the improvementsand shall notify the developer, in writing, by certified mail, ofthe contents of the report and the action not later than 90 days after receipt of the notice from the developer of the completionof all improvements. 

(d) 	
Where partial approval is granted, the developer shall be released from all liability, except for that portion of improvements not yet approved. 

(e) 	
Should the developer fail to complete the improvements, the Town may use the guarantee to complete the improvements. 



(3) 	
Performance and maintenance mechanisms. Performance and maintenance guarantees shall be provided by a variety of means as approved by the Director of Public Works, including, but not limitedto, the following: 

(a) 	
Security bond. The applicant may obtain a security bond from a surety bonding company authorized to do business in the state. 

(b) 	
Letter of credit. The applicant may provide an irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or other reputable institution. 

(c) 	
Escrow account. The applicant shall deposit cash, or otherinstruments readily convertible into cash at face value, eitherwith the municipality or in escrow with a bank. 






1:405 

§ 165-119 BEL AIR CODE 	§ 180-4 
Chapter 180 
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Building construction — See Ch. 145. Fire prevention — See Ch. 204. 
§ 180-1. Adoption of Electrical Code. 
For the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the proper design,acceptable installation and adequate maintenance of electrical systems within the Town of Bel Air, including but not limited to the granting andrevocation of permits and the fixing of penalties and fees, the Town of BelAir hereby adopts the National Electrical Code, 2014 Edition, including all annexes, as adopted by the National Fire Protection Association (ElectricalSection), saving and excepting such portions as are deleted, modified oramended by this chapter, and the same is hereby adopted and made part of this chapter with the same force and effect as though set out in full herein. 
§ 180-2. Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide practical electrical regulations to safeguard persons and property from hazards arising from the use ofelectricity in the Town of Bel Air. 
§ 180-3. Scope and applicability. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to and govern electrical regulations to safeguard persons and electrical conditions within the Townof Bel Air. 
§ 180-4. Amendments to Electrical Code. 
The National Electrical Code, 2014 Edition, adopted by this chapter isamended and revised as follows: 
A. 	Aluminum conductors of Number 6 American wire gauge (AWG) andsmaller are not permitted. 
B. 	In Subsection 210.8(A)(2) and (5) add the following exception: "Exception to (2) and (5): Receptacles for refrigeration and submersiblepumps are permitted to be installed without GFCI protection when asingle receptacle is utilized for each appliance." 
C. 	In Subsection 210.8(B)(2) add the following exception: "Exception No.1 to (2): Receptacles for refrigeration and submersible pumps are permitted to be installed without GFCI protection when a single receptacle is utilized for each appliance." 
1:406 

D. 
E. 
F. 
G. 
H. 
I. 
J. 
K. 

L. 

In Subsection 210.11(C)(1) delete the word "two" in the third line andinsert the word "three" in lieu thereof. 
In Subsection 210.12(A) add the following exception: "Exception:Receptacles for refrigeration and submersible pumps are permittedto be installed without GFCI protection when a single receptacle is utilized for each appliance." 
In Subsection 210.52(B)(1) delete the word "two" in the third line andinsert the word "three" in lieu thereof. 
In Subsection 210.52(B)(2) delete the word "two" in the first line andinsert the word "three" in lieu thereof. 
In Subsection 240.21(B)(1) and (B)(2) add the following exception: "Exception: In meter rooms, the conductors within the auxiliary gutterthat supplies the meters shall not count as part of the total length." 
In Subsection 250.52(A)(5)(B) delete the language and insert the following language in lieu thereof: "Electrodes or rods of iron or steel are not permitted. Stainless steel rods, nonferrous rods, or their equivalent shall be listed and shall not be less than 16 millimeters (5/8 inch) in diameter." 
In Subsection 250.104(B)(1) add the following language to the endof the sentence: "For other than gas piping system(s)." Under (B)(1), add the following language: "For gas piping system(s), the bondingconductors shall not be smaller than six AWG copper wire or equivalentto be connected at a readily accessible location either outside of a building or structure or inside nearest to the point of entrance of thepiping system and ahead of any CSST piping that may be installed inthe structure." 
In Subsection 410.16(C) add the following language: "All 'lay-in'luminaires require independent suspension to ensure the luminairewill not drop when the framing members no longer provide support. At a minimum, 12 SWG wire which is firmly secured to the buildingstructure and the luminaires must be utilized. Two restraining wires,one at each corner, are required when installed in fire-rated ceilings. Other types of luminaires installed in suspended ceilings must have atleast one 12 SWG or larger wire which is firmly secured to the buildingstructure and the luminaire as a secondary support to preclude the danger of falling when the framing members fail or are removed." 
In Subsection 680.26(B)(2)(b) delete the language after "alternatemeans," including (1) through (5), and insert the following language in lieu thereof: "where structural reinforcing steel is not available or isencapsulated in a nonconductive compound, a copper conductor gridshall be provided and shall comply with (b)(1) through (b)(3): (1) Be constructed of minimum 8 AWG bare solid copper conductors bondedto each other at all points of crossing. (2) Conform to the contour ofthe pool and the pool deck. (3) Be arranged in a 300 millimeter (12 
1:407 

inch) by 300 millimeter (12 inch) network of conductors in a uniformlyspaced perpendicular grid pattern with a tolerance of 100 millimeters (four inches)." 
§ 180-5. Licensing and registration. 
All persons performing electrical work in the Town of Bel Air shall be licensed and registered in accordance with Article III, Licenses and Registrations, of the Harford County Electrical Code. 
No license or permit shall be required for installations of low-voltage systems of 50 volts or less within a dwelling. 
§ 180-6. Permit required. 
No work authorized under this chapter, unless accepted in this chapter, shall be undertaken without an electrical permit issued by the HarfordCounty Division of Electrical Services under the authority of the Town of BelAir. 
§ 180-7. Inspections. 
The Harford County Division of Electrical Services shall perform theinspection of all electrical work for which an electrical permit is required in the Town of Bel Air during the course of construction and upon completionof the construction. If any defects are found, the Town of Bel Air shall havethe authority to order such electrical work to be corrected to comply with the provisions of the code. 
§ 180-8. Administration and enforcement. 
This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Department of Public Works, herein referred to as the "Department." 
§ 180-9. Right of entry. 
The Director or an authorized representative, upon exhibiting proper credentials or proof of identity on request, has the right to enter anybuilding, structure or premises, except private residences, without consentof the occupants, at any time during business or operating hours and at such other times as may be necessary in any emergency that immediatelyendangers life, property or public safety for the purpose of enforcing thischapter. In the case of multiple dwellings, the Director or an authorized representative has the right to enter without consent only those spaces towhich the public is ordinarily admitted, such as hallways, basements andsimilar spaces, provided that the Director or an authorized representative may enter any private residence or dwelling for the purpose of enforcingthis chapter with the consent of the occupants or without such consent ifthe Director obtains an administrative search warrant in accordance with prescribed legal procedure or if there is an emergency present. 
1:408 

§ 180-10. Violations and penalties. 
Any person in violation of the provisions of this chapter and rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty asprovided in Chapter 1, Article II, of this Code. In addition, the Town may institute other appropriate legal actions for the enforcement of this chapter. 
§ 180-11. Emergency disconnections. 
Where any electrical system, whether installed before or after the enactment of this chapter, is determined by the Director to be an immediatethreat to the safety of persons or property, or where it may interfere withthe fire-protection service of any fire department in the county, the Director shall have authority to cause the electrical system to be disconnectedimmediately without prior notice to the owner. 
§ 180-12. Fees. 
Prior to the issuance of any permit or license as provided for in this chapter,the applicant shall pay a fee in accordance with the schedule of fees established and revised by Harford County. Fees for electrical permits are separate from the fees paid for building permits and will be paid directly tothe Harford County Division of Electrical Services. 
Chapter 192 
FEES AND COSTS 
§ 192-1. Fees. 
The Board of Town Commissioners shall establish by resolution certain fees to be paid by any person, firm, or corporation applying to the Town of BelAir for certain services, publications, documents, licenses and petitions. 
§ 192-2. Additional costs. 
Whenever any petition or application for annexation, rezoning, variance,exception, conditional use, substitution or extension of nonconforming useand amendment as set forth in § 192-1 hereof requires publication, rent for place of public hearing and stenographic record, the cost of all suchrequirements shall be paid to the Town of Bel Air by the petitioner orapplicant. 
1:409 

§ 192-2 BEL AIR CODE 	§ 198-4 
Chapter 198 
FIREARMS, FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Fire prevention — See Ch. 204. 	Peace and good order — See Ch. 345. 
§ 198-1. Discharge of firearms. 
A. 	It is unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm or air gun, BBgun, or any toy gun, projecting lead or any other missile, except in a regularly established shooting gallery or in a private basement or cellar target range. 
B. 	This section shall not be construed to prohibit the discharge of guns where necessary to protect life or property or to kill any dangerousanimal, nor to prohibit the discharge of guns by any duly authorizedpeace officer acting in the proper performance of his official duties, nor to prevent discharge of blank cartridges in theatrical performances,sporting events or other public or ceremonial functions. 
C. 	Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section, upon conviction thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II of this Code.92 
§ 198-2. Stun guns. 
Stun guns within the Town of Bel Air are hereby regulated under theprovisions of §§ 260-2 and 260-3 of the Harford County Code and saidprovisions shall be enforced within the Town of Bel Air in the same manner and by the same officials and with the same effect as in the unincorporatedareas of Harford County, and all persons within the Town of Bel Air shall berequired to abide by said provisions. Violation of said provisions shall be a misdemeanor punishable under the provisions of Chapter 1, Article II of theCode of the Town of Bel Air. 
§ 198-3. Discharge and sale of fireworks. 
No person shall distribute, sell, cast, throw, discharge or fire any squib,rocket, firecracker, torpedo, grenade, or other combustible fireworks of anykind, to include ground-based sparkling devices or explosive preparation, within the Town, provided that the Commissioners shall have the authorityto grant, free of all charges, a permit for using fireworks upon applicationmade to them. 
92.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:410 
§ 198-4. Keeping or storage of explosives. 
No person shall keep or store within the Town any giant powder, nitroglycerine, dynamite, blasting powder or other explosive, provided thatwhite or black gunpowder may be kept within the Town by any person forany lawful purpose whatsoever, provided that the quantity so kept shall not at any time exceed 25 pounds in the aggregate. 
§ 198-5. Violations and penalties.93 
Except as otherwise provided, any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be a municipal infraction and any violator shall be fined asprovided in Chapter 1, Article II of this Code for each day or fraction thereofduring which a violation continues. 
Chapter 204 
FIRE PREVENTION 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Address numbers — See Ch. 115.  Fireworks and explosives — See Ch. 198.  
Fire alarms — See Ch. 122, Art. II.  Plumbing and gas fitting standards — See Ch. 353.  
Building construction — See Ch. 145. Electrical standards — See Ch. 180.  Property maintenance — See Ch. 364.  

93.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:411 
ARTICLE I 
General Regulations
[Adopted 3-11-1980 by Ord. No. 310 as Ch. 8, Art. 3 of the 1980
Code; amended in its entirety 5-20-2013 by Ord. No. 760-13] 

§ 204-1. Adoption of State of Maryland Fire Prevention Code andLife Safety Code. 
A. 	The Town hereby adopts the following: 
(1) 	
The State of Maryland Fire Prevention Code (adoption of NFPA 1, Uniform Fire Code, 2012 Edition with amendments). For thepurposes of such code, the Public Works Director shall be deemedthe authority having jurisdiction (AHJ) under this code. 

(2) 	
The Life Safety Code, NFPA 101, 2012 Edition with amendments,published by the National Fire Protection Association. The PublicWorks Director shall have the duties and functions of the authority having jurisdiction (AHJ) as referred to in this code. 


B. 	Nothing herein shall be construed to impair the validity, effect andenforceability of any fire code or regulations now or hereafter adopted by the appropriate agencies of the state. 
§ 204-2. Removal of obstructions to emergency vehicle access. 
A. 	Whenever the Public Works Director may find that any private sidewalk or vehicular driveway is obstructed by snow, debris, construction material, vehicles or other matter likely to interfere with the operationof the Fire Department or other emergency services, he shall order that said obstruction be removed and that such areas be kept clearfrom such obstructions in the future. As may be required, the PublicWorks Director shall consult the Chief of Police of Bel Air, the Chief of the Bel Air Volunteer Fire Department, and the Director of Planningand Community Development for Bel Air or any authority to give suchassistance as may be deemed advisable. 
B. 	In order to assure free access by Fire Department vehicles and otheremergency vehicles, the Board of Town Commissioners of Bel Air orits designated representative, upon such finding by the Public Works Director, may order "No Parking" signs erected and may designatefire lanes to be distinctively marked and may order that curbs bepainted a distinctive color to delineate areas to be kept clear from any obstruction. Where such signs are erected or such painting or markingis done on privately owned property, the cost and installation of suchsigns and the application of marking or painting shall be borne by the owner or owners of such property. 
C. 	The parking of any vehicle, on private property or otherwise, which isin violation of the foregoing shall constitute a municipal infraction, and any person convicted thereof shall be subject to penalties as provided 
1:413 

in Chapter 1, Article II, and Chapter 450, Article IV, of this Code.In addition, any vehicle parked in violation of this section may be impounded by the Police Department and held until the penaltyprovided and the towing and storage charges incurred as a result of impounding are paid. When a citation is attached to a vehicle in the absence of its driver, the registered owner of the vehicle shall bepresumed to be the person wrongfully parking such vehicle and thusviolating this section. If such vehicle remains unattended for two hours after issuance of a citation, it may be impounded as provided above. 
§ 204-3. Membrane structures on building roofs 
A. 	Membrane structures are defined as: 
(1) 	
Cable-restrained, air-supported structure. A structure in which theuplift is resisted by cables or webbings which are anchored toeither foundations or dead men. Reinforcing cable or webbing is attached by various methods to the membrane or is an integral partof the membrane. This is not a cable-supported structure. 

(2) 	
Membrane-covered cable structure. A nonpressurized structure in which a mast and cable system provides support and tension to themembrane weather barrier and the membrane imparts stability tothe structure. 

(3) 	
Membrane-covered frame structure. A nonpressurized buildingwherein the structure is composed of a rigid framework to supporta tensioned membrane which provides the weather barrier. 


B. 	Temporary cable-restrained, air-supported structures, temporarymembrane-covered cable structures and temporary membrane-coveredframe structures that would be an alteration to an existing building, would constitute an addition to the height and/or area of any structureor be proposed in conjunction with the construction of a new structureshall be prohibited on any story above the lowest level of exit discharge. 
§ 204-4. Enforcement; violations and penalties. 
A. 	The provisions of this article may be enforced by the State Fire Marshal or the Town of Bel Air Public Works Director or designated representative. 
B. 	The Town of Bel Air may deny the issuance of any permits to an applicant at any time when it determines that the applicant is not in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
C. 	Any person(s) who shall violate a provision of this article or shall fail tocomply with any of the requirements of an approved plan or directive of the Public Works Director or authorized representative, or in violationof a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this article, shallbe guilty of a municipal infraction punishable as provided in Chapter 
1:414 

1, Article II, of this Code. Each day the violation continues shall bedeemed a separate offense. 
1:415 

Chapter 210 
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Building construction — See Ch. 145. Stormwater management — See Ch. 405. Sediment control — See Ch. 390. 
1:416 

ARTICLE I 
General Provisions 
§ 210-1. Findings. 
A. 	The Federal Emergency Management Agency has identified special flood hazard areas within the boundaries of the Town of Bel Air. Specialflood hazard areas are subject to periodic inundation which may resultin loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary publicexpenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of thetax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. Structures that are inadequately elevated, improperlyfloodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damage also contribute to flood losses. 
B. 	The Town of Bel Air, by resolution, agreed to meet the requirementsof the National Flood Insurance Program and was accepted for participation in the program on September 16, 1981. As of that date or as of September 16, 1981, the initial effective date of the Town of BelAir Flood Insurance Rate Map, all development and new construction,as defined herein, are to be compliant with these regulations. 
§ 210-2. Statutory authorization. 
The Maryland General Assembly, in Md. Code Ann., Land Use Article, Title4, has established as policy of the state that the orderly development and use of land and structures requires comprehensive regulation throughthe implementation of planning and zoning control, and that planning andzoning controls shall be implemented by local government in order to, among other purposes, secure the public safety, promote health and generalwelfare, and promote the conservation of natural resources. Therefore,the Commissioners of the Town of Bel Air do hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations. 
§ 210-3. Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of these regulations to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to: 
A. 	Protect human life, health and welfare; 
B. 	Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future; 
C. 	Minimize flooding of water supply and sanitary sewage disposal systems; 
D. 	Maintain natural drainage; 
1:417 

E. 	Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmentalunits and its residents, by discouraging unwise design and construction of development in areas subject to flooding; 
F. 	Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with floodingand generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
G. 	Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
H. 	Minimize damage to public facilities and other utilities, such as waterand gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges; 
I. 	Reinforce that those who build in and occupy special flood hazard areasshould assume responsibility for their actions; 
J. 	Minimize the impact of development on adjacent properties within and near flood-prone areas; 
K. 	Provide that the flood storage and conveyance functions of floodplainsare maintained; 
L. 	Minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial functions of floodplains; 
M. 	Prevent floodplain uses that are either hazardous or environmentally incompatible; and 
N. 	Meet community participation requirements of the National FloodInsurance Program as set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) at 44 CFR 59.22. 
§ 210-4. Areas to which these regulations apply. 
These regulations shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the Town of Bel Air and identified in § 210-5. 
§ 210-5. Basis for establishing special flood hazard areas and BFEs. 
A. 	For the purposes of these regulations, the minimum basis for establishing special flood hazard areas and base flood elevations is theFlood Insurance Study for Harford County, Maryland, and IncorporatedAreas, dated April 19, 2016, or the most recent revision thereof, and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map(s), and all subsequentamendments and revisions to the FIRMs. The FIS and FIRMs are retained on file and available to the public at the Public Works and Planning Departments, 705 East Churchville Road. 
B. 	Where field-surveyed topography or digital topography indicates thatground elevations are below the closest applicable base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard on the FIRM, thearea shall be considered as a special flood hazard area. 
1:418 

C. 	To establish base flood elevations in special flood hazard areas thatdo not have such elevations shown on the FIRM, the floodplain administrator may provide the best available data for base floodelevations, may require the applicant to obtain available informationfrom federal, state or other sources, or may require the applicant to establish special flood hazard areas and base flood elevations as setforth in §§ 210-13, 210-14, and 210-15 of these regulations. 
§ 210-6. Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
These regulations are not intended to repeal or abrogate any existing regulations and ordinances, including subdivision regulations, zoningordinances, building codes, or any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. In the event of a conflict between these regulations and anyother ordinance, the more restrictive shall govern. 
§ 210-7. Interpretation. 
A. 	In the interpretation and application of these regulations, all provisionsshall be: 
(1) 	
Considered as minimum requirements; 

(2) 	
Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 

(3) 	
Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 


B. 	Notes referencing publications of the Federal Emergency ManagementAgency refer to the most recent edition of those publications, are intended only as guidance, and do not bind or alter the authority of the floodplain administrator to interpret and apply these regulations. 
§ 210-8. Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
A. 	The degree of flood protection required by these regulations is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and willoccur, and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. These regulations do not imply that land outside of the specialflood hazard areas or uses that are permitted within such areas will befree from flooding or flood damage. 
B. 	These regulations shall not create liability on the part of the Townof Bel Air, any officer or employee thereof, the Maryland Departmentof the Environment (MDE) or the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for any flood damage that results from reliance onthese regulations or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
1:419 

§ 210-9. Severability. 
Should any section or provision of these regulations be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the regulations as a whole, or any part thereof other than the partso declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
1:420 

ARTICLE II 
Definitions 
§ 210-10. Terms defined. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in these regulations shall be interpreted to have the meanings they have in commonusage and to give these regulations the most reasonable application. 
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A building or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principalstructure. For the purposes of these regulations, an accessory structureshall be used solely for parking of vehicles and limited storage. 
AGREEMENT TO SUBMIT AN ELEVATION CERTIFICATE — A form on which the applicant for a permit to construct a building or structure, toconstruct certain horizontal additions, to place or replace a manufactured home, or to substantially improve a building, structure, or manufacturedhome agrees to have an elevation certificate prepared by a licensed professional engineer or licensed professional surveyor, as specified by the floodplain administrator, and to submit the certificate: 
A. 	Upon placement of the lowest floor and prior to further vertical construction; and 
B. 	Prior to the final inspection and issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
ALTERATION OF A WATERCOURSE — Includes but is not limited to widening, deepening or relocating the channel, including excavation or filling of the channel. Alteration of a watercourse does not include construction of a road, bridge, culvert, dam, or in-stream pond unless the channel is proposed to be realigned or relocated as part of such construction. 
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated Zone AO on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, with a one-percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one foot to three feet, where a clearlydefined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable,and where velocity flow may be evident; such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
BASE BUILDING — The building to which an addition is being added. Thisterm is used in provisions relating to additions. 
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled orexceeded in any given year; the base flood also is referred to as the "one­percent annual chance (one-hundred-year) flood." 
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The water surface elevation of the base flood in relation to the datum specified on the community's Flood Insurance RateMap. In areas of shallow flooding, the base flood elevation is the highest adjacent natural grade elevation plus the depth number specified in feet onthe Flood Insurance Rate Map, or at least four feet if the depth number isnot specified. 
1:421 

BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (belowground level) on all sides. 
BUILDING CODE(S) — The effective Maryland Building Performance Standards (COMAR 05.02.07), including the Building Code, ResidentialCode, and Existing Building Code. 
COMMUNITY — A political subdivision of the State of Maryland (county,city or town) that has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain managementregulations within its jurisdictional boundaries. 
CRITICAL AND ESSENTIAL FACILITIES — Buildings and other structuresthat are intended to remain operational in the event of extreme environmental loading from flood, wind, snow or earthquakes. (Note: See Maryland Building Performance Standards, Section 1602 and Table 1604.5.)Critical and essential facilities typically include hospitals, fire stations,police stations, storage of critical records, facilities that handle or store hazardous materials, and similar facilities. 
DECLARATION OF LAND RESTRICTION (NONCONVERSIONAGREEMENT) — A form, signed by the owner, to agree not to convert or modify, in any manner that is inconsistent with the terms of the permitand these regulations, certain enclosures below the lowest floor of elevatedbuildings and certain accessory structures. The form requires the owner to record it on the property deed to inform future owners of the restrictions. 
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved realestate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, placement of manufactured homes, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
ELEVATION CERTIFICATE — FEMA form on which surveyed elevations and other data pertinent to a property and a building are identified, andwhich shall be completed by a licensed professional land surveyor or alicensed professional engineer, as specified by the floodplain administrator. When used to document the height above grade of buildings in specialflood hazard areas for which base flood elevation data are not available, the elevation certificate shall be completed in accordance with the instructions issued by FEMA. (Note: FEMA Form 086-0-33 and instructions are availableonline at http://www.fema.gov/library/viewRecord.do?id=1383.) 
ENCLOSURE BELOW THE LOWEST FLOOR — An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure that is located below an elevated building, is surroundedby walls on all sides, and is usable solely for parking of vehicles, buildingaccess or storage, in an area other than a basement area, provided that such enclosure is built in accordance with the applicable designrequirements specified in these regulations. Also see "lowest floor." 
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) — The federal agency with the overall responsibility for administering the National FloodInsurance Program. 
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated special flood 
1:422 

hazard areas to indicate the magnitude and nature of flood hazards, todesignate applicable flood zones, and to delineate floodways, if applicable. FIRMs that have been prepared in digital format or converted to digitalformat are referred to as "digital FIRMs (DFIRMs)." 
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has provided flood profiles,floodway information, and the water surface elevations. 
FLOOD OPENING — A flood opening (nonengineered) is an opening that is used to meet the prescriptive requirement of one square inch of net openarea for every square foot of enclosed area. An engineered flood openingis an opening that is designed and certified by a licensed professional engineer or licensed architect as meeting certain performancecharacteristics, including providing automatic entry and exit of floodwaters;this certification requirement may be satisfied by an individual certification for a specific structure or issuance of an evaluation report by the ICCEvaluation Service, Inc. (Note: See NFIP Technical Bulletin No. 1, "Openings in Foundation Walls and Walls of Enclosures.") 
FLOOD OR FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial orcomplete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
A. 	The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or 
B. 	The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION — The base flood elevation plus two feet of freeboard. Freeboard is a factor of safety that compensates foruncertainty in factors that could contribute to flood heights greater thanthe height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams, climatechange, and the hydrologic effect of urbanization in a watershed. 
FLOOD PROTECTION SETBACK — A distance, measured perpendicular to the top of bank of a watercourse, that delineates an area to be leftundisturbed to minimize future flood damage and to recognize the potentialfor bank erosion. Along nontidal waters of the state, the flood protection setback is: 
A. 	One hundred feet if the watercourse has special flood hazard areasshown on the FIRM, except where the setback extends beyond the boundary of the flood hazard area; or 
B. 	Fifty feet if the watercourse does not have special flood hazard areasshown on the FIRM. 
FLOOD ZONE — A designation for areas that are shown on Flood InsuranceRate Maps: 
A. 	ZONE A — Special flood hazard areas subject to inundation by the one-percent annual chance (one-hundred-year) flood; base flood elevationsare not determined. 
1:423 

B. 	ZONE AE AND ZONE A1-30 — Special flood hazard areas subject toinundation by the one-percent annual chance (one-hundred-year) flood; base flood elevations are determined; floodways may or may not bedetermined. 
C. 	ZONE AH AND ZONE AO — Areas of shallow flooding, with flood depths of one foot to three feet (usually areas of ponding or sheet flowon sloping terrain), with or without BFEs or designated flood depths. 
D. 	ZONE B AND ZONE X (SHADED) — Areas subject to inundation by the two-tenths-percent annual chance (five-hundred-year) flood; areassubject to the one-percent annual chance (one-hundred-year) flood withaverage depths of less than one foot or with contributing drainage area less than one square mile; and areas protected from the base flood bylevees. 
E. 	ZONE C AND ZONE X (UNSHADED) — Areas outside of zones designated A, AE, A1-30, AO, VE, V1-30, B, and X (shaded). 
F. 	ZONE VE AND ZONE V1-30 — Special flood hazard areas subject toinundation by the one-percent annual chance (one-hundred-year) flood and subject to high-velocity wave action (also see "coastal high-hazardarea"). 
FLOOD-DAMAGE-RESISTANT MATERIALS — Any construction material that is capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair. (Note: See NFIP Technical Bulletin No. 2, "Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements.") 
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to being inundated by waterfrom any source (see definition of "flood" or "flooding"). 
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE — FEMA form that is to be completed,signed and sealed by a licensed professional engineer or licensed architect to certify that the design of floodproofing and proposed methods of construction are in accordance with the applicable requirements of § 210-35B of these regulations. (Note: FEMA Form 086-0-34 is availableonline at http://www.fema.gov/library/viewRecord.do?id=1600.) 
FLOODPROOFING OR FLOODPROOFED — Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to buildings or structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and theircontents, such that the buildings or structures are watertight with wallssubstantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. [Note: State regulations atCOMAR 26.17.04.11(B)(7) do not allow new nonresidential buildings in nontidal waters of the state to be floodproofed.] 
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacentland areas that must be reserved in order to pass the base flood discharge 
1:424 

such that the cumulative increase in the water surface elevation of the base flood discharge is no more than a designated height. When shown on a FIRM, the floodway is referred to as the "designated floodway." 
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform itsintended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water; the term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that arenecessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the groundsurface, prior to construction, next to the proposed foundation of a structure. 
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is: 
A. 	Individually listed on the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the United States Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting therequirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
B. 	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interioras contributing to the historical significance of a registered historicdistrict or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
C. 	Individually listed on the Maryland Register of Historic Places; or 
D. 	Individually listed on the Inventory of Historic Places maintained by the Town of Bel Air, whose Historic Preservation Program has beencertified by the Maryland Historical Trust or the Secretary of the Interior. 
HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC ENGINEERING ANALYSES — Analysesperformed by a licensed professional engineer, in accordance with standardengineering practices that are accepted by the Maryland Department of the Environment (nontidal wetlands and waterways) and FEMA, used todetermine the base flood, other frequency floods, flood elevations, floodwayinformation and boundaries, and flood profiles. 
LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC) — An official FEMA determination, byletter, that amends or revises an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map orFlood Insurance Study. Letters of map change include: 
A. 	LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA) — An amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in adesignated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective Flood Insurance Rate Map and establishes that a specificproperty or structure is not located in a special flood hazard area. 
B. 	LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR) — A revision based on technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, floodplainand floodway delineations, and planimetric features. A letter of map 
1:425 

revision based on fill (LOMR-F) is a determination that a structure orparcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer exposed to flooding associated with thebase flood. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill musthave been permitted and placed in accordance with the community's floodplain management regulations. 
C. 	CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR) — A formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements forsuch projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas.A conditional letter of map revision based on fill (CLOMR-F) is a determination that a parcel of land or proposed structure that willbe elevated by fill would not be inundated by the base flood if fill isplaced on the parcel as proposed or the structure is built as proposed. A CLOMR does not revise the effective Flood Insurance Rate Map orFlood Insurance Study; upon submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a letter of map revision may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM. 
LICENSED — Refers to professionals who are authorized to practice inthe State of Maryland by issuance of licenses by the Maryland Board of Architects, Maryland Board of Professional Engineers, Maryland Board ofProfessional Land Surveyors, and the Maryland Real Estate Appraisers andHome Inspectors Commission. 
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (includingbasement) of a building or structure; the floor of an enclosure below thelowest floor is not the lowest floor, provided that the enclosure is constructed in accordance with these regulations. The lowest floor of amanufactured home is the bottom of the lowest horizontal supportingmember (longitudinal chassis frame beam). 
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use withor without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle. 
MARKET VALUE — The price at which a property will change handsbetween a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither party being under compulsion to buy or sell and both having reasonable knowledge of relevantfacts. For the purposes of these regulations, the market value of a buildingis determined by a licensed real estate appraiser or the most recent, full phased-in assessment value of the building (improvement) determined bythe Maryland Department of Assessments and Taxation. 
MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT (MDE) — A principal department of the State of Maryland that is charged with, among otherresponsibilities, the coordination of the National Flood Insurance Programin Maryland (NFIP State Coordinator) and the administration of regulatory programs for development and construction that occur within the waters ofthe state, including nontidal wetlands, nontidal waters and floodplains, and 
1:426 

state and private tidal wetlands (tidal wetlands). Unless otherwise specified,"MDE" refers to the Department's Wetlands and Waterways Program. 
MIXED-USE STRUCTURE — Any structure that is used or intended for usefor a mixture of nonresidential and residential uses in the same structure. 
NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP) — The program authorized by the United States Congress in 42 U.S.C. §§ 4001 through4129. The NFIP makes flood insurance coverage available in communitiesthat agree to adopt and enforce minimum regulatory requirements for development in areas prone to flooding (see definition of "special floodhazard area"). 
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures, including additions and improvements, and the placement of manufactured homes, for which thestart of construction commenced on or after September 16, 1981, the initialeffective date of the Town of Bel Air Flood Insurance Rate Map, including any subsequent improvements, alterations, modifications, and additions tosuch structures. 
NFIP STATE COORDINATOR — See "Maryland Department of the Environment." 
NONTIDAL WATERS OF THE STATE — See "waters of the state." As used in these regulations, refers to any stream or body of water within the state that is subject to state regulation, including the "one-hundred-yearfrequency floodplain of free-flowing waters." COMAR 26.17.04 states that"the landward boundaries of any tidal waters shall be deemed coterminous with the wetlands boundary maps adopted pursuant to Environment Article,§ 16-301, Annotated Code of Maryland." Therefore, the boundary betweenthe tidal and nontidal waters of the state is the tidal wetlands boundary. 
PERSON — An individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership,association, or any other entity, including state and local governments andagencies. 
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle that is built on a single chassis,400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection,designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck, and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — The land in the floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.Special flood hazard areas are designated by the Federal EmergencyManagement Agency in Flood Insurance Studies and on Flood Insurance Rate Maps as Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-30, and A99. The term includes areasshown on other flood maps that are identified in § 210-5. 
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date the building permit was issued, provided that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180days of the permit date. The "actual start" means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of 
1:427 

slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or anywork beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include theinstallation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporaryforms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessorystructures, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For substantial improvements, the "actualstart of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, orother structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
STRUCTURE — That which is built or constructed; specifically, a walled androofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a buildingor structure whereby the cost of restoring the building or structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the marketvalue of the building or structure before the damage occurred; also used as"substantially damaged" structures. 
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a building or structure, the cost of whichequals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the building or structure before the start of construction of the improvement. The term includesstructures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actualrepair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
A. 	Any project for improvement of a building or structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety codespecifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official prior to submission of an application for a permit and which arethe minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
B. 	Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure. 
[Note: See "Substantial Improvement/Substantial Damage Desk
Reference" (FEMA P-758).] 
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE — A structure installed, used, or erected for a period of less than 180 days. 
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the strict application of one or morerequirements of these regulations. 
VIOLATION — Any construction or development in a special flood hazardarea that is being performed without an issued permit; the failure of abuilding, structure, or other development for which a permit is issued to be fully compliant with these regulations and the conditions of the 
1:428 

issued permit. A building, structure, or other development without therequired design certifications, the elevation certificate, or other evidence of compliance required is presumed to be a violation until such time as therequired documentation is provided. 
WATERCOURSE — The channel, including channel banks and bed, of nontidal waters of the state. 
WATERS OF THE STATE — (See Environment Article, Title 5, Subtitle 1,Annotated Code of Maryland.) Includes: 
A. 	Both surface and underground waters within the boundaries of thestate subject to its jurisdiction; 
B. 	That portion of the Atlantic Ocean within the boundaries of the state; 
C. 	The Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries; 
D. 	All ponds, lakes, rivers, streams, public ditches, tax ditches, and publicdrainage systems within the state, other than those designed and used to collect, convey, or dispose of sanitary sewage; and 
E. 	The floodplain of free-flowing waters determined by MDE on the basisof the one-hundred-year flood frequency. 
1:429 

ARTICLE III 
Administration 
§ 210-11. Designation of floodplain administrator. 
The Director of Public Works is hereby appointed to administer and implement these regulations and is referred to herein as the "floodplainadministrator." The floodplain administrator may: 
A. 	Delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and otheremployees. 
B. 	Enter into a written agreement or written contract with another Maryland community or private-sector entity to administer specificprovisions of these regulations. Administration of any part of theseregulations by another entity shall not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to the participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as set forth in the Code of FederalRegulations (CFR) at 44 CFR 59.22. 
§ 210-12. Duties and responsibilities of floodplain administrator. 
The duties and responsibilities of floodplain administrator shall include butare not limited to: 
A. 	Review applications for permits to determine whether proposedactivities will be located in flood hazard areas. 
B. 	Interpret floodplain boundaries and provide available base flood elevation and flood hazard information. 
C. 	Review applications to determine whether proposed activities will bereasonably safe from flooding and require new construction and substantial improvements to meet the requirements of these regulations. 
D. 	Review applications to determine whether all necessary permits have been obtained from the federal, state or local agencies from whichprior or concurrent approval is required; in particular, permits fromMDE for any construction, reconstruction, repair, or alteration of a dam, reservoir, or waterway obstruction (including bridges, culverts,and structures), any alteration of a watercourse, or any change ofthe course, current, or cross section of a stream or body of water, including any change to the one-hundred-year-frequency floodplain offree-flowing nontidal waters of the state. 
E. 	Verify that applicants proposing an alteration of a watercourse have notified adjacent communities and MDE (NFIP State Coordinator) andhave submitted copies of such notifications to FEMA. 
1:431 

F. 
G. 
H. 
I. 
J. 
K. 
L. 
M. 
Approve applications and issue permits to develop in flood hazard areasif the provisions of these regulations have been met, or disapprove applications if the provisions of these regulations have not been met. 
Inspect, or cause to be inspected, buildings, structures, and other development for which permits have been issued to determine compliance with these regulations or to determine if noncompliancehas occurred or violations have been committed. 
Review elevation certificates and require incomplete or deficient certificates to be corrected. 
Submit to FEMA, or require applicants to submit to FEMA, data andinformation necessary to maintain FIRMs, including hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses prepared by or for the Town of Bel Air,within six months after such data and information become available, if the analyses indicate changes in base flood elevations or boundaries. 
Maintain and permanently keep records that are necessary for theadministration of these regulations, including: 
(1) 	
Flood Insurance Studies, Flood Insurance Rate Maps (including historic studies and maps and current effective studies and maps)and letters of map change; and 

(2) 	
Documentation supporting issuance and denial of permits, elevation certificates, documentation of the elevation (in relation to the datum on the FIRM) to which structures have been floodproofed, other required design certifications, variances, and records of enforcement actions taken to correct violations of these regulations. 


Enforce the provisions of these regulations, investigate violations, issue notices of violations or stop-work orders, and require permit holders totake corrective action. 
Advise the Board of Appeals regarding the intent of these regulations and, for each application for a variance, prepare a staff report andrecommendation. 
Administer the requirements related to proposed work on existing buildings: 
(1) 	
Make determinations as to whether buildings and structures thatare located in flood hazard areas and that are damaged by any cause have been substantially damaged. 

(2) 	
Make reasonable efforts to notify owners of substantially damagedstructures of the need to obtain a permit to repair, rehabilitate, or reconstruct, and prohibit the noncompliant repair of substantiallydamaged buildings except for temporary emergency protectivemeasures necessary to secure a property or stabilize a building or structure to prevent additional damage. 

1:432 


N. 	
Undertake, as determined appropriate by the floodplain administratordue to the circumstances, other actions, which may include but are not limited to: issuing press releases, public service announcements,and other public information materials related to permit requests andrepair of damaged structures; coordinating with other federal, state, and local agencies to assist with substantial damage determinations;providing owners of damaged structures information related to theproper repair of damaged structures in special flood hazard areas; and assisting property owners with documentation necessary to file claimsfor "increased cost of compliance" (ICC) coverage under NFIP floodinsurance policies. 

O. 	
Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency when the corporateboundaries of the Town of Bel Air have been modified and: 

(1) 	
Provide a map that clearly delineates the new corporate boundaries or the new area for which the authority to regulate pursuant tothese regulations has either been assumed or relinquished throughannexation; and 

(2) 	
If the FIRM for any annexed area includes special flood hazardareas that have flood zones that have regulatory requirements thatare not set forth in these regulations, prepare amendments to these regulations to adopt the FIRM and appropriate requirementsand submit the amendments to the governing body for adoption;such adoption shall take place within six months of the date of annexation, and a copy of the amended regulations shall be provided to MDE (NFIP State Coordinator) and FEMA. 



P. 
Upon the request of FEMA, complete and submit a report concerning participation in the NFIP, which may request information regardingthe number of buildings in the SFHA, number of permits issued fordevelopment in the SFHA, and number of variances issued for development in the SFHA. 


§ 210-13. Use and interpretation of FIRMs. 
The floodplain administrator shall make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of special flood hazard areas, floodplain boundaries,and floodway boundaries. The following shall apply to the use and interpretation of FIRMs and data: 
A. 	Where field-surveyed topography indicates that ground elevations: 
(1) 	
Are below the base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard area on a FIRM, the area shall be considered as special flood hazard area and subject to the requirements ofthese regulations; 

(2) 
Are above the base flood elevation, the area shall be regulated as special flood hazard area unless the applicant obtains a letter of 


1:433 

map change that removes the area from the special flood hazard area. 
B. 	In FEMA-identified special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and floodway data have not been identified and in areas where FEMA has not identified special flood hazard areas, any other flood hazard data available from a federal, state, or other source shall be reviewed and reasonably used. 
C. 	Base flood elevations and designated floodway boundaries on FIRMs and in FISs shall take precedence over base flood elevations and floodway boundaries by any other sources if such sources show reducedfloodway widths and/or lower base flood elevations. 
D. 	Other sources of data shall be reasonably used if such sources showincreased base flood elevations and/or larger floodway areas than areshown on FIRMs and in FISs. 
E. 	If a Preliminary Flood Insurance Rate Map and/or a Preliminary FloodInsurance Study has been provided by FEMA: 
(1) 	
Upon the issuance of a letter of final determination by FEMA, if the preliminary flood hazard data is more restrictive than the effectivedata, it shall be used and shall replace the flood hazard datapreviously provided from FEMA for the purposes of administering these regulations. 

(2) 	
Prior to the issuance of a letter of final determination by FEMA,the use of preliminary flood hazard data shall be deemed the best available data pursuant to § 210-5C and shall be used where nobase flood elevations and/or floodway areas are provided on theeffective FIRM. 

(3) 	
Prior to issuance of a letter of final determination by FEMA, the useof preliminary flood hazard data is permitted where the preliminarybase flood elevations, floodplain or floodway boundaries exceed the base flood elevations and/or designated floodway widths in existingflood hazard data provided by FEMA. Such preliminary data maybe subject to change and/or appeal to FEMA. 


§ 210-14. Permits required; expiration. 
A. 	It shall be unlawful for any person to begin any development or construction which is wholly within, partially within, or in contact with any flood hazard area established in § 210-5, including but not limitedto: filling; grading; construction of new structures; the substantial improvement of buildings or structures, including repair of substantial damage; placement or replacement of manufactured homes, includingsubstantial improvement or repair of substantial damage of manufactured homes; erecting or installing a temporary structure, or alteration of a watercourse, until a permit is obtained from the Town of 
1:434 

Bel Air. No such permit shall be issued until the requirements of theseregulations have been met. 
B. 	In addition to the permits required in Subsection A, applicants forpermits in nontidal waters of the state are advised to contact MDE.Unless waived by MDE, pursuant to Code of Maryland Regulations 26.17.04, Construction on Nontidal Waters and Floodplains, MDEregulates the "one-hundred-year frequency floodplain of free-flowingwaters," also referred to as "nontidal waters of the state." To determine the one-hundred-year frequency floodplain, hydrologic calculations arebased on the ultimate development of the watershed, assuming existingzoning. The resulting flood hazard areas delineated using the results of such calculations may be different than the special flood hazard areasestablished in § 210-5 of these regulations. A permit from the Town ofBel Air is still required in addition to any state requirements. 
C. 	A permit is valid provided that the actual start of work is within 180days of the date of permit issuance. Requests for extensions shall besubmitted in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. The floodplain administrator may grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, foradditional periods not exceeding 90 days each, and provided that therehas been no amendment or revision to the basis for establishing special flood hazard areas and BFEs set forth in § 210-5. 
§ 210-15. Application required. 
Application for a permit shall be made by the owner of the property or the owner's authorized agent (herein referred to as the "applicant") prior tothe start of any work. The application shall be on a form furnished for that purpose. 
A. 	Application contents. At a minimum, applications shall include: 
(1) 	
Site plans, drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions, and existing and proposed topography of the area in question and the location of existing and proposed structures,excavation, filling, storage of materials, drainage facilities, andother proposed activities. 

(2) 	
The elevation of the existing natural ground where buildings orstructures are proposed, referenced to the datum on the FIRM. 

(3) 	
Delineation of flood hazard areas, designated floodway boundaries, flood zones, base flood elevations, and flood protection setbacks.Base flood elevations shall be used to delineate the boundary offlood hazard areas, and such delineations shall prevail over the boundary of SFHAs shown on FIRMs. 

(4) 	
Where floodways are not delineated or base flood elevations arenot shown on the FIRMs, the floodplain administrator has the authority to require the applicant to use information provided bythe floodplain administrator, information that is available from 


1:435 

(5) 
(6) 

(7) 

(8) 

(9) 


federal, state, or other sources, or to determine such information using accepted engineering practices or methods approved by the floodplain administrator. [Note: See "Managing FloodplainDevelopment in Approximate Zone A Areas: A Guide for Obtainingand Developing Base (100-Year) Flood Elevations" (FEMA 265).] 
Determination of the base flood elevations, for developmentproposals and subdivision proposals, each with at least five lots orat least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in special flood hazard areas where base flood elevations are not shown on the FIRM; if hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses are submitted, suchanalyses shall be performed in accordance with the requirements and specifications of MDE and FEMA. 
Hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses for proposals inspecial flood hazard areas where FEMA has provided base flood elevations but has not delineated a floodway; such analyses shalldemonstrate that the cumulative effect of proposed development,when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of thebase flood by more than one foot or a lower increase if required byMDE. 
For encroachments in floodways, an evaluation of alternatives tosuch encroachments, including different uses of the site or portionof the site within the floodway, and minimization of such encroachment. 
If fill is proposed to be placed for a purpose other than to elevatestructures, the applicant shall indicate the intended purpose for the fill. 
For proposed buildings and structures, including substantial improvement and repair of substantial damage, and placement and replacement of manufactured homes, including substantialimprovement and repair of substantial damage: 
(a) 	
The proposed elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, referenced to the datum on the FIRM, and a signed agreementto submit an elevation certificate. 

(b) 	
The signed declaration of land restriction (nonconversion agreement) that shall be recorded on the property deed priorto issuance of the certificate of occupancy, if the applicationincludes an enclosure below the lowest floor or a crawl/ underfloor space that is more than four feet in height. 

(c) 	
A written evaluation of alternative methods considered to elevate structures and manufactured homes, if the location is in nontidal waters of the state and fill is proposed to achievethe elevation required in § 210-34A or 210-35A. 

1:436 

(10) 

(11) 

(12) 

(13) 


For accessory structures that are 300 square feet or larger in area(footprint) and that are below the base flood elevation, a variance is required as set forth in Article VI. If a variance is granted, a signeddeclaration of land restriction (nonconversion agreement) shall berecorded on the property deed prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
For temporary structures and temporary storage, specification ofthe duration of the temporary use. 
For proposed work on existing buildings, structures, and manufactured homes, including any improvement, addition, repairs, alterations, rehabilitation, or reconstruction, sufficient information to determine if the work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage, including but notlimited to: 
(a) 	
If the existing building or structure was constructed after September 16, 1981, evidence that the work will not alterany aspect of the building or structure that was required for compliance with the floodplain management requirements ineffect at the time the building or structure was permitted. 

(b) 	
If the proposed work is a horizontal addition, a description of the addition and whether it will be independently supported orstructurally connected to the base building and the nature ofall other modifications to the base building, if any. 

(c) 	
Documentation of the market value of the building or structurebefore the improvement or, if the work is repair of damage,before the damage occurred. 

(d) 	
Documentation of the actual cash value of all proposed work,including the actual cash value of all work necessary to repairand restore damage to the before-damaged condition, regardless of the amount of work that will be performed. Thevalue of work performed by the owner or volunteers shall be valued at market labor rates; the value of donated or discounted materials shall be valued at market rates. 

Certifications and/or technical analyses prepared or conducted by a licensed professional engineer or licensed architect, as appropriate, including: 

(a) 	
The determination of the base flood elevations or hydrologicand hydraulic engineering analyses prepared by a licensed professional engineer that are required by the FloodplainAdministrator or are required by these regulations in: § 210-20for certain subdivisions and development; § 210-33A for development in designated floodways; § 210-33C for development in flood hazard areas with base flood elevations 


1:437 

but no designated floodways; and § 210-33E for deliberatealteration or relocation of watercourses. 
(b) 	
The floodproofing certificate for nonresidential structures thatare floodproofed as required in § 210-35B. 

(c) 	
Certification that engineered flood openings are designed to meet the minimum requirements of § 210-34C(3) to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces. 


(14)For nonresidential structures that are proposed with floodproofing, an operations and maintenance plan as specified in § 210-35B(3). 
(15)Such other material and information as may be requested by thefloodplain administrator and necessary to determine conformance with these regulations. 
B. 	New technical data. 
(1) 	
The applicant may seek a letter of map change by submitting new technical data to FEMA, such as base maps, topography, andengineering analyses to support revision of floodplain and floodwayboundaries and/or base flood elevations. Such submissions shall be prepared in a format acceptable to FEMA, and any fees shall be thesole responsibility of the applicant. A copy of the submittal shall beattached to the application for a permit. 

(2) 	
If the applicant submits new technical data to support any changein floodplain and designated floodway boundaries and/or base floodelevations but has not sought a letter of map change from FEMA, the applicant shall submit such data to FEMA as soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the date suchinformation becomes available. Such submissions shall be prepared in a format acceptable to FEMA, and any fees shall be the soleresponsibility of the applicant. 


§ 210-16. Review of application. 
The floodplain administrator shall: 
A. 	Review applications for development in special flood hazard areas todetermine the completeness of information submitted. The applicant shall be notified of incompleteness or additional information that isrequired to support the application. 
B. 	Notify applicants that permits from MDE and the United States Army Corps of Engineers and other state and federal authorities may berequired. 
C. 	Review all permit applications to assure that all necessary permits have been received from the federal, state or local governmental agenciesfrom which prior approval is required. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining such permits, including permits issued by: 
1:438 

(1) 	
The United States Army Corps of Engineers under Section 10 of theRivers and Harbors Act and Section 404 of the Clean Water Act; 

(2) 	
MDE pursuant to COMAR 26.23 (Nontidal Wetlands) and Section401 of the Clean Water Act; and 

(3) 	
MDE for construction on nontidal waters of the state pursuant to COMAR 26.17.04. 


D. 	Review applications for compliance with these regulations after allinformation required in § 210-15 of these regulations or identified and required by the floodplain administrator has been received. 
§ 210-17. Inspections. 
The floodplain administrator shall make periodic inspections of development permitted in special flood hazard areas at appropriate timesthroughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance. Suchinspections may include: 
A. 	Stake-out inspection, to determine location on the site relative to theflood hazard area and designated floodway. 
B. 	Foundation inspection, upon placement of the lowest floor and prior to further vertical construction, to collect information or certification of the elevation of the lowest floor. 
C. 	Inspection of enclosures below the lowest floor, including crawl/ underfloor spaces, to determine compliance with applicable provisions. 
D. 	Utility inspection, upon installation of specified equipment and appliances, to determine appropriate location with respect to the base flood elevation. 
E. 	Final inspection prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
§ 210-18. Submissions required prior to final inspection. 
Pursuant to the agreement to submit an elevation certificate submittedwith the application as required in § 210-15A(9), the permittee shall havean elevation certificate prepared and submitted prior to final inspection and issuance of a certificate of occupancy for elevated structures andmanufactured homes, including new structures and manufactured homes,substantially improved structures and manufactured homes, and additions to structures and manufactured homes. 
1:439 

ARTICLE IV 
Requirements in All Flood Hazard Areas 
§ 210-19. Applicability of requirements. 
The general requirements of this article apply to all development proposed within all special flood hazard areas identified in § 210-5. 
§ 210-20. Subdivision proposals and development proposals. 
A. 	In all flood zones: 
(1) 	
Subdivision proposals and development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and are subjectto all applicable standards in these regulations. 

(2) 	
Subdivision proposals and development proposals shall have utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and watersystems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 

(3) 	
Subdivision proposals and development proposals shall have adequate drainage paths provided to reduce exposure to floodhazards and to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 

(4) 	
Subdivision proposals and development proposals containing atleast five lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, that are wholly or partially in flood hazard areas where base flood elevationdata are not provided by the floodplain administrator or availablefrom other sources, shall be supported by determinations of base flood elevations as required in § 210-15 of these regulations. 

(5) 	
Subdivision access roads shall have the driving surface at or abovethe base flood elevation. 


B. 	In special flood hazard areas of nontidal waters of the state: 
(1) 	
Subdivision proposals shall be laid out such that proposed buildingpads are located outside of the special flood hazard area, and any portion of platted lots that includes land areas that are below thebase flood elevation shall be used for other purposes, or be deedrestricted, or otherwise protected to preserve it as open space. 

(2) 	
Subdivision access roads shall have the driving surface at or abovethe base flood elevation. 


§ 210-21. Protection of water supply and sanitary sewage systems. 
A. 	New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. 
1:441 

B. 	New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed tominimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into systems and discharges from systems into floodwaters. 
C. 	On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment toor contamination from them during conditions of flooding. 
§ 210-22. Buildings and structures. 
New buildings and structures (including the placement and replacement ofmanufactured homes) and substantial improvement of existing structures (including manufactured homes) that are located, in whole or in part, in anyspecial flood hazard area shall: 
A. 	Be designed (or modified) and constructed to safely support flood loads. The construction shall provide a complete load path capable of transferring all loads from their point of origin through the load-resisting elements to the foundation. Structures shall be designed, connected and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or permanentlateral movement due to structural loads and stresses, includinghydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads and the effects of buoyancy, from flooding equal to the flood protection elevation or the elevation required by these regulations or the building code, whichever is higher. 
B. 	Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
C. 	Use flood-damage-resistant materials below the elevation of the lowestfloor required in § 210-34A or 210-35A. 
D. 	Have electrical systems, equipment and components, and mechanical, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning, and plumbing appliances,plumbing fixtures, duct systems, and other service equipment locatedat or above the elevation of the lowest floor required in § 210-34A or 210-35A. Electrical wiring systems are permitted to be located belowthe elevation of the lowest floor, provided that they conform to theprovisions of the electrical part of the building code for wet locations. If replaced as part of a substantial improvement, electrical systems,equipment and components, and heating, ventilation, air-conditioning,and plumbing appliances, plumbing fixtures, duct systems, and other service equipment shall meet the requirements of this section. 
E. 	As an alternative to Subsection D, electrical systems, equipment andcomponents, and heating, ventilating, air-conditioning, and plumbing appliances, plumbing fixtures, duct systems, and other service equipment are permitted to be located below the elevation of the lowestfloor, provided that they are designed and installed to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components and to resisthydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses, including the effectsof buoyancy, during the occurrence of flooding to that elevation. 
F. 	Have the electric panelboard elevated at least three feet above the BFE. 
1:442 

G. 	Comply with the specific requirements of Article V. 
H. 	Comply with the requirements of the most restrictive designation if located on a site that has more than one flood zone designation (A Zone,designated floodway). 
§ 210-23. Placement of fill. 
A. 	Disposal of fill, including but not limited to earthen soils, rock, rubble,construction debris, woody debris, and trash, shall not be permitted inspecial flood hazard areas. 
B. 	Fill proposed to be placed to elevate structures in flood hazard areasshall comply with the floodways requirements in § 210-33A, B and Cand the limitations of § 210-34B. 
§ 210-24. Historic structures. 
Repair, alteration, addition, rehabilitation, or other improvement of historicstructures shall be subject to the requirements of these regulations if the proposed work is determined to be a substantial improvement, unlessa determination is made that the proposed work will not preclude thestructure's continued designation as an historic structure. The floodplain administrator may require documentation of a structure's continued eligibility and designation as an historic structure. 
§ 210-25. Manufactured homes. 
A. 	New manufactured homes shall not be placed or installed in floodways. 
B. 	For the purpose of these regulations, the lowest floor of a manufacturedhome is the bottom of the lowest horizontal supporting member (longitudinal chassis frame beam). 
C. 	New manufactured homes located outside of floodways, replacementmanufactured homes in any flood hazard areas, and substantial improvement (including repair of substantial damage) of existingmanufactured homes in all flood hazard areas shall: 
(1) 	
Be elevated on a permanent, reinforced foundation in accordance with Article V; 

(2) 	
Be installed in accordance with the anchor and tie-down requirements of the building code or the manufacturer's written installation instructions and specifications; and 

(3) 	
Have enclosures below the lowest floor of the elevated manufactured home, if any, including enclosures that are surrounded by rigid skirting or other material that is attached tothe frame or foundation, that comply with the requirements ofArticle V. 


1:443 

§ 210-26. Recreational vehicles. 
Recreational vehicles shall: 
A. 	Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in § 210-25; 
B. 	Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
C. 	Be on a site for less than 180 consecutive days. 
§ 210-27. Critical and essential facilities. 
Critical and essential facilities shall: 
A. 	Not be located in floodways. 
B. 	If located in flood hazard areas other than floodways, be elevated tothe higher of the elevation required by these regulations plus one foot,the elevation required by the building code, or the elevation of the two­tenths-percent chance (five-hundred-year) flood. 
§ 210-28. Temporary structures and temporary storage. 
In addition to the application requirements of § 210-15, applications for the placement or erection of temporary structures and the temporary storageof any goods, materials, and equipment shall specify the duration of thetemporary use. Temporary structures and temporary storage in floodways shall meet the limitations of § 210-33A of these regulations. In addition: 
A. 	Temporary structures shall: 
(1) 	
Be designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic loads and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the base flood; 

(2) 	
Have electric service installed in compliance with the electric code; and 

(3) 	
Comply with all other requirements of the applicable state andlocal permit authorities. 


B. 	Temporary storage shall not include hazardous materials. 
§ 210-29. Gas or liquid storage tanks. 
A. 	Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads,including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the base flood. 
B. 	Aboveground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to a supporting structure and elevated to or above the base flood elevationor shall be anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to preventflotation, collapse, or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic 
1:444 

and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, duringconditions of the base flood. 
C. 	In flood hazard areas, tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shallbe: 
(1) 	
At or above the base flood elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of thetanks during conditions of the base flood; and 

(2) 	
Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the base flood. 


§ 210-30. Functionally dependent uses. 
Applications for functionally dependent uses that do not conform to therequirements of these regulations shall be approved only by variancesissued pursuant to Article VI. If approved, functionally dependent uses shall be protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood,including measures to allow floodwaters to enter and exit, use of flood­damage-resistant materials, and elevation of electric service and equipment to the extent practical given the use of the building. 
1:445 

ARTICLE V 
Requirements in Flood Hazard Areas 
§ 210-31. General requirements. 
In addition to the general requirements of Article IV, the requirements of this article shall: 
A. 	Apply in flood hazard areas, including special flood hazard areas alongnontidal waters of the state. 
B. 	Apply to all development, new construction, substantial improvements(including repair of substantial damage), and placement, replacement,and substantial improvement (including repair of substantial damage) of manufactured homes. 
§ 210-32. Flood protection setbacks. 
Within areas defined by flood protection setbacks along nontidal waters of the state: 
A. 	No new buildings, structures, or other development shall be permittedunless the applicant demonstrates that the site cannot be developed without such encroachment into the flood protection setback and theencroachment is the minimum necessary, after consideration of varyingother siting standards such as side, front, and back lot line setbacks. 
B. 	Disturbance of natural vegetation shall be minimized, and anydisturbance allowed shall be vegetatively stabilized. 
C. 	Public works and temporary construction may be permitted. 
§ 210-33. Development that affects flood-carrying capacity ofnontidal waters of state. 
A. 	Development in designated floodways. For proposed development that will encroach into a designated floodway, § 210-15A(7) requires theapplicant to submit an evaluation of alternatives to such encroachment,including different uses of the site or the portion of the site within the floodway, and minimization of such encroachment. This requirementdoes not apply to fences that do not block the flow of floodwaters ortrap debris. Proposed development in a designated floodway may be permitted only if: 
(1) 	
The applicant has been issued a permit by MDE; and 

(2) 	
The applicant has developed hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses and technical data prepared by a licensed professionalengineer reflecting such changes, and the analyses, which shallbe submitted to the floodplain administrator, demonstrate that the proposed activity will not result in any increase in the base floodelevation; or 


1:447 

(3) 	If the analyses demonstrate that the proposed activities will resultin an increase in the base flood elevation, the applicant has obtained a conditional letter of map revision and a letter of maprevision from FEMA upon completion of the project. Submittalrequirements and fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
B. 	Development that includes the placement of fill in nontidal waters ofthe state. For proposed development that includes the placement of fillin nontidal waters of the state, other than development that is subject to Subsection D, a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation isrequired. Such excavations shall be designed to drain freely. 
C. 	Development in areas with base flood elevations but no designated floodways. For development in special flood hazard areas of nontidal waters of the state with base flood elevations but no designatedfloodways: 
(1) 	
The applicant shall develop hydrologic and hydraulic engineeringanalyses and technical data reflecting the proposed activity andshall submit such technical data to the floodplain administrator as required in § 210-15A(6). The analyses shall be prepared by alicensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for aconditional letter of map revision and a letter of map revision upon completion of the project. Submittal requirements and fees shall bethe responsibility of the applicant. 

(2) 	
The proposed development may be permitted if the applicant has received a permit by MDE and if the analyses demonstrate thatthe cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combinedwith all other existing and potential flood hazard area encroachments, will not increase the base flood elevation more than 1.0 foot at any point. 


D. 	Construction of roads, bridges, culverts, dams and in-stream ponds. Construction of roads, bridges, culverts, dams, and in-stream ponds innontidal waters of the state shall not be approved unless it complieswith this section and the applicant has received a permit from MDE. 
E. 	Alteration of a watercourse. For any proposed development that involves alteration of a watercourse not subject to Subsection C, unlesswaived by MDE, the applicant shall develop hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses and technical data reflecting such changes,including the floodway analysis required in § 210-15A, and submit suchtechnical data to the floodplain administrator and to FEMA. The analyses shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer in aformat required by MDE and by FEMA for a conditional letter of maprevision and a letter of map revision upon completion of the project. Submittal requirements and fees shall be the responsibility of theapplicant. Alteration of a watercourse may be permitted only uponsubmission, by the applicant, of the following: 
1:448 

(1) 	
A description of the extent to which the watercourse will be alteredor relocated; 

(2) 	
A certification by a licensed professional engineer that the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be diminished; 

(3) 	
Evidence that adjacent communities, the United States Army Corps of Engineers, and MDE have been notified of the proposal andevidence that such notifications have been submitted to FEMA; and 

(4) 	
Evidence that the applicant shall be responsible for providing the necessary maintenance for the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity will not be diminished. The Floodplain Administrator may require the applicant to enter into an agreement with the Town of Bel Airspecifying the maintenance responsibilities; if an agreement is required, the permit shall be conditioned to require that the agreement be recorded on the deed of the property, which shall bebinding on future owners. 


§ 210-34. Residential structures and residential portions of mixed-use structures. 
New residential structures and residential portions of mixed-use structures,and substantial improvement (including repair of substantial damage) of existing residential structures and residential portions of mixed-use structures, shall comply with the applicable requirements of Article IV andthis section. See § 210-36 for requirements for horizontal additions. 
A. 	Elevation requirements. 
(1) 	
Lowest floors shall be elevated to or above the flood protectionelevation. 

(2) 	
In areas of shallow flooding (Zone AO), the lowest floor (includingbasement) shall be elevated at least as high above the highestadjacent grade as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM plus two feet, or at least four feet if a depth number is not specified. 

(3) 	
Enclosures below the lowest floor shall meet the requirements ofSubsection C. 


B. 	Limitations on use of fill to elevate structures. Unless otherwise restricted by these regulations, especially by the limitations in § 210-33A, B and C, fill placed for the purpose of raising the ground level to support a building or structure shall: 
(1) 	
Consist of earthen soil or rock materials only. 

(2) 	
Extend laterally from the building footprint to provide for adequate access as a function of use; the floodplain administrator may seekadvice from the State Fire Marshal's Office and/or the local fireservices agency; 


1:449 

(3) 	
Comply with the requirements of the building code and be placedand compacted to provide for stability under conditions of rising and falling floodwaters and resistance to erosion, scour, and settling; 

(4) 	
Be sloped no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal, unless approved by the floodplain administrator; 

(5) 	
Be protected from erosion associated with expected velocitiesduring the occurrence of the base flood; unless approved by the floodplain administrator, fill slopes shall be protected by vegetationif the expected velocity is less than five feet per second and byother means if the expected velocity is five feet per second or more; and 

(6) 	
Be designed with provisions for adequate drainage and no adverseeffect on adjacent properties. 


C. 	Enclosures below the lowest floor. 
(1) 	
Enclosures below the lowest floor shall be used solely for parkingof vehicles, building access, crawl/underfloor spaces, or limited storage. 

(2) 	
Enclosures below the lowest floor shall be constructed using flood­damage-resistant materials. 

(3) 	
Enclosures below the lowest floor shall be provided with floodopenings which shall meet the following criteria. (Note: See NFIPTechnical Bulletin No. 1, "Openings in Foundation Walls and Walls of Enclosures.") 

(a) 	
There shall be a minimum of two flood openings on differentsides of each enclosed area; if a building has more than one enclosure below the lowest floor, each such enclosure shall have flood openings on exterior walls. 

(b) 	
The total net area of all flood openings shall be at least one square inch for each square foot of enclosed area (non-engineered flood openings), or the flood openings shall beengineered flood openings that are designed and certified by a licensed professional engineer to automatically allow entryand exit of floodwaters; the certification requirement may besatisfied by an individual certification or an evaluation report issued by the ICC Evaluation Service, Inc. 

(c) 	
The bottom of each flood opening shall be one foot or lessabove the higher of the interior floor or grade, or the exterior grade, immediately below the opening. 

(d) 	
Any louvers, screens or other covers for the flood openingsshall allow the automatic flow of floodwaters into and out of the enclosed area. 




1:450 

(e) 	If installed in doors, flood openings that meet requirements ofSubsection C(3)(a) through (d) are acceptable; however, doors without installed flood openings do not meet the requirementsof this section. 
§ 210-35. Nonresidential structures and nonresidential portions ofmixed-use structures. 
New nonresidential structures and nonresidential portions of mixed-usestructures, and substantial improvement (including repair of substantial damage) of existing nonresidential structures and nonresidential portionsof mixed-use structures, shall comply with the applicable requirementsof Article IV and the requirements of this section. See § 210-36 for requirements for horizontal additions. 
A. 	Elevation requirements. Elevated structures shall: 
(1) 	
Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the flood protection elevation; or 

(2) 	
In areas of shallow flooding (Zone AO), have the lowest floor(including basement) elevated at least as high above the highest adjacent grade as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRMplus two feet, or at least four feet if a depth number is not specified;and 

(3) 	
Have enclosures below the lowest floor, if any, that comply with therequirements of § 210-34C: or 

(4) 	
If proposed to be elevated on fill, meet the limitations on fill in § 210-34B. 


B. 	Floodproofing requirements. 
(1) 	
Floodproofing of new nonresidential buildings is not allowed in nontidal waters of the state [COMAR 26.17.04.11(B)(7)]. 

(2) 	
Floodproofing for substantial improvement of nonresidential buildings is allowed in nontidal waters of the state. 

(3) 	
If floodproofing is proposed, structures shall: 

(a) 	
Be designed to be dry floodproofed such that the buildingor structure is watertight with walls and floors substantially impermeable to the passage of water to the level of the floodprotection elevation plus 1.0 foot; or 

(b) 	
If located in an area of shallow flooding (Zone AO), be dry floodproofed at least as high above the highest adjacent gradeas the depth number specified on the FIRM plus three feet, orat least five feet if a depth number is not specified; and 


1:451 


(c) 	
Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostaticand hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; 

(d) 	
Have floodproofing measures that are designed taking intoconsideration the nature of flood-related hazards; frequency,depth and duration of flooding; rate of rise and fall of floodwater, soil characteristics; flood-borne debris; at least 12 hours of flood warning time from a credible source; and timenecessary to implement any measures that require human intervention; 

(e) 	
Have at least one door above the applicable flood elevation thatallows human ingress and egress during conditions of flooding; 

(f) 	
Have an operations and maintenance plan that is filed withlocal emergency management officials and that specifies theowner's/occupant's responsibilities to monitor flood potential; the location of any shields, doors, closures, tools, or othergoods that are required for implementation; maintenance ofsuch goods; methods of installation; and periodic inspection; and 

(g) 	
Be certified by a licensed professional engineer or licensedarchitect, through execution of a floodproofing certificate that states that the design and methods of construction meet therequirements of this section. The floodproofing certificate shallbe submitted with the construction drawings as required in § 210-15A(13). 


§ 210-36. Horizontal additions. 
A. 	A horizontal addition proposed for a building or structure that was constructed after the date specified in § 210-1 shall comply with theapplicable requirements of Article IV and this section. 
B. 	In nontidal waters of the state that are subject to the regulatory authority of MDE, all horizontal additions shall comply with the applicable requirements of Article IV and this section and: 
(1) 	
If the addition is structurally connected to the base building, the requirements of Subsection C apply. 

(2) 	
If the addition has an independent foundation and is not structurally connected to the base building and the common wall with the base building is modified by no more than a doorway, thebase building is not required to be brought into compliance. 


C. 	For horizontal additions that are structurally connected to the base building: 
(1) 	If the addition combined with other proposed repairs, alterations, or modifications of the base building constitutes substantial 
1:452 

improvement, the base building and the addition shall comply withthe applicable requirements of Article IV and this section. 
(2) 	If the addition constitutes substantial improvement, the base building and the addition shall comply with all of the applicablerequirements of Article IV and this section. 
D. 	For horizontal additions with independent foundations that are not structurally connected to the base building and the common wall withthe base building is modified by no more than a doorway, the base building is not required to be brought into compliance. 
E. 	A horizontal addition to a building or structure that is not substantialimprovement, and is not located in nontidal waters of the state, is not required to comply with this section. 
[Note: See "Substantial Improvement/Substantial Damage Desk Reference" (FEMA P-758).] 
§ 210-37. Accessory structures. 
A. 	Accessory structures shall be limited to not more than 300 square feetin total floor area. 
B. 	Accessory structures shall comply with the elevation requirements andother requirements of § 210-34, the floodproofing requirements of § 210-35B, or shall: 
(1) 	
Be usable only for parking of vehicles or limited storage; 

(2) 	
Be constructed with flood-damage-resistant materials below thebase flood elevation; 

(3) 	
Be constructed and placed to offer the minimum resistance to theflow of floodwaters; 

(4) 	
Be anchored to prevent flotation; 

(5) 	
Have electrical service and mechanical equipment elevated to orabove the base flood elevation; and 

(6) 	
Have flood openings that meet the requirements of § 210-34C. 


1:453 

ARTICLE VI 
Variances 
§ 210-38. General provisions. 
A. 	The Board of Appeals shall have the power to consider and authorize or deny variances from the strict application of the requirements ofthese regulations. A variance shall be approved only if it is determinedto not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to special conditions of the lot or parcel, a literal enforcement of the provisionsof these regulations, an unnecessary hardship would result. Uponconsideration of the purposes of these regulations, the individual circumstances, and the considerations and limitations of this section, the Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to variances as itdeems necessary to further the purposes of these regulations. 
B. 	The Board of Appeals shall notify, in writing, any applicant to whoma variance is granted to construct or substantially improve a buildingor structure with its lowest floor below the elevation required by these regulations that the variance is to the floodplain managementrequirements of these regulations only and that the cost of federal floodinsurance will be commensurate with the increased risk, with rates up to $25 per $100 of insurance coverage. 
C. 	A record of all variance actions, including justification for issuance,shall be maintained pursuant to § 210-12J of these regulations. 
§ 210-39. Application for variance. 
A. 	The owner of property, or the owner's authorized agent, for which avariance is sought shall submit an application for a variance to the floodplain administrator. 
B. 	At a minimum, the application shall contain the following information:name, address, and telephone number of the applicant and property owner; legal description of the property; parcel map; description of theexisting use; description of the proposed use; site map showing thelocation of flood hazard areas, designated floodway boundaries, flood zones, base flood elevations, and flood protection setbacks; descriptionof the variance sought; and reason for the variance request. Varianceapplications shall specifically address each of the considerations in § 210-40. 
C. 	If the application is for a variance to allow the lowest floor of a buildingor structure below the applicable minimum elevation required by these regulations, the application shall include a statement signed by theowner that, if granted, the conditions of the variance shall be recordedon the deed of the property. 
1:455 

§ 210-40. Considerations for variances. 
The floodplain administrator shall request comments on variance applications from MDE (NFIP State Coordinator) and shall provide suchcomments to the Board of Appeals. In considering variance applications, theBoard of Appeals shall consider and make findings of fact on all evaluations, all relevant factors, requirements specified in other sections of theseregulations, and the following factors: 
A. 	The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others. 
B. 	The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage. 
C. 	The susceptibility of the proposed development and its contents (if applicable) to flood damage and the effect of such damage on theindividual owner. 
D. 	The importance of the services to the community provided by the proposed development. 
E. 	The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which arenot subject to, or are subject to less, flooding or erosion damage. 
F. 	The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable,or if the facility is a functionally dependent use. 
G. 	The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development. 
H. 	The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan andhazard mitigation plan for that area. 
I. 	The safety of access to the property in times of flood for passengervehicles and emergency vehicles. 
J. 	The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site. 
K. 	The costs of providing government services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities andfacilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streetsand bridges. 
L. 	The comments provided by MDE (NFIP State Coordinator). 
§ 210-41. Limitations on granting variances. 
The Board of Appeals shall make an affirmative decision on a variance request only upon: 
A. 	A showing of good and sufficient cause. Good and sufficient causedeals solely with the physical characteristics of the property and cannot 
1:456 

be based on the character of the improvement, the personalcharacteristics of the owner/inhabitants, or local provisions that regulate standards other than health and public safety. 
B. 	A determination that failure to grant the variance would result inexceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the property. Increased cost or inconvenience of meeting the requirements of theseregulations does not constitute an exceptional hardship to the applicant. 
C. 	A determination that the granting of a variance for development within any designated floodway, or flood hazard area with base flood elevations but no designated floodway, will not result in increased flood heights beyond those which are allowed in these regulations. 
D. 	A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nuisances, fraud or victimization of the public, or conflict with existinglocal laws. 
E. 	A determination that the building, structure or other development is protected by methods to minimize flood damages. 
F. 	A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary to affordrelief, considering the flood hazard. 
1:457 

ARTICLE VII 
Enforcement 
§ 210-42. Compliance required. 
A. 	No building, structure or development shall hereafter be located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, improved, repaired, extended,converted, enlarged or altered without full compliance with theseregulations and all other applicable regulations. 
B. 	Failure to obtain a permit shall be a violation of these regulations andshall be subject to penalties in accordance with § 210-44. 
C. 	Permits issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the floodplain administrator authorize only the specific activities setforth in such approved plans and applications or amendments thereto.Use, arrangement, or construction of such specific activities that are contrary to that authorization shall be deemed a violation of theseregulations. 
§ 210-43. Notice of violation and stop-work order. 
If the floodplain administrator determines that there has been a violationof any provision of these regulations, the floodplain administrator shall givenotice of such violation to the owner, the owner's authorized agent, and the person responsible for such violation and may issue a stop-work order. Thenotice of violation or stop-work order shall be in writing and shall: 
A. 	Include a list of violations, referring to the section or sections of these regulations that have been violated; 
B. 	Order remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with theprovisions of these regulations; 
C. 	Specify a reasonable period of time to correct the violation; 
D. 	Advise the recipients of the right to appeal; and 
E. 	Be served in person; or 
F. 	Be posted in a conspicuous place in or on the property and sent byregistered or certified mail to the last known mailing address, residence, or place of business of the recipients. 
§ 210-44. Violations and penalties. 
Violations of these regulations or failure to comply with the requirementsof these regulations or any conditions attached to a permit or variance shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person responsible for a violation shall comply with the notice of violation or stop-work order. Failure to comply shall be subject to a fine of not more than $400 for each offense in accordance with Chapter 1, Article II, § 1-10, of the Town Code. Each day aviolation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein 
1:459 

contained shall prevent the Town of Bel Air from taking such other lawfulaction as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
1:460 

ARTICLE VIII 
Subsequent Amendments 
§ 210-45. Amendments. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances that are inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency. This chapter shall be amended as required by the FederalEmergency Management Agency, Title 44, Code of Federal Regulations. All subsequent amendments to this chapter are subject to the approval of theFederal Emergency Management Agency and the Maryland Department ofthe Environment. 
1:461 

Chapter 216 FOREST CONSERVATION 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Trees — See Ch. 435. 
1:462 

ARTICLE I 
General Provisions 
§ 216-1. Purpose. 
The Bel Air Board of Town Commissioners has determined that to meet the requirements of Natural Resources Article, § 5-1601 through 5-1612,Annotated Code of Maryland, the provisions of this chapter be enacted. 
1:463 

ARTICLE II 
Definitions 
§ 216-2. Definitions. 
In this chapter, the following terms have the meanings indicated. AFFORESTATION — 
A. 	Establishment of a forest or an area from which forest cover has been absent for a long period of time in accordance with an approved landscape plan; 
B. 	Planting of open areas which are not presently in forest cover in accordance with an approved landscape plan; or 
C. 	Establishment of a forest in accordance with an approved landscapeplan according to procedures set forth in the Conservation TechnicalManual. 
APPLICANT — A person who is applying for subdivision or project plan approval or grading or sediment control permit, or who has received approval of a forest stand delineation or forest conservation plan. 
APPROVED FOREST MANAGEMENT PLAN — 
A. 	A document approved by the Department of Natural Resources foresterassigned to the Town of Bel Air; and 
B. 	Which operates as a protective agreement for forest conservation asdescribed in the Natural Resources Article, § 5-1607(e) through (f),Annotated Code of Maryland. 
CALIPER — The diameter measured at two inches above the root collar. 
CHAMPION TREE — The largest tree of its species within the United States,the state or county. 
CHAMPION TREE OF THE STATE — A tree which appears in the StateForest Conservation Manual list of state champion trees. 
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL AREAS — Areas zoned for manufacturing operations, office complexes, shopping centers and other similar uses andtheir associated storage areas, yarding, and parking areas, and corresponding to the Town of Bel Air Zoning Classifications B-1, B-2, B-3 and M-1. 
CRITICAL HABITAT AREA — A critical habitat for an endangered speciesand its surrounding protection areas. A critical habitat area shall: 
A. 	Be likely to contribute to the long-term survival of the species; 
B. 	Be likely to be occupied by the species for the foreseeable future; 
1:465 

C. 	Constitute habitat of the species which is considered critical underNatural Resources Article, §§ 4-2A-04 and 10-2A-06, Annotated Code of Maryland. 
CRITICAL HABITAT FOR ENDANGERED SPECIES — A habitat occupied byan endangered species as determined or listed under Natural Resources Article, §§ 4-2A-04 and 10-2A-04, Annotated Code of Maryland. 
DECLARATION OF INTENT — 
A. 	A signed and notarized statement by a landowner or the authorized landowner's agent certifying that the activity on the landowner's property. 
(1) 	
Is for certain activities exempted under this chapter or Natural Resources Article, §§ 5-103 and 5-1601 through 5-1612, AnnotatedCode of Maryland; 

(2) 	
Does not circumvent the requirements of this chapter or Natural Resources Article, §§ 5-103 and 5-1601 through 5-1612, AnnotatedCode of Maryland, and 

(3) 	
Does not conflict with the purposes of any other declaration of intent; and 


B. 	The document required under COMAR 08.19.01.05. 
DEPARTMENT — The Planning and/or Public Works Department charged 
with implementing the local forest conservation program. 
DEVELOPMENT PROJECT — 

A. 	Grading or construction activities occurring on a specific tract that is 40,000 square feet or greater. 
B. 	Includes redevelopment. 
DEVELOPMENT PROJECT COMPLETION — For the purpose of afforestation, reforestation or payment into a fund: 
A. 	The release of the development bond, if required; 
B. 	Acceptance of the project's streets, utilities, and public services by the Department; or 
C. 	Designation by the Department or state that a: 
(1) 	
Development project has been completed; or 

(2) 	
Particular stage of a staged development project, including a planned unit development, has been completed. 


FOREST — 
A. 	A biological community dominated by trees and other woody plantscovering a land area of 10,000 square feet or greater. 
1:466 

B. "Forest" includes: 

(1) 	
Areas that have at least 100 live trees per acre with at least 50% of those trees having a two-inch-or-greater diameter at 4.5 feet abovethe ground and larger; and 

(2) 	
Areas that have been cut but not cleared. 


C. 	"Forest" does not include orchards. 
FOREST CONSERVANCY DISTRICT BOARD — The forestry board createdfor each state forestry conservancy district under Natural Resources Article, §§ 5-601 through 5-610, Annotated Code of Maryland. 
FOREST CONSERVATION — The retention of existing forest or the creationof new forest at the levels set by the state or Department. 
FOREST CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT AGREEMENT — An agreement as stated in the Tax-Property Article, § 8-211, Annotated Code ofMaryland. 
FOREST CONSERVATION PLAN — A plan approved pursuant to NaturalResources Article, §§ 5-1606 and 5-1607, Annotated Code of Maryland. 
FOREST CONSERVATION TECHNICAL MANUAL — The technical manual incorporated by reference, used to establish standards of performancerequired in preparing forest stand delineations and forest conservationplans. 
FOREST COVER — The area of a site meeting the definition of forest. 
FOREST MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan establishing best conservation andmanagement practices for a landowner in assessment of the resource values of forested property. 
FOREST STAND DELINEATION — The methodology for evaluating theexisting vegetation on a site proposed for development, as provided in the Forest Conservation Technical Manual. 
GROWING SEASON — The period of consecutive frost-free days as statedin the current soil survey for this county published by the National Cooperative Soil Survey Program, 16 U.S.C. § 590 (a) – (f). 
INTERMITTENT STREAM — A stream in which surface water is absent during a part of the year as shown on the most recent 7.5 minute topographic quadrangle published by the United States Geologic Survey asconfirmed by field verification. 
LANDSCAPE PLAN — 
A. 	A plan drawn to scale, showing dimensions and details for: 
(1) 	Reforesting an area at least 35 feet wide and covering 2,500 squarefeet or greater in size as part of a forest conservation plan; or 
1:467 

(2) 	Replacing unique specimen trees (10 inches in caliper or greater)on a 2:1 to 5:1 ratio as required on parcels of less than 40,000 square feet. 
B. 	Using native or indigenous plants when appropriate; and 
C. 	Which is made part of an approved forest conservation plan or as a requirement for individual tree replacement on site. 
LOCAL AGENCY — Each unit in the executive, legislative or judicial branchof a county or municipal government, including an office or department of public works. 
LOT — A unit of land, the boundaries of which have been established as a result of a deed or previous subdivision of a larger parcel, and which will not be the subject of further subdivision, as defined by Natural ResourcesArticle § 5-1601, Annotated Code of Maryland and this chapter without anapproved forest stand delineation and forest conservation plan. 
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — The short-term management agreementassociated with afforestation or reforestation plans required under NaturalResources Article, § 5-1605, Annotated Code of Maryland and this chapter. 
NATURAL REGENERATION — The natural establishment of trees and other vegetation with at least 400 woody, free-to-grow seedlings per acre, whichare capable of reaching a height of at least 20 feet at maturity. 
NET TRACT AREA — The total area of a site, including both forested andnonforested areas, to the nearest 1/10 acre, reduced by the area found tobe within the boundaries of the one-hundred-year floodplain. 
NONTIDAL WETLANDS — 
A. 	An area that is: 
(1) 	
Inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under normal conditionsdoes support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for lifein saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation; and 

(2) 	
Considered a nontidal wetland in accordance with the publicationknown as the "Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands," published in 1989 and as may be amendedand interpreted by the U. S. Environmental Protection Agency. 


OFF SITE — Outside of the limits of the area encompassed by the tract. 
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chanceof being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Except for Class III waters(natural trout streams), a body of water with a watershed less than 400 acres is excluded. 
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOODPLAIN — An area along or adjacent to astream or body of water that is capable of storing or conveying floodwaters 
1:468 

during a one-hundred-year frequency storm event, or a one-hundred-yearflood. 
ON SITE — Within the limits of the area encompassed by the tract,including an area classified as a one-hundred-year floodplain. 
PERENNIAL STREAM — A stream containing surface water throughout an average rainfall year, as shown on the most recent 7.5 minute topographicquadrangle published by the United State Geologic Survey, and confirmedby field verification. 
PERSON — The federal government, the state, a county or municipalcorporation, or other political subdivision of the state, or any of theirunits, or an individual, receiver, trustee, guardian, executor, administrator, fiduciary, or representative of any kind, or any partnership, firm, association, public or private corporation, or any of their affiliates, or anyother entity. 
PUBLIC UTILITY — Any: 
A. 	Transmission line or electric generating station; or 
B. Water, sewer, electric, gas, telephone, and television cable service line. REFORESTATION or REFORESTED — 
A. 	The: 
(1) 	
Creation of a biological community dominated by trees and other woody plants containing at least 100 live trees per acre with atleast 50% of those trees having the potential of attaining a two­inch-or-greater diameter measured at 4.5 feet above the ground, within seven years; or 

(2) 	
Establishment of a forest according to procedures set forth in theForest Conservation Technical Manual. 


B. 	Includes landscaping of areas under an approved landscaping planestablishing a forest at least 35 feet wide and covering 2,500 squarefeet or more of area. 
REGULATED ACTIVITY — Any of the following activities when that activityoccurs on a unit of land which is 40,000 square feet or greater: 
A. 	Subdivision; 
B. 	Cutting, clearing or grading; 
C. 	An activity that requires a sediment control permit; or 
D. 	Project plan of a local agency. 
RESIDENTIAL AREAS — Areas zoned for low density/medium density/highdensity residential and residential/office development, including both existing and planned development and their associated infrastructure, such 
1:469 

as roads, utilities, and water and sewer service, and corresponding to theTown of Bel Air Zoning Classifications R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-O. 
RETENTION — The deliberate holding and protecting of existing trees,shrubs or plants on the site according to established standards as providedin the Forest Conservation Technical Manual. 
SEDIMENT CONTROL PERMIT — The authorization of an activity regulatedunder a sediment control plan as provided in the Environmental Article,Title 4, Annotated Code of Maryland. 
SEEDLINGS — An unbranched woody plant, less than 24 inches in heightand having a diameter of less than 1/2 inch measured at two inches abovethe root collar. 
SELECTIVE CLEARING — The careful and planned removal of trees,shrubs, and plants using specific standards and protection measures underan approved forest conservation plan. 
SITE PLAN — A plan, to scale, showing uses and structures proposed fora parcel of land as required by this chapter. It includes lot lines, streets,building sites, reserved open space, buildings, major landscape features, both natural and man-made, and existing and proposed utility lines. 
STREAM BUFFER — All lands lying within 50 feet measured from the top ofeach normal bank of a perennial or intermittent stream. 
SUBDIVISION — Any division of a unit of land into two or more lots or parcels for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer ofownership, sale, lease, or development. 
TRACT — Property or unit of land subject to an application for a gradingor sediment control permit, subdivision approval, project plan approval, orareas subject to this subtitle. 
TREE — A large, branched woody plant having one or several self-supporting stems or trunks that reach a height of at least 20 feet at maturity. 
VARIANCE — 
A. 	Relief from Natural Resources Article, §§ 5-1601 through 5-1612, Annotated Code of Maryland or this chapter. 
B. 	Does not mean a zoning variance. 
WATERSHED — All land lying within an area described as a subbasin inwater quality regulations adopted by the Department of the Environment under COMAR 26.08.02.08. 
WHIP — An unbranched woody plant greater than 24 inches in height andhaving a diameter of less than one inch measured at two inches above the root collar. 
1:470 

ARTICLE III 
Applicability; Declaration of Intent 
§ 216-3. Applicability. 
Except as provided in § 216-4 of this article, this chapter applies to: 
A. 	A person making application for a subdivision, project plan, grading,or sediment control approval on units of land 40,000 square feet orgreater after the effective date of this chapter. 
B. 	A public utility not exempt under § 216-4C and D of this article. 
C. 	A unit of county or municipal government, including a public utility orpublic works project, making application for a subdivision, project plan, grading, or sediment control approval on areas 40,000 square feet or greater. 
§ 216-4. Exemptions. 
This chapter does not apply to: 
A. 	Highway construction activities under Natural Resources Article, § 5-103, Annotated Code of Maryland. 
B. 	Areas governed by the Chesapeake Bay Critical Area Protection Law,Natural Resources Article, §§ 8-1801 through 8-1816, Annotated Codeof Maryland. 
C. 	The cutting or clearing of public utility rights-of-way licensed underArticle 78, §§ 54A and 54B or § 54-I, Annotated Code of Maryland orland for electric generating stations licensed under Article 78, §§ 54A and 54B or § 54-I, Annotated Code of Maryland if: 
(1) 	
Required certificates of public convenience and necessity havebeen issued in accordance with Natural Resources Article, § 5-1603(f), Annotated Code of Maryland; and 

(2) 	
Cutting or clearing of the forest is conducted to minimize the lossof forest. 


D. 	Routine maintenance or emergency repairs of public utility rights-of­way licensed under Article 78, §§ 54A and 54B or § 54-I, AnnotatedCode of Maryland. 
E. 	Except for a public utility subject to § 216-4F of this article, routinemaintenance or emergency repairs of a public utility right-of-way if: 
(1) 	
The right-of-way existed before the effective date of this chapter; or 

(2) 	
The right-of-way's initial construction was approved under this chapter. 


1:471 

F. 	Residential construction activity that is conducted on an existing singleresidential lot of any size if the activity: 
(1) 	
Does not involve a request to subdivide the lot; 

(2) 	
Does not result in the cumulative cutting, clearing, or grading ofmore than 20,000 square feet of forest; 

(3) 	
Does not result in the cutting, clearing, or grading of a forest that issubject to the requirements of a previous forest conservation planapproved under this chapter; and 

(4) 	
Is the subject of a declaration of intent filed with the Department,as provided for in § 216-5 of this article, stating that the lot willnot be the subject of a regulated activity within five years of the cutting, clearing, or grading of forest. 


G. 	An activity required for the purpose of constructing a dwelling houseintended for the use of the owner, or a child or a grandchild of the owner, if the activity: 
(1) 	
Does not result in the cutting, clearing, or grading of more than20,000 square feet of forest; and 

(2) 	
Is the subject of a declaration of intent filed with the Department,as provided for in § 216-5 of this article, which states that transferof ownership may result in a loss of exemption. 


H. 	A preliminary plan of subdivision or a grading or sediment control planapproved before July 1, 1992. 
I. 	A real estate transfer to provide a security, leasehold, or other legal or equitable interest, including a transfer of title, or a portion of a lot orparcel, if: 
(1) 	
The transfer does not involve a change in land use, or other legal development or redevelopment with associated land disturbing activities; and 

(2) 	
Both the grantor and grantee file a declaration of intent, as provided for in § 216-5 of this article. 


J. 	Previously developed or improved areas absent of tree cover undergoing redevelopment. Generally these are areas of existing impervious surface. [Added 9-2-2014 by Ord. No. 768-14] 
§ 216-5. Declaration of intent. 
A. 	The purpose of the declaration of intent is to verify that the proposedactivity is exempt under Natural Resources Article, §§ 5-103 and 5-1601through 5-1612, Annotated Code of Maryland and this chapter. 
B. 	A person seeking an exemption under § 216-4 F, G and I of this articleshall file a declaration of intent with the Department. 
1:472 

C. The existence of a declaration of intent does not preclude: 

(1) 	
An exempted activity on the property subject to a declaration of intent; and 

(a) 	
Does not conflict with the purpose of any existing declarationof intent; and 

(b) 	
Complies with the applicable requirements for an exemptedactivity; 



(2) 	
A regulated activity on the area covered by the declaration of intent, if the activity occurs within five years of the effective dateof the declaration of intent, in which case: 

(a) 	
There shall be an immediate loss of exemption; or 

(b) 	
There may be a noncompliance action taken by the Department, as appropriate, under this chapter; or 



(3) 	
A regulated activity on that area of the property not covered under the declaration of intent if the requirements of this chapter aresatisfied. 


D. 	The Department may require a person failing to file a declaration of intent or found in noncompliance with a declaration of intent to: 
(1) 	
Meet the retention, afforestation and reforestation requirementsestablished in Articles III through XIII of this chapter; 

(2) 	
Pay a noncompliance fee of $0.30 per square foot of forest cut orcleared under the declaration of intent; 

(3) 	
Be subject to other enforcement actions appropriate under Natural Resources Article, §§ 5-1601 through 5-1612, Annotated Code ofMaryland and this chapter; or 


E. 	In its determination of appropriate enforcement action, the Department may consider whether failure to file a declaration of intent by a personrequired to file is a knowing violation of this chapter. 
F. 	The declaration of intent is effective for five years. 
1:473 

ARTICLE IV 
General Requirements 
§ 216-6. Requirements for application. 
A person making application after the effective date of this chapter, for subdivision or local agency project plan approval, a grading permit, or asediment control permit for an area of land of 40,000 square feet or greatershall: 
A. 	Submit to the Department a forest stand delineation and a forest conservation plan for the lot or parcel on which the development islocated; and 
B. 	Use methods approved by the Department, as provided in the ForestConservation Technical Manual, to protect retained forests and treesduring construction. 
§ 216-7. Requirements for regulated activities. 
If a local agency or person using state funds makes application to conduct aregulated activity, the provisions of COMAR 08.19.04.01D – G apply. 
1:475 

ARTICLE V 
Forest Stand Delineation § 216-8. When required; criteria for review; approval. 
A. 	A forest stand delineation shall be submitted at the initial stages of subdivision or project plan approval, before a grading permitapplication, or before a sediment control application is submitted forthe tract being developed. 
B. 	The delineation shall be prepared by a licensed forester, licensed landscape architect, or a qualified professional who meets the requirements stated in COMAR 08.19.06.01B. 
C. 	The delineation shall be used during the preliminary review process todetermine the most suitable and practical areas for forest conservationand shall contain the following components: 
(1) 	
A topographic map delineating intermittent and perennial streams,and steep slopes over 20%; 

(2) 	
A soils map delineating soils with structural limitations, hydric soils, or soils with a soil K value greater than 0.35 on slopes of 15% or more; 

(3) 	
Forest stand maps indicating species, location, and size of trees and showing dominant and co-dominant forest types; 

(4) 	
Location of one-hundred-year floodplain; 

(5) 	
Information required by the Forest Conservation Technical Manual; and 

(6) 	
Other information the Department determines is necessary to implement this chapter. 


D. 	If approved by the Department, a simplified delineation may be submitted for an area that meets the minimum forest conservation threshold as determined in Article VIII, § 216-14 of this chapter when less than 40,000 square feet of forest cover is disturbed during a construction activity and the area is designated to be under a long-termprotective agreement. 
E. 	The Department shall consider a simplified forest stand delineationcomplete if it includes: 
(1) 	
All requirements under Article V, § 216-8C(1), (2), (4) and (5) of this chapter; 

(2) 	
A map showing existing forest cover as verified by field inspection;and 

(3) 	
Other information required by this chapter. 


1:477 

F. 	An approved forest stand delineation may remain in effect for a periodnot longer than five years. 
G. 	Department forest stand delineation approval. 
(1) 	
Within 30 calendar days after receipt of the forest stand delineation, the Department shall notify the applicant whether the forest stand delineation is approved or list deficiencies. 

(2) 	
If the Department fails to notify the applicant within 30 days ofdeficiencies of the forest stand delineation, the delineation shall be treated as approved. 

(3) 	
Resubmission of the forest stand delineation will be required tocorrect any list of deficiencies. The forest stand delineation will not be approved until all listed deficiencies have been corrected to thesatisfaction of the Department. 


1:478 

ARTICLE VI 
Forest Conservation Plan 
§ 216-9. General provisions. 
A. 	In developing a forest conservation plan, the applicant shall give priority to techniques for retaining existing forest on the site. 
B. 	If existing forest on the site subject to a forest conservation plan cannotbe retained, the applicant shall demonstrate the satisfaction of the Department; 
(1) 	
How techniques for forest retention have been exhausted; 

(2) 	
Why the priority forests and priority areas specified in Natural Resources Article, § 5-1607(C), Annotated Code of Maryland,cannot be left in an undisturbed condition; 

(a) 	
If priority forests and priority areas cannot be left undisturbed, how the sequence for afforestation or reforestation will befollowed in compliance with Natural Resources Article § 5-1607, Annotated Code of Maryland; and 

(b) 	
Where on the site in priority areas afforestation or reforestation will occur in compliance with Natural ResourcesArticle § 5-1607, Annotated Code of Maryland. 



(3) 	
How the disturbance to the priority forests and priority areas specified in Natural Resources Article § 5-1607(c)(2), AnnotatedCode of Maryland qualifies for a variance. 


C. 	The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Departmentthat the requirements for afforestation or reforestation on site or offsite cannot be reasonably accomplished if the applicant proposes to make a payment into the local forest conservation fund instead ofafforestation or reforestation. 
D. 	Nontidal wetlands. A regulated activity under the local program is subject to the following requirements: 
(1) 	
For the purposes of delineation, permitting, and mitigation, areasdetermined to be nontidal wetlands under COMAR 08.05.04 shall be regulated under COMAR 08.05.04 or this chapter, whichever ismore stringent. 

(2) 	
For the purpose of calculating reforestation mitigation under this chapter, a forested nontidal wetland permitted to be cut or clearedand required to be mitigated under COMAR 08.05.04 shall beshown on the forest conservation plan and subtracted on an acre­for-acre basis from the total amount of forest to be cut or cleared as part of a regulated activity. 


1:479 

(3) 	
Nontidal wetlands shall be considered to be priority areas for retention and replacement. 

(4) 	
Forested nontidal wetland identification and delineation should be included at the earliest stage of planning to assist the applicant inavoidance and reduction of impacts to the nontidal wetlands and to avoid delay in the approval process. 


§ 216-10. Preliminary forest conservation plan. 
A. 	A preliminary forest conservation plan shall be prepared by a licensed forester, a licensed landscape architect, or a qualified professional whomeets the requirements stated in COMAR 08.19.06. 
B. 	A preliminary forest conservation plan shall: 
(1) 	
Be submitted with the preliminary plan of subdivision or proposedproject plan; 

(2) 	
Include the approved forest stand delineation for the site; 

(3) 	
Include a table that lists the proposed values of the following, insquare feet: 

(a) 	
Net tract area; 

(b) 	
Area of forest conservation required; and 

(c) 	
Area of forest conservation that the applicant proposed toprovide including both on site and off site areas; 



(4) 	
Include a clear graphic indication of the forest conservation provided on the site drawn to scale, showing areas where retentionof existing forest or afforestation or reforestation is proposed; 

(5) 	
Include an explanation of how the provisions of § 216-9 of thisarticle have been met; 

(6) 	
In the case of afforestation or reforestation, include a proposed afforestation or reforestation plan; 

(7) 	
Include a proposed construction timetable showing the sequence offorest conservation procedures; 

(8) 	
Show the proposed limits of disturbance; 

(9) 	
Show proposed stockpile areas; 


(10)Incorporate a proposed two-year maintenance agreement that shows how areas designated for afforestation or reforestation willbe maintained to ensure protection and satisfactory establishment; 
(11)Include 
information required in the Forest Conservation Technical Manual; and 

1:480 

(12)Include other information the Department determines is necessaryto implement this chapter. 

C. 	
A simplified preliminary forest conservation plan may be submitted foran area if a simplified forest stand delineation has been submitted andapproved by the Department under Article V, § 216-8D of this chapter. 

D. 	
A simplified preliminary forest conservation plan shall: 

(1) 	
Be submitted with the preliminary plan of subdivision or proposedproject plan; 

(2) 	
Include the approved forest stand delineation for the site; 

(3) 	
Include a clear graphic indication of the forest conservation provided on the site drawn to scale, showing: 

(a) 	
Areas where retention of existing forest is proposed; 

(b) 	
Proposed limits of disturbance; 

(c) 	
All trees 10 inches in caliper and greater within the limits of disturbance, labeled by size and species; and 

(d) 	
Proposed stockpile areas of grading or other material. 



(4) 	
Include a table that lists the proposed values of the following, in square feet: 

(a) 	
Net tract area; 

(b) 	
Area of forest conservation required as defined in Article 8, § 216-14B of this chapter; and 

(c) 	
Area of forest conservation the applicant proposed to provide. 



(5) 	
Other information the Department determines is necessary to implement this chapter. 



E. 	
The review of the preliminary forest conservation plan shall be concurrent with the review of the preliminary site plan. 

F. 	
During the different stages of the review process, the preliminary forestconservation plan may be modified. 


§ 216-11. Final forest conservation plan. 
A. 	A final forest conservation plan shall be prepared by a licensed forester,a licensed landscape architect, or a qualified professional who meetsthe requirements stated in COMAR 08.91.06.01B. 
B. 	A final forest conservation plan shall: 
(1) 	
Be submitted with the following: 

1:481 


(a) 	
A final subdivision plan; 

(b) 	
A final project plan; 

(c) 	
An application for a grading permit; or 

(d) 	
An application for a sediment control permit; 


(2) 	
Show proposed locations and types of protective devices to be used during construction activities to protect trees and forestsdesignated for conservation; 

(3) 	
In the case of afforestation or reforestation, include an afforestation or reforestation plan, with a timetable and descriptionof needed site and soil preparation, species, size, and spacing to beused; 

(4) 	
Incorporate a binding two-year maintenance agreement specifiedin COMAR 08.19.05.01 that details how the areas designated forafforestation or reforestation will be maintained to ensure protection and satisfactory establishment, including: 

(a) 	
Watering; and 

(b) 	
A reinforcement planting provision if survival rates fall below required standards, as provided in the Forest ConservationTechnical Manual; 



(5) 	
Incorporate a long-term binding protection agreement as specified in COMAR 08.19.05.02 that: 

(a) 	
Provides protection for areas of forest conservation, includingareas of afforestation, reforestation, and retention; and 

(b) 	
Limits uses in areas of forest conservation to those uses that are designated and consistent with forest conservation, including recreational activities and forest management practices that are used to preserve forest; 



(6) 	
Include the substantive elements required under § 216-10B(2), (3),

(4) and (5) of this article, as finalized elements of the forest conservation plan; and 

(7) 	
Other information the Department determines is necessary to implement this chapter. 


C. 	If a simplified preliminary forest conservation plan for an area has beenapproved by the Department, the final forest conservation plan shall: 
(1) 	
Be submitted with the following: 

(a) 	
A final subdivision plan; 

(b) 	
A final project plan; 


1:482 

D. 

E. 

F. 

G. 

(c) 	
An application for a grading permit; or 

(d) 	
An application for a sediment control permit. 




(2) 	
Show proposed locations and types of protective devices to beused during construction activities to protect trees and forestsdesignated for conservation; 

(3) 	
Include the substantive elements required under § 216-10D of thisarticle, as finalized elements of the forest conservation plan. 

(4) 	
Include a landscape plan for tree replacement if any ten-inch­in-caliper-and-greater trees are to be removed. This plan shall include: 

(a) 	
Location, size and species of trees to be removed; 

(b) 	
Location, size and species of replacement trees at a ratio oftwo trees planted per one tree removed for trees 10 to 23inches in caliper. Trees 24 inches in caliper or greater shall be replaced at a ratio of four trees planted per one removed. 



(5) 	
Other information the Department determines is necessary to implement this chapter. 

Department forest conservation plan approval. 

(1) 	
Within 45 calendar days after receipt of the final forest conservation plan, the Department shall notify the applicant whether the forest conservation plan is approved or list deficiencies. 

(2) 	
If the Department fails to notify the applicant within 45 calendar days of deficiencies, the plan shall be treated as approved. 

(3) 	
Resubmission of the final forest conservation plan will be requiredto correct any list of deficiencies. The final forest conservation plan will not be approved until all listed deficiencies have beencorrected to the satisfaction of the Department. 


The Department's review of a final forest conservation plan shall be concurrent with the review of the final subdivision or project plan,grading permit application, or sediment control application associatedwith the project. 
If a forest conservation plan is required pursuant to this chapter, aperson may not cut, clear or grade, in any way, the development siteuntil the Department has approved the final forest conservation plan. 
The Department may revoke an approved forest conservation plan if itfinds that: 
(1) 	A provision of the plan has been violated; 
1:483 

(2) 	
Approval of the plan was obtained through fraud, misrepresentation, a false or misleading statement, or omission of a relevant or material fact; or 

(3) 	
Changes in the development or in the condition of the site necessitate preparation of a new or amended plan. 


H. 	The Department may issue a stop-work order against a person whoviolates a provision of this chapter or a regulation, order, approvedforest conservation plan, or maintenance agreement. 
I. 	Before revoking approval of a forest conservation plan, the Departmentshall notify the violator in writing and provide an opportunity for ahearing. 
1:484 

ARTICLE VII 
Afforestation and Retention 
§ 216-12. Afforestation requirement. 
A person making application after the effective date of this chapter for subdivision or project plan approval, a grading permit, or a sediment controlpermit for an area of land of 40,000 square feet or greater, shall: 
A. 	Conduct afforestation on the lot or parcel in accordance with the following: 
(1) 	
A tract having less than 20% of the net tract area in forest covershall be afforested up to at least 20% of the net tract area for residential areas; 

(2) 	
A tract with less than 15% of its net tract area in forest cover shall be afforested up to at least 15% of the net tract area for commercial and industrial use areas; 


B. 	Comply with the following when cutting into forest cover that is currently below the afforestation percentage described in § 216-12A(1) and (2) of this article: 
(1) 	
The required afforestation level shall be determined by the amountof forest existing before cutting or clearing begins; and 

(2) 	
Forest cut or cleared below the required afforestation level shallbe reforested or afforested at a two-to-one ratio and added to the amount of afforestation necessary to reach the minimum required afforestation level, as determined by the amount of forest existingbefore cutting or clearing began. 


§ 216-13. Retention. [Amended 9-2-2014 by Ord. No. 768-14] 
The following trees, shrubs, plants, and specific areas are considered priority for retention and protection and shall be left in an undisturbedcondition unless the applicant has demonstrated, to the satisfaction of the Department, that the applicant qualifies for a variance in accordance with§ 216-21 of this chapter. 
A. 	Sensitive areas. 
(1) 	
Trees, shrubs, and plants located in sensitive areas including theone-hundred-year floodplain, intermittent and perennial streamsand their buffers, steep slopes, nontidal wetlands, and critical habitats; 

(2) 	
Contiguous forest that connects the largest undeveloped or mostvegetated tracts of land within and adjacent to the site; 


B. Trees, shrubs, or plants determined to be rare, threatened, or endangered under: 
1:485 

(1) 	
The federal Endangered Species Act of 1973 in 16 U.S.C. §§ 1531through 1544 and in 50 CFR Part 17; 

(2) 	
The Maryland Nongame and Endangered Species ConservationAct, Natural Resources Article, §§ 10-2A-01 through 10-2A-09,Annotated Code of Maryland, and 

(3) 	
COMAR 08.03.08; 



C. 	Trees that: 
(1) 	
Are part of an historic site, 

(2) 	
Are associated with an historic structure; or 

(3) 	
Have been designated by the state or the Department as a national,state, county or Town champion tree; and 


D. 	Any tree having a diameter measured at 4.5 feet above the ground of: 
(1) 	
Thirty inches or more; or 

(2) 	
Seventy-five percent or more of the diameter, measured at 4.5 feet above the ground, of the current State champion tree of thatspecies as designated by the Department of Natural Resources. 


1:486 

ARTICLE VIII 
Reforestation 
§ 216-14. Forest conservation threshold. 
A. 	There is a forest conservation threshold established for all land use categories, as provided in Subsection B of this section. The forestconservation threshold means the percentage of the net tract area atwhich the reforestation requirements changes from a ratio of 1/4 acre planted for each acre removed above the threshold to a ratio of twoacres planted for each acre removed below the threshold. 
B. 	After reasonable efforts to minimize the cutting or clearing of trees and other woody plants have been exhausted in the development of asubdivision or project plan, grading and sediment control activities, andimplementation of the forest conservation plan, the forest conservation plan shall provide for reforestation, or payment into the forest conservation fund, according to the formula set forth in Subsections Band C of this article and consistent with § 216-9 of this chapter, and the following forest conservation thresholds for the applicable land use 
category:  
Category of Use  Threshold Percentage  
Residential use areas  25%  
Commercial and industrial use areas  15%  
Calculations.C.  

(1) 	
For all existing forest cover measured to the nearest 1/10 acrecleared on the net tract area above the applicable forest conservation threshold, the area of forest removed shall be reforested at a ratio of 1/4 acre planted for each acre removed. 

(2) 	
Each acre of forest retained on the net tract area above the applicable forest conservation threshold shall be credited against the total number of acres required to be reforested under Subsection C(1) of this subsection. The calculation of the creditshall be according to the criteria provided in the Forest Conservation Technical Manual. 

(3) 	
For all existing forest cover measured to the nearest 1/10 acrecleared on the net tract area below the applicable forest conservation threshold, the area of forest removed shall be reforested at a ratio of two acres planted for each acre removedbelow the threshold. 


1:487 

ARTICLE IX 
Priorities and Time Requirements 
§ 216-15. Sequence for afforestation and reforestation. 
A. 	After techniques for retaining existing forest on the site have been exhausted, the preferred sequence for afforestation and reforestation,as determined by the Department, is as follows: 
(1) 	
Selective clearing and supplemental planting on site; 

(2) 	
On-site afforestation or reforestation, if economically feasible,using transplanted or nursery stock that is greater than two inchesdiameter measured at 4.5 feet above the ground; 

(3) 	
Landscaping of areas under an approved landscaping tree planwhich establishes a forest that is at least 35 feet wide and covering2,500 square feet or more of area; 

(4) 	
On-site afforestation or reforestation, using whip and seedling stock; 

(5) 	
Off-site afforestation or reforestation, using transplanted or nursery stock that is greater than two inches diameter measured at

4.5 feet above the ground; 

(6) 	
Off-site afforestation or reforestation, using whip and seedling stock; 

(7) 	
Street trees with an established cost per tree subtracted from theForest Conservation Fund for the site as determined in Article X, § 216-16 of this chapter; 

(8) 	
Natural regeneration on site; and 

(9) 	
Natural regeneration off site. 


B. 	A sequence other than the one described in Subsection A of this sectionmay be used for a specific project, if necessary, to achieve the objectivesof the Town land use plan or Town land use policies, or to take advantage of opportunities to consolidate forest conservation efforts. 
C. 	The following are considered a priority for afforestation and reforestation to: 
(1) 	
Establish or enhance forest buffers adjacent to intermittent andperennial streams to widths of at least 50 feet; 

(2) 	
Establish or enhance nonforested areas on one-hundred-year floodplains, when appropriate; 

(3) 	
Establish or increase existing forested corridors to connect existingforests within or adjacent to the site, and, where practical, forested 


1:489 

corridors should be a minimum of 300 feet in width to facilitate wildlife movement; 
(4) 	
Establish or enhance forest buffers adjacent to critical habitatswhere appropriate; 

(5) 	
Establish plantings to stabilize slopes of 20% or greater and slopes of 15% or greater with a soil K value greater than 0.35, includingthe slopes or ravines or other natural depressions; 

(6) 	
Establish buffers adjacent to areas of differing land use when appropriate, or adjacent to highways or utility rights-of-way; 

(7) 	
Establish forest areas adjacent to existing forests to increase theoverall area of contiguous forest cover, when appropriate; and 

(8) 	
Use native plant materials for afforestation or reforestation, whenappropriate. 


D. 	A person required to conduct afforestation or reforestation under this article shall accomplish it within one year or two growing seasons,whichever is a greater time period, following development project completion. 
1:490 

ARTICLE X 
Alternate Methods of Compliance 
§ 216-16. Forest Conservation Fund. 
A. 	There is established a Forest Conservation Fund in the local program. 
B. 	If a person subject to this chapter demonstrates to the satisfaction ofthe Department that requirements for reforestation or afforestation onsite or off site cannot be reasonably accomplished, the person shall contribute money, at a rate of $0.40 per square foot of the area ofrequired planting, into the Town Forest Conservation Fund. 
C. 	Money contributed instead of afforestation or reforestation under this article shall be paid within 90 calendar days after execution of thepublic works agreement or prior to issuance of any permit as determined in the sole discretion of the Zoning Administrator. 
D. 	Money deposited in the local Forest Conservation Fund: 
(1) 	
May be spent on the costs directly related to reforestation andafforestation, including site identification, acquisition, preparation, maintenance of existing forest and achieving urban canopy goalsand/or; 

(2) 	
May be spent on the costs directly related to individual tree plantings in public and private rights-of-way, and on public lands,including site identification, acquisition, preparation and tree maintenance. 

(3) 	
Shall be deposited in a separate Forest Conservation Fund; and 

(4) 	
May not revert to the general fund. 


E. 	Sites for afforestation or reforestation using fund money shall be located within the boundaries of the Town of Bel Air. 
§ 216-17. Off-site protection. 
A. 	If a person subject to this chapter demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Department that the requirements for reforestation or afforestation cannot be met in accordance with the preferred sequence for afforestation or reforestation as described in Article IX, § 216-15, of this chapter, a person may request the option to protect an existing forestedarea off site as a means of meeting the afforestation or reforestationrequirement for a proposed development site. 
B. 	The following conditions must exist on a proposed off-site protectionsite: 
(1) 	The site must have forest cover in excess of the minimum forest conservation threshold for the site; and 
1:491 

(2) 	The forest cover must not be protected through an existing long­term binding agreement related to tree retention. 
C. 	A forest conservation plan for the off-site protection site shall beprepared by a licensed forester, a licensed landscape architect, or aqualified professional who meets the requirements stated in COMAR 08.19.06.01B. 
D. 	Off-site protection shall be at a protection-to-reforestation/afforestationratio of 2:1. 
E. 	The forest conservation plan shall include: 
(1) 	
All simplified forest stand delineation requirements as noted inArticle V, § 216-8E of this chapter; 

(2) 	
A site plan indicating all existing protection areas, an area equal tothe minimum conservation threshold for the site, and the proposed area of protection at an amount equal to or greater than the required amount of afforestation or reforestation for the development site; and 

(3) 	
A long-term protective agreement for the area equal to the minimum forest conservation threshold and the offsite protectionarea as described in Article VI, § 216.11B(5) of this chapter. 


F. 	Sites designated for off-site protection shall be located within the boundaries of the Town of Bel Air. 
1:492 

ARTICLE XI 
Recommended Tree Species 
§ 216-18. Use of native species; list of approved trees. 
A. 	Tree species used for afforestation or reforestation shall be native to the State, when appropriate, and selected from a list of approvedspecies established by the Department. 
B. 	The Department shall adopt a list of the tree species to be used for any required afforestation or reforestation and incorporate it into the ForestConservation Technical Manual. 
1:493 

ARTICLE XII 
Financial Security 
§ 216-19. Bond or other approved security for afforestation orreforestation. 
A. 	A person required to conduct afforestation or reforestation under thischapter shall furnish financial security in the form of a bond, an irrevocable letter of credit, or other security approved by the Department. The surety shall: 
(1) 	
Assure that the afforestation, reforestation, and the associated maintenance agreement are conducted and maintained in accordance with the approved forest conservation plan; 

(2) 	
Be in an amount equal to the estimated cost, as determined by theDepartment, of afforestation and reforestation; and 

(3) 	
Be in a form and of a content approved by the Department. 


B. 	After one growing season, the person required to file a bond under§ 216-19A of this article may request reduction of the amount of the bond or other financial security by submitting a written request tothe Department with a justification for reducing the bond or otherfinancial security amount, including estimated or actual costs to ensure afforestation or reforestation requirements are met. 
C. 	The Department shall determine whether a lesser amount is sufficientto cover the cost of afforestation or reforestation, taking into account the following: 
(1) 	
The number of acres; 

(2) 	
The proposed method of afforestation or reforestation; 

(3) 	
The cost of planting materials or replacement materials; 

(4) 	
The cost of maintenance of the afforestation or reforestation project; and 

(5) 	
Other relevant factors. 


D. 	If, after two growing seasons, the planting associated with the afforestation or reforestation meet or exceed the standards of the Forest Conservation Technical Manual, the amount of the cash bond, letter of credit, surety bond, or other security shall be returned orreleased. 
E. 	A local forest conservation program may incorporate the financialsecurity set forth in § 216-19A through D of this article or in COMAR08.19.05.01B. 
1:495 

ARTICLE XIII 
Protection of Trees from Construction Activities 
§ 216-20. Adoption of standards; protective devices. 
A. 	The Town shall adopt standards for the protection of trees from construction activity that are at least as effective as the standardsprovided in the Department of Natural Resources Forest ConservationManual. 
B. 	Before cutting, clearing, grading, or construction begins on a site forwhich a forest conservation plan is required by this chapter, the applicant shall demonstrate to the Department that protective devices have been established. 
1:497 

ARTICLE XIV 
Variances 
§ 216-21. Procedure for variance. 
A. 	A person may request a variance from this chapter or the requirements of Natural Resources Article, §§ 5-1601 through 5-1612, AnnotatedCode of Maryland, if the person demonstrates that enforcement wouldresult in unwarranted hardship to the person. 
B. 	An applicant for a variance shall: 
(1) 	
Describe the special conditions peculiar to the property whichwould cause the unwarranted hardship; 

(2) 	
Describe how enforcement of these rules will deprive the applicantof rights commonly enjoyed by others in similar areas; 

(3) 	
Verify that the granting of the variance will not confer on the applicant a special privilege that would be denied to other applicants; 

(4) 	
Verify that the variance request is not based on conditions or circumstances which are the result of actions by the applicant; 

(5) 	
Verify that the request does not arise from a condition relatingto land or building use, either permitted or nonconforming, on a neighboring property; and 

(6) 	
Verify that the granting of a variance will not adversely affect waterquality. 


C. 	The Department shall make findings that the applicant has met therequirements in Subsections A and B of this section before the Department may grant a variance. 
D. 	Notice of a request for a variance shall be given to the Department ofNatural Resources within 15 days of receipt of a request for a variance. 
E. 	There is established by this chapter the right and authority of the Department of Natural Resources to initiate or intervene in an administrative, judicial or other original proceeding or appeal in thestate concerning an approval of a variance under Natural Resources Article, §§ 5-1601 through 5-1612, Annotated Code of Maryland, or thischapter. 
§ 216-22. Appeal process. 
A. 	Aggrieved parties may appeal the Department's decision to grant avariance to the Town Board of Commissioners within 30 days of thedecision. 
B. 	Procedures. 
1:499 

(1) 	
The aggrieved party shall submit a written request to the TownCommissioners requesting review of the Department's decision. 

(2) 	
A public hearing shall be scheduled before the Town Commissioners; public notice shall be placed in a local paper fortwo consecutive weeks; the subject property will be posted 10 days prior to the hearing date. 

(3) 	
A public hearing shall be held before the Town Commissioners.It is the responsibility of the aggrieved party to demonstrate that the variance request did not meet the variance procedurerequirements as stated in Article XIV, § 216-21B of this chapter. 

(4) 	
Town Commissioners approve or deny the request. The Town Commissioners may table the matter for further discussion or togather additional information. In any case, a decision shall be rendered within 60 days of the first hearing date, unless an extension is agreed upon by all parties involved. 

(5) 	
If approved, the variance becomes effective 10 days after the TownCommissioners' approval. 

(6) 	
Aggrieved parties may appeal the Town Commissioners' decision tothe Circuit Court within 30 days of the decision. 


1:500 

ARTICLE XV 
Enforcement § 216-23. Violations and penalties. 
A. 	Noncompliance fees. 
(1) 	
A person found to be in noncompliance with this chapter,regulations adopted under this chapter, the forest conservationplan or the associated two-year maintenance agreement, shall be assessed by the Department, the penalty of $0.40 per square footof the area found to be in noncompliance. 

(2) 	
Money collected under Subsection A(1) of this section shall be deposited in the Forest Conservation Fund as required by Article Xof this chapter, and may be used by the Department for purposesrelated to implementing this chapter. 


B. 	Violation. 
(1) 	
In addition to the provisions under Subsection A of this section, aperson who violates a provision of this chapter or a regulation or order adopted or issued under this chapter is liable for a penaltynot to exceed $1,000, which may be recovered in a civil actionbrought by the Department. 

(2) 	
Each day a violation continues is a separate violation. 


C. 	The Department may seek an injunction requiring the person to ceaseviolation of this chapter and take corrective action to restore or reforest an area. 
D. 	The local program may adopt the enforcement provisions under COMAR 08.19.06.03. 
1:501 

ARTICLE XVI 
Annual Report 
§ 216-24. Annual reporting requirements. 
On or before March 1 of each year, the Department shall submit to the Department of Natural Resources a report which contains the: 
A. 	Number, location, and type of projects subject to the provisions of thischapter; 
B. 	Amount and location of acres cleared, conserved and planted, includingany areas located in the one-hundred-year floodplain, in connectionwith a development project; 
C. 	Amount of reforestation and afforestation fees and noncompliancepenalties collected and expended; 
D. 	Costs of implementing the forest conservation program; 
E. 	Location and size of all forest mitigation banks approved during the past year with a description of the priority areas afforested or reforested by the bank; 
F. 	Number of acres debited from each forest mitigation bank since the lastannual report; 
G. 	Forest mitigation banks inspected since the last annual report; 
H. 	Number, location and types of violations and types of enforcementactivities conducted; and 
I. 	Size and location of all conserved and planted forest areas submitted in an electronic geographic information system or computer-aided designformat if possible. If not possible, the location shall be given byMaryland State Plane Grid Coordinates and eight-digit subwatershed. 
1:503 

ARTICLE XVII 
Biennial Review by Department of Natural Resources 
§ 216-25. Submission of documentation. 
The Department shall submit the necessary documentation to comply with COMAR 08.19.02.04. 
1:505 

ARTICLE XVIII 
Amendments 
§ 216-26. Amendments as required and subject to approval. 
This chapter may be amended as required. All amendments to this chapter are subject to the approval of the Maryland Department of Natural Resources. 
1:507 

Chapter 223 
Chapter 240 
HEALTH AND SANITATION 

GENERAL REFERENCES Minimum Livability Code — See Ch. 301. Sewers — See Ch. 397. Property maintenance — See Ch. 364. 
1:508 

ARTICLE I 
General Provisions 
§ 240-1. Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to require that dwellings be kept clean and free from dirt, filth, rubbish, garbage and similar matter and fromvermin and rodent infestation; to provide for the control of weeds andlitter on vacant lots or other properties and streets and sidewalks within the Town; to regulate refuse storage and collection and to make othernecessary regulations regarding health and sanitation; and to authorizethe Town Administrator to issue orders compelling compliance with the provisions hereof and to correct such conditions at the expense of theproperty occupants or owners of properties upon which violations occur. 
§ 240-2. Nuisances.94 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him to become or remain in a filthy condition, or to permit the use or occupation of the same in such a manner as to create noxious or offensive smells and odors in connection therewith, or to allow the accumulation or creation of unwholesome and offensive matter or the breeding of flies, rodents, or other vermin on the premises to the menace of the public health or the annoyance of people residing within the vicinity. Anyviolation of this provision shall be a municipal infraction and any violatorshall be fined as provided in Chapter 1, Article II of this Code for each day or fraction thereof for which a violation continues. 
94.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:509 
ARTICLE II 
Litter Control 
§ 240-3. Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE — A litter storage and collectionreceptacle made of metal or other suitable material, watertight, strong, durable, rodent and insect proof, and provided with tight covers. The capacity of such shall not exceed 20 gallons. 
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of anymatter of literature which: 
A. 	Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, or thing; 
B. 	Directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly orindirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; 
C. 	Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance,exhibition, or event of any kind for which an admission fee is chargedfor the purpose of private gain or profit; or 
D. 	While containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed orcirculated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor. 
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from thehandling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined herein and all otherwaste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends tocreate a danger to public health, safety and welfare. 
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, anysample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine,paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definition of"commercial handbill." 
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building, or other structure designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes,whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant,and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building orother structure. 
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds, 
1:511 

and buildings and any and all parking lots, except such parking spaces asreserved for single-family dwellings. 
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except bodywastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,abandoned automobiles, and solid market and industrial wastes. 
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes,cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, and similar materials. 
§ 240-4. Litter in public places.95 
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place within the Town except in public receptacles or inauthorized private receptacles for collection. 
§ 240-5. Placement to prevent scattering. 
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized privatereceptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carriedor deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place or upon private property. 
§ 240-6. Sweeping litter into gutter or street; sidewalks to be keptclear. 
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, or other publicplace within the Town the accumulation of litter from any building or lotor from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free oflitter. 
§ 240-7. Duties of business owners. 
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into ordeposit in any gutter, street, or other public place within the Town theaccumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of businesswithin the Town shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premisesfree of litter. 
§ 240-8. Litter thrown by persons in vehicles. 
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or depositlitter upon any street or other public place within the Town or upon private property. 
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:512 
§ 240-9. Vehicle loads causing litter. 
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the Town unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load,contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley, orother public place, nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck within the Town the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in anystreet, alley or other public place sticky substances, litter, or foreign matterof any kind. 
§ 240-10. Litter in parks. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the Town exceptin public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the parkor upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are notprovided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as providedherein. 
§ 240-11. Litter in bodies of water. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream,or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the Town. 
§ 240-12. Handbills. 
A. 	Throwing or distributing commercial handbills in public places. No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the Town, nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell anycommercial handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it shallnot be unlawful on any sidewalk, street, or other public place within the Town for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to thereceiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill to any person willing toaccept it. 
B. 	Placing commercial and noncommercial handbills on vehicles. No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any vehicles; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distributewithout charge to the receiver thereof a noncommercial handbill to anyperson or occupant of any vehicle who is willing to accept it. 
C. 	Depositing commercial and noncommercial handbills on uninhabitedor vacant premises. No person shall throw or deposit any commercialor noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which is temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. 
D. Prohibiting distribution of handbills where properly posted. No personshall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial 
1:513 

handbill upon any private premises if requested by anyone thereon notto do so or if there is placed on said premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof a sign bearing the words "No Trespassing,""No Peddlers or Agents" or "No Advertisement" or any similar noticeindicating in any matter that the occupants of said premises do not desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed or to haveany such handbills left upon such premises. 
E. 	Distributing commercial and noncommercial handbills at inhabited private premises. 
(1) 	
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial ornoncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which is inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbilldirectly to the owner, occupant, or other person then present inor upon such private premises; provided, however, that in case of inhabited private premises which are not posted, as provided inthis section, such person, unless requested by anyone upon suchpremises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises if such handbill is so placedor deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from beingblown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets, or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so used whenso prohibited by federal postal law or regulations. 

(2) 	
The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States nor to newspapers, except thatnewspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manneras to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place or upon private property. 


§ 240-13. Dropping litter from aircraft. 
No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the Town any litter, handbill, or any other object. 
§ 240-14. Litter on occupied private property. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the Town, whether occupied by such person or not, except that theowner or person in control of private property may maintain authorizedprivate receptacles for collection in such manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street,sidewalk, or other public place or upon any private property. 
§ 240-15. Owner to maintain premises free of litter. 
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all timesmaintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this sectionshall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacle for collection. 
1:514 

§ 240-16. Litter on vacant lots.96 
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant lot, except in authorized private receptacles for collection. 
§ 240-17. Order to remove litter; action by Town. [Amended3-17-2007 by Ord. No. 706-08] 
A. 	Notice to remove. The Town's Building Official is hereby authorized andempowered to notify the owner of such real property or both the ownerand occupant if such property is not owner-occupied or of any open or vacant private property within the Town or the agent of such ownerto properly dispose of litter located on such owner's property which isdangerous to public health, safety, or welfare. Such notice shall be by registered mail addressed to said owner of such real property or boththe owner and occupant if such property is not owner-occupied at his/her last known address. 
B. 	Action upon noncompliance. Upon failure, neglect or refusal of anyowner of such real property or both the owner and occupant if suchproperty is not owner-occupied or the agent so notified to properly dispose of litter dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare withinseven days after receipt of written notice provided for in SubsectionA or within seven days after the date of such notice in the event that the same is returned to the Town by the United States Postal Servicebecause of its inability to make delivery thereof, provided that the samewas properly addressed to the last known address of such owner of such real property or both the owner and occupant if such property isnot owner-occupied or the agent, the Town's Building Official is herebyauthorized and empowered to contract for the disposing of such litter or to order its disposal by the Town. 
C. 	Reimbursement to Town. When the Town has completed the removalof such dangerous litter or has paid for its removal, the actual cost of removal shall be billed to the owner of such real property or boththe owner and occupant if such property is not owner-occupied andshall become due and payable 30 days from the bill date and will incur interest at the rate of 1 1/2% per month until paid. The litter controlcosts shall be assessed as a lien against each affected real propertyto be collected pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 50, Finance and Taxation, § 50-3 of this Code. 
§ 240-18. Violations and penalties.97 
Any violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be a municipal infraction and any violator shall be fined as provided in Chapter 1, Article 
96.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
97.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:515 
II of this Code for each day or fraction thereof during which a violationcontinues. 
1:516 

ARTICLE III 
Refuse, Garbage and Weeds 
§ 240-19. Removal of refuse and weeds required.98 
All owners and occupants of any premises in the Town, whether improved or unimproved, shall keep such premises in a clean, orderly, and sanitarycondition and shall remove therefrom all refuse, including trash, garbage,brush, weeds, grass over 12 inches in height, or any other objectionable matter, whether vegetable, animal, or mineral. 
§ 240-20. Notice to remove; action by Town. [Amended 3-17-2007 byOrd. No. 706-08] 
A. 	In addition to other remedies and penalties provided in this article, inthe case of any owner of such real property, or both the owner andoccupant if such property is not owner-occupied, who neglects to or refuses to comply with the provisions of § 240-19, such owner of suchreal property, or both the owner and occupant if such property is notowner-occupied, shall be notified of such noncompliance by the Town's Building Official and such notice shall be by registered mail addressedto said owner of such real property, or both the owner and occupantif such property is not owner-occupied, at his/her last known address, and if such compliance has not been effected within one week fromthe date of such notice, the Town's Building Official is authorized andempowered to enter upon such premises and perform such acts as are necessary to bring such premises into compliance with the provisionsof such section. 
B. 	When the Town has completed the removal of such refuse, litter and/or weeds or has paid for its removal, the actual cost thereof shall be billedto the owner of such real property, or both the owner and occupant ifsuch property is not owner-occupied, and shall become due and payable 30 days from the bill date and will incur interest at the rate of 1 1/2% per month until paid. The removal costs constitute a lien againsteach affected real property to be collected pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 50, Finance and Taxation, § 50-3 of this Code. 
§ 240-21. Deposit and storage of waste; open burning; infectedmaterials. 
A. 	Except as provided in this article, no person shall throw or deposit anyrefuse, garbage, rubbish, or waste matter of any kind or cause the sameto be thrown or deposited upon any street, alley, gutter, park, waterway, lot or building in the Town. 
B. 	No person shall store, deposit or keep refuse of any kind accessible torodents for feeding, nesting or breeding. 
98.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:517 
C. 	No person shall burn refuse, garbage, rubbish, or waste matter at anyplace or in any manner which would create a health or fire hazard, excessive smoke, noxious odor, or release of toxic substances uponcombustion or which would violate any municipal, county, or state law. 
D. 	Any rags, clothing, bedding, mattresses, shoes and similar materials to be discarded which are known to carry or reasonably suspectedof carrying infections or contagious substances or diseases shall bedisposed of as directed by the appropriate health authorities. 
§ 240-22. Storage of refuse between collection times. 
A. 	During the intervals between refuse collection, but in no event for aperiod exceeding seven days, refuse, including garbage, filth, decayed fruits, vegetables and articles of glass, metal and other material whichmight be dangerous to handle, or any other offensive matter or debris,may be kept within the Town only if the same is placed in sanitary and rodent-proof containers of twenty-gallon maximum volume or in suchother containers as may from time to time be approved by the Directorof Public Works, all containers to be equipped with tight-fitting lids. 
B. 	The period specified in Subsection A above may be shortened if theDirector of Public Works finds that such storage of refuse or wastecreates or tends to create a health hazard, offensive odors, rodent and insect breeding places, dust and unsafe conditions, surface pollution, oran excessive accumulation of waste. In such case, a written notice shall be issued by the Director of Public Works to the owner or occupier of any premises on which such conditions exist specifying the time limitfor removal of such waste material. 
§ 240-23. Keeping of dry trash. 
No dry trash, including but not necessarily limited to newspapers,magazines, wastepaper, and paper cartons, shall be kept within the Townunless the same is tied in bundles or placed in boxes or cartons of gross weight not exceeding 50 pounds and further secured so as to preventscattering. Cardboard boxes which are not used as containers for such trashshall be flattened and tied in bundles. 
§ 240-24. Waste matter from building operations. 
In addition to adherence to other requirements of this article, any person,corporation, contractor or subcontractor owning or engaged in the alteration, repair, construction, excavation, or demolition of a structure,walk, driveway or other appurtenance shall maintain the premises uponwhich such activities are taking place in a clean, orderly, and sanitary condition, shall adopt measures to prevent the scattering of debris, andshall remove and dispose of, at his expense, all refuse, rubbish, or wastematter resulting from such alteration, repair, construction, excavation, or demolition. Such refuse and waste matter shall be removed in a sanitary 
1:518 

manner with seven days of final cessation of work, unless otherwisespecifically authorized by the Director of Public Works. 
§ 240-25. Collection of refuse by Town. 
A. 	The Town shall collect on a regular schedule, without extra charge,all household-originated refuse from single-family dwellings, provided that such dwellings abut on a public right-of-way and that refuse isplaced in approved containers of not less than 20 gallons nor more than32 gallons in volume nor more than 40 pounds in loaded weight and provided further that the containers are placed at the curb of a publicright-of-way permitting loading and passage of collection vehicles. Suchcontainers shall not be placed at the curb before 6:00 p.m. on the day preceding the collection and shall be removed before 9:00 a.m. on theday following the collection. 
B. 	The Town shall collect on a regular schedule, without extra charge, all refuse from institutional, industrial and commercial establishments, apartment houses and condominiums, provided that such establishments abut a public right-of-way and that refuse is placed in approved containers of not less than 20 gallons nor more than 32gallons in volume nor more than 40 pounds in loaded weight andprovided further that the containers are placed at the curb of a public right-of-way permitting loading and passage of collection vehicles. Suchcontainers shall not be placed at the curb before 6:00 p.m. on the daypreceding the collection and shall be removed before 9:00 a.m. on the day following the collection. 
C. 	The Town, acting through the Director of Public Works, shall decline to pick up refuse from institutional, industrial and commercial establishments, apartment houses and condominiums where such refuse regularly exceeds the volume of 10 thirty-two-gallon cans for aninstitutional, industrial or commercial establishment or three cans per unit per collection for an apartment or condominium or when in theopinion of the Director of Public Works the placing of cans at a publiccurb constitutes a nuisance or health hazard or excessively encroaches upon public space or where vehicular entry upon private premises isrequired for collection. In the event that any of the foregoing conditionsexist, the Director may require such institution, industrial or commercial establishment, apartment house or condominium to be serviced by a private contractor. 
D. 	The Town may collect, on an unscheduled basis, at such extra charge, if any, as the Commissioners may from time to time establish, dry yardtrash, leaves, tree trimmings, flattened boxes or wood refuse, providedthat such dry yard trash, leaves, tree trimmings, flattened boxes or wood refuse is bundled, boxed or bagged in bundles, boxes or bags,not exceeding five feet in length, six feet in girth and 50 pounds inweight for each item, and also discarded furniture, appliances, rugs and other bulky items of household trash. Application for such unscheduled 
1:519 

collection should be made to the Department of Public Works, whichwill inform the applicant of the day of collection. 
§ 240-26. Nonexclusive franchises to commercial operators. 
Nonexclusive franchises, renewable annually, may be granted to commercial refuse collectors under the following conditions: 
A. 	The holder of a franchise shall: 
(1) 	
Maintain such compensation and liability insurance as will protectthe Town from any and all claims under workers' compensation acts and from any other claims for damages or for personal injuryor damage to property which may arise from his operations underthe franchise. The public liability and automobile liability insurance shall be not less than $500,000 bodily injury and $100,000 forproperty damage arising out of any occurrence. The holder shallprovide the Town certificates of such insurance. Such certificates shall provide at least 10 days' written notice of cancellation ortermination to the Town of Bel Air, 39 Hickory Avenue, Bel Air,Maryland 21014. 

(2) 	
Provide the Town copies of licenses for vehicles operating withinthe Town evidencing approval, by an agent of the Maryland StateDepartment of Health and Mental Hygiene, of the equipment for hauling refuse. 

(3) 	
Maintain containers provided to customers in a serviceable condition. 

(4) 	
Provide service to customers on a timely basis. 

(5) 	
Provide the Town with a list of customers detailing service provided, i.e., size and number of containers and schedule of pickups, and a route schedule and shall keep the Town informed ofchanges in either. 

(6) 	
Comply with the rules of conduct which have been established by the operator of a landfill to which he is conveying refuse originatingwithin the Town. 

(7) 	
Bear full responsibility for segregating refuse generated by customers located within the corporate limits of the Town of BelAir from that collected outside the corporate limits for purposes ofavoiding fees which may be imposed by the operator of a landfill. Failure to segregate such refuse while operating under the franchise shall be subject to a fine as provided in § 240-29 of thisarticle. Subsequent offenses shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, ofthis Code. [Amended 11-17-2008 by Ord. No. 715-08] 

1:520 


B. 	
Failure on the part of the holder of a franchise to comply with any one ofthe above conditions will be deemed sufficient cause for the voidance of the franchise. The purpose of granting a franchise is to grant the holderthe right to avoid tipping fees charged by Harford County. Commercial refuse collectors are free to collect refuse within the Town. [Amended11-17-2008 by Ord. No. 715-08] 


§ 240-27. Transporting waste over streets. 
No garbage, trash, or debris shall be transported, conveyed or hauled over streets or highways unless the same shall be in covered containers or acovered vehicle or, if carried in an open vehicle, held down by a netted wirecovering or any other covering of sufficient weight and size to prevent the blowing, scattering, or dropping of the garbage, trash or debris. 
§ 240-28. Rules and regulations. 
The Commissioners may, from time to time, by resolution, adopt reasonable and uniform rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of this article. 
§ 240-29. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-17-2008 by Ord.No. 715-08] 
Any violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be a municipalinfraction and any violator shall be fined as provided in Chapter 1, ArticleII, of this Code for each day or fraction thereof during which a violation continues. 
1:521 

ARTICLE IV 
Recycling Plan
[Amended 5-19-2008 by Ord. No. 708-08; 9-7-2010 by Ord. No.
733-10] 

§ 240-30. Adoption of Recycling Plan. 
A. 	In 1992 the Town developed and legislated a plan for the purposeof complying with the spirit and intent of the Maryland RecyclingAct to protect our environment, to conserve and preserve our natural resources and to save energy within the Town of Bel Air. The Town'splan is incorporated as Appendix D in the current Harford County,Maryland, Solid Waste Management Plan 2005-2014 pursuant to § 9-504 of the Environment Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland,saving and excepting such portions as are deleted, modified or amended by this article, and the same is hereby adopted and made part of this article with the same force and effect as though set out in fullherein. 
B. 	The plan features a voluntary program primarily designed for all residential properties and incorporates curbside collection of glass,metal and plastic containers, paper products, white goods, and yardwaste. The recycling of used motor oil, antifreeze, and batteries is also addressed herein. Furthermore, the plan addresses the collection ofrecyclable materials from the governmental institutions of the Town ofBel Air. The Town of Bel Air has for many years provided solid waste collection services to its residences and the Town's institutions. The collection of recyclable materials from these entities is, therefore, alogical extension of the existing program. 
C. 	The plan also provides for the collection of recyclable materials frominstitutional, apartment, condominium and some small commercial establishments. Most commercial waste within the Town of Bel Air has traditionally been collected by independent private haulers. Thesehaulers are subject to the same recycling requirements as those imposed by Harford County on the other haulers active throughout the county. All private haulers are required to offer recycling optionsto their clients. Larger commercial businesses often choose to recycledirectly to the markets. 
D. 	Beginning in September 2010 the Town will adopt a "single stream"recycling plan in conjunction with Harford County. Under this new program both fiberous (paper) and nonfiberous (glass, plastic, metal) recyclables can be combined in a designated container for pickup andno longer need to be separated. Further information on the Town'srefuse collection program and schedule can be found at http://www.belairmd.org/departments/publicworks/recyclingrefuse.asp. 
§ 240-31. Collection of recyclables. 

1:523 

A. 

B. 

C. 

Collection of recyclables is an integral component of the overall Town-wide refuse collection operation. Household refuse will be collected on Monday and Tuesday of each week and recyclables on Thursday andFriday. If the scheduled household collection day falls on a Mondayholiday, refuse will be collected on Tuesday and Wednesday. If the recyclable collection day falls on a holiday, recyclable collection isextended to Saturday. The Department of Public Works will publish anddistribute a collection flyer highlighting the holiday pickup schedule along with a calendar annually for the upcoming year. Eligibleproperties are those that abut a public right-of-way, have curbsideaccess and comply with criteria in Article III of this chapter. 
The following items shall be collected as part of the recycling program: 
(1) 	
Single stream curbside collection of bimetal, steel, aluminum, glassand plastic containers, as well as all paper products to include corrugated cardboard and newspapers from residential propertiesand Town facilities (see Subsection C below). 

(2) 	
Curbside collection of grass clippings, leaves, brush and loose limbs from all residential properties receiving trash collectionservices from the Town of Bel Air. 

(3) 	
Curbside collection of recyclable white goods from all residential properties receiving trash collection services from the Town of BelAir. 

(4) 	
Apartments, condominiums and townhomes having convenient access to public curbs are provided with co-mingled and whitegoods recycling pickup by the Town. 

(5) 	
Private haulers offer apartment, condominium and apartment complexes co-mingled recycling pickup service. 

(6) 	
Used oil, antifreeze and batteries at a state-and county-sponsoredand -maintained facility located at the entrance of the Bel Air Public Works Facility at 705 East Churchville Road. This dropoff point isaccessible to the public 24 hours a day. 

Recyclables shall be placed at curbside by eligible residential property owners. Town Public Works refuse employees will collect recyclables inaccordance with the published annual schedule. Types of recyclablesand method of collection are as follows: 

(1) 	
Co-mingled recyclables. 


(a) 	Allowed: All food and beverage jars and bottles of all colors.Plastic containers with No. 1 through No. 7 inside the triangle on or near the bottom, such as soda and detergent bottlesand milk jugs, wide-mouth tubs and trays. Rigid plastics whichinclude milk/soda crates, plastic buckets, plastic laundry baskets, plastic lawn furniture, plastic totes/drums/coolers, 
1:524 

plastic flower pots, plastic drinking cups, plastic toys. Metalcans (aluminum and tin/steel); this includes all beverage and food cans and clean aluminum foil and pie plates/pans. 
(b) 	
Not allowed: Caps or bottle tops, window glass, drinkingglasses, dishes or ceramics, light bulbs, or mirrors. Styrofoam, plastic cutlery, construction/demolition materials, colored plastic film, plastic grocery bags. Aluminum/vinyl siding,aluminum window frames, or scrap metal of any type. 

(c) 	
Rinse glass, plastic, and metal and place together with paperrecyclables in a clearly marked recycling container or trash can. 


(2) 	
Paper recyclables. 

(a) 	
Allowed: newspapers and inserts, magazines, catalogs, junkmail, books, brown paper bags, cleaned/rinsed gable-top milk and juice cartons, paperboard boxes (examples: cereal andshirt boxes), telephone books, nonmetallic gift wrap, shredded paper (bagged and sealed) and flattened corrugated cardboard. 

(b) 	
Not allowed: food-contaminated, waxed, laminated or carbon paper, used paper towels and tissues, metallic wrapping paper, loose shredded paper. 

(c) 	
Place all paper items together with co-mingled recyclables ina clearly marked recycling container or trash can. Flattened corrugated cardboard can be set beside the recyclingcontainer. 



(3) 	
Following the recycling schedule, place recycling container at curb no earlier than 6:00 p.m. on the evening before your recycling day. 


D. 	Yard waste consisting of grass clippings, leaves and brush will bepicked up according to the published schedule. Request for pickup of loose limbs and brush must be phoned in at least 24 hours priorto the scheduled pickup day [limbs are chipped by the Town's refusecollection personnel and transported to the Harford Waste Disposal Center (HWDC)]. Bagged leaves and grass clippings will be pickedup (no call necessary) on Wednesdays, Thursdays or Fridays in areasaccording to the published schedule. Any bagged leaves and/or grass clippings not picked up on the scheduled day will be picked up onthe day of the following week. No yard waste collection service willbe provided on holidays. Grass clippings and leaves must be placed in plastic bags, except that loose leaves will be collected according to thepublished schedule each fall from October 1 through December 31 andin the spring during the first two full weeks in April. 
E. 	Collection of recyclable white goods will be made upon request. 
1:525 

§ 240-32. Processing of recyclables. 
All recyclable items collected in the Town of Bel Air are processed by the Harford Waste Disposal Center's Office of Recycling. All curbsiderecyclables, white goods and yard waste are processed or transferred atthe HWDC facility located at 3241 Scarboro Road, Street, Maryland. Used motor oil/antifreeze dropoff locations are maintained by Harford Countyand those recycled products are collected and processed by MarylandEnvironmental Services (MES). Further information about the county's waste collection and recycling program and services can be found on theenvironmental affairs web page at http://www.harfordcountymd.gov/dpw/envaffairs. 
1:526 

ARTICLE V 
Miscellaneous Regulations 
§ 240-33. Abandonment of refrigerators and other containers. 
Whenever a refrigerator, icebox or other container which cannot be opened from the inside is stored or disposed of so that it is located in a placeaccessible to the general public or children, the owner or person on whosepremises the same has been removed, stored or located shall remove either the doors or catches or locks to such doors so that in no manner may anysuch container doors remain locked or fixed, whether or not its doors have been removed. 
§ 240-34. Wrecked and inoperative motor vehicles. 
A. 	It shall be unlawful to park, store or leave or to permit the parking,storing or leaving of any motor vehicle, or part or parts thereof, which is in a wrecked, junked, partially dismantled, or inoperative condition,whether or not attended, upon any private or public property in theTown for a period longer than 30 continuous days. If the vehicle, or part or parts, is completely enclosed within a building, or is completelyscreened from public view where it will not be visible from a publicstreet or other private property, or is stored in a regularly constituted junkyard, or has an untagged vehicle permit issued by the Departmentof Planning and Community Development, it is not included within the scope of this section. [Amended 11-17-2008 by Ord. No. 715-08] 
B. 	No violation shall accrue until service of a written notice by registered or certified mail to the property owner or owners or any one of themby the Town of Bel Air giving the property owner or owners 15 days todiscontinue the unlawful nuisance herein defined. 
C. 	A violation of this section is a nuisance and a municipal infractiondetrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of theTown. It is the duty of the owner of the motor vehicle and also the owner of the private property or the lessee or other person in possession ofthe private property upon which the motor vehicle, or part or parts, islocated to remove it from the private property or to have it housed in a building or screened from public view where it will not be visible froma public street or other private property. 
D. 	Any violation of any of the provisions of this section shall be a municipal infraction and any violator shall be fined as provided in Chapter 1,Article II, of this Code for each day or fraction thereof during which a violation continues. [Amended 11-17-2008 by Ord. No. 715-08] 
E. 	The Police Department is authorized to remove vehicles in violation ofthis section in accordance with Title 25, Subtitle 2 of the Transportation Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland. [Amended 11-17-2008 by Ord. No. 715-08] 
1:527 

F. 	This section does not apply or refer to motor vehicles, or part or parts, in a regularly operated gasoline service station, garage or motor vehicle junkyard or graveyard. 
1:528 

§ 240-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS 	§ 246-2 
Chapter 246 
HISTORIC PRESERVATION 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Tax credit for historic preservation — See Ch. Building construction — See Ch. 145. 
50. 
§ 246-1. Policy and objectives; assistance from other organizations. 
A. 	The preservation of sites, structures and districts of historic, archaeological and architectural significance together with their appurtenances and environmental settings is a public policy of Bel Air.In accomplishing this policy the following objectives are sought to be attained: 
(1) 	
To preserve and enhance the quality of life. 

(2) 	
To safeguard the historical and cultural heritage of the Town of Bel Air by preserving the sites, structures or districts therein whichreflect elements of its cultural, social, economic, political,archaeological or architectural history. 

(3) 	
To stabilize and improve property values of such sites, structuresor districts. 

(4) 	
To foster civic beauty. 

(5) 	
To strengthen the local economy. 

(6) 	
To promote the use, preservation and appreciation of such historicsites, structures and districts for the education, welfare and pleasure of the residents of Bel Air. 


B. 	The Board of Town Commissioners of the Town of Bel Air and the Historic Preservation Commission may seek and obtain the advice and assistance of the Maryland Historic Trust, the Harford County HistoricPreservation Commission, the Historical Society of Harford County,Inc., and other organizations or individuals qualified by interest, training and experience in achieving the purposes of this chapter. 
§ 246-2. Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
ALTERATION — Any exterior change that would affect the historic, archaeological or architectural significance of a designated site or structure, any portion of which is visible or intended to be visible from 
1:529 

a public way, including but not limited to construction, reconstruction,moving or demolition. 
APPURTENANCES AND ENVIRONMENTAL SETTINGS — Include but are not limited to walkways and driveways (whether paved or not), trees,landscaping, pasture, cropland, waterways and rocks. When used in this chapter, the word "structure" shall also be determined to include the words"appurtenances and environmental settings." 
CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL — The official form indicating the Historic Preservation Commission's affirmative action on a request to alter, repair,modify, renovate, construct, demolish or otherwise alter all or a portion of ahistorically designated property or structure. 
DEMOLITION — Includes any willful neglect in maintenance and repair ofa structure, not including any appurtenances and environmental settings,that does not result from financial inability to maintain and repair the structure and that threatens to result in any substantial deterioration of theexterior features of the structure. 
EXTERIOR FEATURES — The architectural style, design and general arrangement of the exterior of a historic structure which includes appurtenances and environmental settings, including the color, nature andtexture of building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs or similar items found on or related to the exterior of ahistoric structure. 
HISTORIC DISTRICT — A significant concentration, linkage or continuity of sites, structures or objects united historically, architecturally, archaeologically, culturally, or aesthetically by plan or physicaldevelopment, the preservation of which is deemed to be for the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the inhabitants of Bel Air. A historic district shall include all property within its boundaries as definedand designated by resolution of the Board of Town Commissioners. 
ROUTINE MAINTENANCE — Work that does not alter the exterior fabric or features of a site, structure, or appurtenances and environmental settingsand has no material effect on the historic, archaeological or architectural significance of the historic site or structure. 
SITE — The location of an event of historic significance or of a structure,whether standing or ruined, which possesses historic, archaeological or cultural significance. 
STRUCTURE — A combination of material to form a construction that is stable, including but not limited to stadiums, reviewing stands, platforms, staging, observation towers, radio towers, buildings, water tanks and towers, trestles, bridges, piers, paving, bulkheads, wharves, sheds, coalbins, shelters, fences and display signs, visible or intended to be visible from a public way. The term "structure" shall be construed as if followed by thewords "or part thereof." 
§ 246-3. Historic Preservation Commission. 
1:530 

A. Creation. There is hereby created a commission to be known as the"Historic Preservation Commission." 
B. 

C. 

D. 

E. 

Membership. The Historic Preservation Commission shall have a membership of not fewer than five nor more than seven persons. Amajority of members of the Historic Preservation Commission shall be residents of Bel Air. Each member should possess a demonstratedinterest, specific knowledge or professional or academic training insuch fields as history, architecture, architectural history, planning, archaeology, anthropology, curation, conservation, landscapearchitecture, historic preservation, urban design, or related discipline.At least two members of the Historic Preservation Commission shall possess professional or academic training in one or more of the above-listed fields in accordance with the minimum professional requirementsof the United States Department of the Interior for certifying local governments under 36 CFR 61. 
Historic Preservation Commission membership qualification criteria.The requirement for Historic Preservation Commission membership under the category of demonstrated special interest may be satisfiedeither by formal training in one or more of the fields listed in SubsectionB of this section or active membership in a preservation-related organization. The requirement for membership under the category ofspecific knowledge may be satisfied by formal postsecondary education,employment or practical experience in one or more of the above-listed fields. The requirement for Historic Preservation Commission membership under the category of professional or academic training may be satisfied by, at a minimum, two years' experience as a professional or a bachelor's degree in one or more of the above-listedfields. 
Terms. The members shall be appointed by the Board of Town Commissioners for terms of three years, except that in making theinitial appointments, some appointments shall be established for lessthan three years in order that as these initial terms expire all appointments shall be for three years and shall not expire at the sametime. Members of the Historic Preservation Commission are eligible forreappointment. 
Vacancy. Any vacancy in the membership of the Historic PreservationCommission caused by the expiration of a term, resignation, death,incapacity to discharge duties, removal for cause, or any other reason shall be filled for a new term, or for the remainder of the term for which there is a vacancy, as the case may be, in the same manneras provided herein for the appointment of the initial members of the Historic Preservation Commission. Any vacancy on the Historic Preservation Commission shall be filled by the appointing authoritywithin 60 days. In the case of expiration of term, a member may continue to serve until the member's successor is appointed.Unexcused absence at three or more consecutive meetings shall be 
1:531 

cause for removal, and the Board of Town Commissioners may remove a member for cause. [Amended 11-17-2008 by Ord. No. 715-08] 
F. 	Officers. The Historic Preservation Commission shall select from its membership a Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson. The Chairperson and Vice Chairperson shall serve a term of one year, shall perform suchduties as the Historic Preservation Commission may prescribe and shallbe eligible for reelection. 
G. 	Compensation. The members of the Historic Preservation Commissionshall serve without compensation but shall be reimbursed for necessaryexpenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
H. 	Meetings. The Historic Preservation Commission shall hold such regular meetings and hearings as necessary to discharge its duties,but not less than quarterly. The Historic Preservation Commission shall hold special meetings at the call of the Chairperson or of any threemembers of the Historic Preservation Commission. 
I. 	Rules of procedure; quorum. The rules of procedure shall also be available for public inspection. Three members shall constitute a quorum. 
§ 246-4. Designation of historic site, structure or district.[Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 728-09] 
The Historic Preservation Commission is authorized and empowered, afterconsultation with the Department of Planning and Community Development of the Town of Bel Air, and upon making full and proper study, to recommendany property, structure or area within the limits of the Town of Bel Air as aproposed historic site, structure or district and to determine the boundary lines of any such site, structure or district. The Historic Preservation Commission shall prepare a resolution setting forth its recommendeddesignation of a site, structure or district as historic and shall cause such resolution to be introduced to the Board of Town Commissioners for appropriate action. No property, structure or area shall be deemed to be anhistoric site, structure or district unless and until it has been so designated by a resolution of the Board of Town Commissioners. The process for designation is as follows: 
A. 	The criteria for designation as an historic site, structure or district is as follows: 
(1) 	
The Historic Preservation Commission shall conduct a publichearing to consider designation of a site, structure or district In determining its recommendation for such designation, the Commission shall consider the significance of this site, structure orarea in local, regional or American history. 

(2) 	
In evaluating historical significance, the Commission shall determine whether the site, structure or area is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad 


1:532 

pattern of our history, or whether the site, structure or area isassociated with the lives of persons significant in the Town's past. 
(3) 	
In considering architectural significance, the Commission shalldetermine whether the site, structure or area embodies distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method of construction, or represents the work of a master or possesses high artistic values or represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction. The Commission shall also consider the integrity of design, setting, materials and workmanship of the site structure or area. 

(4) 	
In considering archeological significance, the Commission shall determine whether the site, structure or area has yielded or maybe likely to yield information important in history or prehistory. 


B. 	At least 10 days prior to a scheduled public hearing, the Historic Preservation Commission shall send written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing to the owner(s) of the proposed historic site,structure or area and to those agencies, organizations and citizens which the Commission determines may have an Interest In the proceedings. Further, the historic site, structure or area's propertyshall be posted at least 14 days prior to the scheduled public hearing with a sign identifying the historic site, structure or area and listingthe date, time and place of the public hearing and giving instructionsfor obtaining further information. A notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be posted in a newspaper of general circulation inthe jurisdiction at least seven days prior to the public hearing. If anapplication for historic site designation has been filed, the Commission shall schedule a public hearing and make public its decision. Within 45days after the filing of an application or, in the event the record is leftopen by the Commission, within 15 days after the close of the record, the Commission shall make Its decision public. No record shall be heldopen for longer than seven calendar days, without the consent of theapplicant The time period for Commission action may be extended with the written consent of the applicant. 
C. 	Upon completion of the public hearing process, the Historic Preservation Commission shall determine whether the site, structure or area should be designated as historic. If the decision is favorable, theHistoric Preservation Commission shall submit its recommendation to the Bel Air Board of Town Commissioners including its specific reasons for recommendation and provide the Board of Town Commissionerswith a proposed resolution for designation of a site, structure or districtas historic. The Board of Town Commissioners shall consider approval or denial of the proposed resolution for designation of a site, structure or district based on the Historic Preservation Commission recommendation. 
1:533 

§ 246-5. Commission powers and duties. 
In addition to the authority to recommend areas for historic preservation designation, the Historic Preservation Commission shall have the followingpowers and duties: 
A. 	To acquire, develop and preserve historic or cultural properties, buildings, fixtures, furnishings, facilities, collections and appurtenances, with approval of the Board of Town Commissioners. 
B. 	To acquire and hold real and personal property of historic or cultural significance by purchase, gift, devise or bequest and to preserve andadminister such properties, with approval of the Board of Town Commissioners. 
C. 	To accept gifts, grants, legacies, bequests and endowments for anypurpose, with approval of the Board of Town Commissioners, as setforth in § 246-1 hereof. 
D. 	To accept or otherwise acquire historic preservation easements on properties located in or adjacent to a locally designated historic districtupon approval by the Board of Town Commissioners. 
E. 	To direct studies, reports and surveys to identify historical, archaeological or architecturally significant sites, structures and districts that exemplify the cultural, social, economic, political or architectural history of the Town of Bel Air, State of Maryland or thenation. 
F. 	To prescribe appropriate rules and regulations for the transaction of business. 
G. 	To adopt rehabilitation and new construction design guidelines andcriteria for construction, alteration, reconstruction, moving and/or demolition of structures and/or districts consistent with those generallyrecognized by the Maryland Historic Trust. These guidelines shall beused by the Historic Preservation Commission in review of applications. 
H. 	To perform all the functions and duties as set forth in Article 66B, § 8.01et seq. of the Maryland Annotated Code, as amended from time to time. 
I. 	To undertake any action or activity necessary or appropriate to the implementation of its powers and duties and the implementation of thepurpose of this chapter. 
§ 246-6. Certificate of approval. 
A. 	Application for certificate. Before the construction, alteration, repair,moving or demolition of a structure is undertaken on any designatedsite or structure within a designated district, if an exterior change is involved which would affect the historic, archaeological or architecturalsignificance of a designated site within a designated district, anyportion of which will be visible from public way, the person, firm, or 
1:534 

B. 

C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 

corporation proposing to make such change shall file with the HistoricPreservation Commission, through the Department of Planning and Community Development, an application for a certificate of approvalto construct, alter, repair, move or demolish the site or structure. Every such application shall be referred to and considered by the Historic Preservation Commission and accepted or rejected by theHistoric Preservation Commission. An application which is substantiallyidentical to a rejected application may not be resubmitted to the Commission within one year after rejection. No permit for any suchchange may be granted until the Historic Preservation Commission hasacted thereon as hereinafter provided. 
Application review. In reviewing applications, the Historic PreservationCommission shall give consideration to: 
(1) 	
The historic, archaeological or architectural significance of the site or structure and its relationship to the historic, archaeological orarchitectural significance of the surrounding area; 

(2) 	
The relationship of the exterior architectural features of the structure to the remainder of the structure and to the surrounding area; 

(3) 	
The general compatibility of the proposed exterior design, scale, proportion, arrangement, texture and materials to the site or structure and to the surrounding area; and 

(4) 	
Any other factors, including aesthetic factors, which the Historic Preservation Commission deems to be pertinent. 


The Historic Preservation Commission shall consider only exteriorfeatures of a structure and shall not consider any interior arrangements. 
The Historic Preservation Commission shall not disapprove an application except with respect to the several factors specified in Subsection B above. 
The Historic Preservation Commission shall be strict in its judgmentof plans for those sites or structures determined by research to be of historic, archaeological or architectural significance. The HistoricPreservation Commission shall be lenient in its judgment of plans forsites or structures of little historic, archaeological or architectural significance or for plans involving new construction, unless such planswould seriously impair the historic, archaeological or architectural significance of surrounding sites or structures. The Historic Preservation Commission is not required to limit new construction,alteration, or repairs to the architectural style of any one period. 
If an application for a certificate of approval is submitted for construction, reconstruction or alteration affecting a site or the exteriorof a structure or for the moving or demolition of a structure, the 
1:535 

G. 
H. 
I. 
preservation of which the Historic Preservation Commission considersto be of unusual importance to Harford County or the Town of Bel Air, or unusual importance to the entire state or nation, the HistoricPreservation Commission shall attempt with the owner of the structureto formulate an economically feasible plan for the preservation of the site or structure. Unless in these circumstances the Historic Preservation Commission is satisfied that the proposed construction,alteration, or reconstruction will not materially impair the historic, archaeological or architectural significance of the site or structure, theHistoric Preservation Commission shall reject the application, filing acopy of its rejection with the Building Official.99 
If an application for a certificate of approval is submitted for construction, reconstruction or alteration or for moving or demolition ofa site or structure that the Historic Preservation Commission considers to be of unusual importance and no economically feasible plan can beformulated, the Historic Preservation Commission shall have 90 daysfrom the time it concludes that no economically feasible plan can be formulated to negotiate with the owner and other parties in an effort tofind a means of preserving the site or structure. Where the demolitionof a site or structure is approved hereunder, the Historic Preservation Commission may require plans for construction of a replacementbuilding in accordance with powers granted under this section in orderto preserve the historic, architectural and property value of sites or structures of the surrounding area. 
In the case of a structure considered to be valuable for its historic, archaeological or architectural significance, the Historic Preservation Commission may approve the proposed construction, reconstruction oralteration, moving or demolition despite the fact that the changes comewithin the provisions of Subsection F above if: 
(1) 	
The site or structure is a deterrent to a major improvementprogram which will be of substantial benefit to the Town of Bel Air; 

(2) 	
Retention of the site or structure would cause undue financial hardship to the owners; or 

(3) 	
The retention of the site or structure would not be in the best interests of a majority of persons in the community. 


No construction, reconstruction or alteration of the exterior of any siteor structure or the moving or demolition of a site or structure shallbe permitted on a property after the Historic Preservation Commission has served notice on the affected property owner that the historicpreservation designation process has begun, as defined in this section,without the approval of the Historic Preservation Commission. Application for such approval shall be made to the Historic PreservationCommission. The Historic Preservation Commission shall act on the 
99.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:536 
proposed designation as hereinafter provided. The Historic Preservation Commission shall have 45 days from the date of such application for approval either to grant such approval or to introducea designation resolution on the proposed historic site or district tothe Board of Town Commissioners in accordance with § 246-4 of this chapter. A building permit shall be issued if, at the end of such 45days, the Historic Preservation Commission has not either grantedsuch approval or submitted said designation resolution. If a designation resolution is introduced to the Board of Town Commissioners during theforty-five-day period, no building permit shall be issued until the Boardacts on said resolution. If the Board rejects the resolution, the building permit shall be issued immediately thereafter. If the Board passes theresolution, the applicant shall follow permit requirements for a historicdistrict property as herein described. 
J. 	The Historic Preservation Commission shall file with the BuildingOfficial a certificate of its approval, modification, or rejection of allapplications and plans submitted to it for review. Work shall not be commenced on any such project until such a certificate of approvalhas been filed, and the Building Official shall not issue a buildingpermit for such change or construction unless and until he has received such a certificate of approval. The failure of the Historic PreservationCommission to act upon an application within 45 days from the date theapplication was filed with the Historic Preservation Commission shall be deemed to constitute automatic approval of the proposed changesunless an extension of this forty-five-day period is agreed upon mutuallyby the applicant and the Historic Preservation Commission.100 
K. 	Routine maintenance. Nothing in this chapter shall be taken or construed to prevent routine maintenance that does not alter theexterior fabric or features of a designated site, structure or district, customary farming operations or landscaping which will have no material effect on the historic, archaeological or architectural significance of a designated site, structure or district. Nothing in this chapter affects the right to complete any work covered by a permit orauthorization issued prior to the effective date of this chapter. 
§ 246-7. Demolition by neglect. 
A. 	In the event of demolition by neglect, the Historic Preservation Commission may request the Department of Planning and CommunityDevelopment to notify, in writing, the property owner of record, any person having a right, title or interest therein, and the occupant orother person responsible for the maintenance of the property of thedeterioration. The notice shall specify the minimum items of repair or maintenance necessary to correct the deterioration or prevent furtherdeterioration. 
100.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:537 
B. 	Prior to the issuance of a written notice, the Historic Preservation Commission may request the Department of Planning and Community Development to establish a record of demolition by neglect. Such arecord may include dated materials such as photographs and writtenreports of the condition of the property so as to record or measure the deterioration. 
C. 	The notice shall provide that corrective action shall commence within30 days of the receipt of said notice and be completed within a reasonable time thereafter. The notice shall state that the owner of record of the property, or any person of record with any right, title,or interest therein, may, within 10 days after the receipt of the notice, request a hearing on the necessity of the items and conditions contained in the notice. In the event a public hearing is requested, itshall be held by the Historic Preservation Commission upon 30 days' written notice being mailed to all persons of record with any right, titleor interest in the property and to all citizens and organizations whichthe Historic Preservation Commission determines may have an interest in the proceedings. 
D. 	If, after the public hearing, the Historic Preservation Commissiondetermines that the corrective actions remain necessary, the Historic Preservation Commission may request that the Department of Planningand Community Development issue a final notice detailing the corrective action which shall commence within 30 days from the date of the hearing decision and be completed within a reasonable timethereafter. 
E. 	Upon failure, neglect, or refusal of the property owner or other responsible person, duly notified, to take the corrective action specifiedin the final notice within the time required, the Historic PreservationCommission may request that the Department of Planning and Community Development institute any of the remedies and penaltiesprovided by law for such violations. 
§ 246-8. Maryland Historical Trust report. 
The Historic Preservation Commission may designate the MarylandHistorical Trust to make an analysis of and report recommending thepreservation of sites, structures, or districts of historic, archaeological, architectural, or cultural significance within the Town of Bel Air. The reportmay include proposed boundaries of sites, structures, or districts, as well asrecommendations for the identification and designation of particular sites, structures, or districts to be preserved. 
§ 246-9. Appeals. [Amended 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 728-09] 
In the event that any party is aggrieved by a decision of the Historic Preservation Commission, the party has the right to appeal to the CircuitCourt of Harford County as authorized by Section 4.08(f) of Article 66B ofthe Annotated Code of Maryland. An appeal to the Circuit Court shall be 
1:538 

taken in accordance with Rules 7-201 through 7-211 of Title 7 Chapter 200of Maryland Rules of Procedure. In the alternative, the party may appeal to the Bel Air Board of Appeals as authorized by Section 8.15 of Article66B of the Annotated Code of Maryland. An appeal to the Board of Appealsshall be taken in accordance with Section 15.03.A of the Town of Bel Air Development Regulations. Appeals must be filed within 30 days from thedate of the Historic Preservation Commission's decision. 
§ 246-10. Commission meetings. 
All meetings of the Historic Preservation Commission shall be open to thepublic. Any interested person or his representative is entitled to appearand be heard by the Historic Preservation Commission before it reaches a decision on any matter. The Historic Preservation Commission shall keep anopen record of its resolutions, proceedings, and actions which shall be keptavailable for a period of three years for public inspection during reasonable business hours. 
§ 246-11. Rules and regulations. 
The Historic Preservation Commission shall have the authority to prescribe appropriate rules and regulations in order to carry out the purpose andintent of this chapter. 
§ 246-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-17-2008 by Ord.No. 715-08] 
A violation of this chapter shall be deemed a municipal infraction punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II of this Code. Each and every day that the violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.Violations and fees shall be cumulative. 
Chapter 252 
HOTELS, MOTELS AND BOARDINGHOUSES 
§ 252-1. Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
BOARDINGHOUSE — Lodging or rooming houses providing sleepingaccommodations. Lodging or rooming houses include buildings in which separate sleeping rooms are rented providing sleeping accommodations oneither a transient or permanent basis, with or without meals being offeredor with separate cooking facilities for individual occupants. 
HOTEL — Includes a building or group of buildings under the same management in which there are sleeping accommodations for hire, primarily used by transients who are lodged with or without meals, whether designated as a hotel, inn, club, motel or by any other name. So-called 
1:539 

"apartment hotels" shall be classified as hotels because they are potentiallysubject to transient occupancy like that of hotels. 
MOTEL — A building or group of buildings under the same managementin which there are sleeping accommodations for hire used primarily fortransient occupancy with individual entrances from outside to service each of the guest rooms, including but not limited to a motor lodge or tourist court. 
§ 252-2. Registration information. 
The proprietor or manager of any hotel, motel or boardinghouse as definedabove shall require the following information of any person or personsregistering for a room: 
A. 	Full name of the individual registering. 
B. 	Names of any other persons in the party with the registrant. 
C. 	Verification of the registrant's name through driver's license, military identification, or other such identifying material with the number ofsaid identification card being recorded on the registration. 
D. 	Description of any vehicle being driven by the registrant, including license number. 
E. 	Permanent home residence of the registrant, verified through driver'slicense, registration card for motor vehicle or some other means of identification. 
§ 252-3. Review of registration records. 
The owner, manager or operator of any hotel, motel or boardinghouse shall provide and make available to police officers of the Town of Bel Air, Stateof Maryland or any federal police agency registration records of said hotel,motel or boardinghouse upon request of any police officer. 
§ 252-4. Registration required. 
It shall be unlawful for any hotel, motel or boardinghouse owner, manager or operator to allow registration in any hotel, motel or boardinghouse without the above information being obtained prior to issuance of keys fora hotel, motel or boardinghouse room. 
§ 252-5. Violations and penalties.101 
Any person convicted of the above violation shall be deemed guilty of amisdemeanor and shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1,Article II of this Code. 
101.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:540 
Chapter 265 
PUBLIC FACILITIES, ADEQUATE 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Development Regulations — See Ch. 165. Sewers — See Ch. 397. 
Fees and costs — See Ch. 192. Stormwater Management — See Ch. 405. 

§ 265-1. Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter to minimize the burden of infrastructure costs necessitated by new development in and around the Town of Bel Air and tocoordinate the need for public works with proposed growth. 
§ 265-2. Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall be used: 
BENEFITTING PROPERTY — A parcel of land that is not developed or a parcel of land with less than 50% of its available area utilized for development that benefits from a necessary improvement. 
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM (CIP) — The schedule of capitalimprovements to be undertaken as adopted in the current fiscal year's Town Budget. 
CONSTRUCTION COST — The cost of a development directly associatedwith construction, including labor, material, equipment and administration. 
DIRECTOR — The Town of Bel Air Director of Public Works. 
IMPACT REQUIREMENT — Any improvement obligation required as a condition of approval when all or any portion of the improvement is intended to satisfy the impact of a development on the adequate capacity ofpublic facilities. 
IMPROVEMENT COST — The cost of required infrastructure construction, including labor, material, equipment, engineering, right-of-way acquisitionand administration. 
NECESSARY IMPROVEMENTS — Infrastructure improvements required by the development as determined by the Director of Public Works. 
OFF SITE — Not located on the property that is the subject of a development application. 
§ 265-3. Necessary improvements. 
Any applicant changing a use constructing or expanding residential, commercial, institutional or industrial properties or buildings shall be responsible for the cost of providing necessary improvements for water, 
1:541 

sewerage, drainage facilities, and other improvements, including land andeasements, located off site of the development but necessitated by the development. The capacity and design of proposed improvements shallbe based upon engineering analysis by the applicant as required by theDepartment of Public Works and Department of Planning. The analysis shall be reviewed and approved using the Harford County Water and SewerMaster Plan, Harford County Water and Sewer Design Guidelines, Community Facilities Element of the adopted Comprehensive Plan, and Capital Improvement Program (CIP) as a basis for review of proposed improvements. 
§ 265-4. Allocation of costs. 
A. 	Full allocation. In cases where off-site improvements are necessitatedby the proposed development and no other property owner(s) receive(s)a benefit thereby, an applicant is required, at his/her sole expense and as a condition of site plan or subdivision approval, to provideand install such improvements. In addition, in cases where more thanone property receives benefit from the off-site improvement and the estimated improvement cost is less than $100,000 or less than 10% ofthe estimated construction cost (whichever is greater), the developeris required, at his/her sole expense and as a condition of site plan or subdivision plat approval, to install such improvements. 
B. 	Allocation recoupment. In cases where more than one property willreceive benefit from the off-site improvement and the estimated improvement cost is more than $100,000 or more than 10% of theestimated construction cost (whichever is greater), an applicant is required, at his/her expense and as a condition of site plan or subdivision approval, to provide and install such improvements. Anapplicant may enter into a recoupment agreement, to be approved bythe Director, to determine fair reimbursement at such time as other benefitting properties are developed. The projected development yieldwill be established by the Director based upon the usable land areawithin each benefitting property. The allocation formula cited in § 265-4D shall be utilized in determining the proportionate share of thecost of such improvements attributable to each benefitting property. 
C. 	Delayed allocation. If it is determined that an applicant is unable to provide the necessary improvement because of the inability to acquireright-of-way, the physical constraints of a property, or state/federalregulations beyond the control of the applicant, then the applicant shall place 125% of the improvement cost in an interest-bearing escrowaccount administered by the Town until such time as the improvementcan be constructed. Any balance remaining after completion of and approval of construction by the Director shall be refunded to theapplicant. If the improvement cannot be constructed within 15 years,all monies and interest shall be returned to the applicant. However, the Town will not allow a sanitary connection to proceed without thenecessary improvement in place when engineering analysis indicates 
1:542 

that a hydraulic overload of the system occurs during wet conditionsthat causes a sanitary overflow downstream. 
D. 	Allocation assessment. 
(1) 	Sanitary sewers. The applicant's responsibility for his/her/itsproportionate share of new collection facilities, including but not limited to the installation, relocation, or replacement of collector,trunk, and interceptor sewers, right-of-way acquisition and associated appurtenances, shall be computed as follows: 
(a) 	
The capacity and the design of the sanitary sewer system shallbe based on the standards specified in the Town StandardSpecifications and Details. 

(b) 	
As required by the Director, the applicant shall provide theTown with the existing and anticipated peak-hour flows, dailyflows, as well as capacity limits of the affected sewer system. 

(c) 	
If the Director determines that the existing off-site system doesnot have adequate capacity to accommodate the applicant'sflow given existing and anticipated peak-hour flows, the applicant is responsible for the necessary improvement. If theimprovement meets the criteria of § 265-4B, the benefittingproperty's share shall be computed as follows: 


Benefitting Property Sewer 
Requirement Total Estimated Impact 
= 	X Improvement CostRequirement ($) ($) 
Total of All Necessary 
Improvements 
(2) 	Water supply. The applicant's responsibility for water distribution facilities, including but not limited to the installation, relocation, or replacement of water mains, hydrants, valves, right-of-wayacquisition and associated appurtenances, shall be computed as follows: 
(a) 	
The capacity and the design of the water supply system shallbe based on the standards specified in the Town Standard Specifications and Details. 

(b) 	
As required by the Director, the applicant shall provide theTown with the existing and anticipated capacity limits of the affected water supply system in terms of average dailydemand, peak demand, and fire demand. 

(c) 	
If the Director determines that the existing off-site system does not have adequate capacity, as defined above, to accommodatethe developer's needs, the applicant is responsible for the 


1:543 

necessary improvement. If the improvement meets the criteriaof § 265-4B, the benefitting property's share shall be computed as follows: 
Benefitting Property Water 
Requirement Total Estimated Impact 
= 	X Improvement CostRequirement ($) ($) 
Total of All Necessary 
Improvements 
(3) 	Drainage improvements. The applicant's responsibility for stormwater and drainage improvements, including but not limitedto the installation, relocation, or replacement of storm drains, culverts, catch basins, manholes, riprap, improved drainageditches and appurtenances, acquisition of right-of-way and relocation or replacement of other storm drainage facilities or appurtenances, shall be determined as follows: 
(a) 	
The capacity and the design of the drainage system to accommodate stormwater runoff shall be based on the standards specified in the Town Standard Specifications andDetails. 

(b) 	
The capacity of the improved system required for the development and areas outside of the development, tributaryto the drainage system shall be determined by the applicant,subject to approval of the Director. The plans for the improved system shall be prepared by the applicant along with theestimated cost of the improved system, to be approved by theDirector. 

(c) 	
If the Director determines the existing off-site system does nothave adequate capacity, the applicant is responsible for thenecessary improvement. If the improvement meets the criteria of § 265-4B, the benefitting property's share for the proposedimprovement shall be computed as follows: 


Benefitting Property Stormwater 
Requirement Total Estimated Impact 
= 	X ImprovementRequirement ($) Cost ($) 
Total of All Necessary 
Improvements 
(4) 	
Other improvements. The applicant's responsibility for a proportionate share of other improvements necessitated by theproposed development, based on the Community Facilities Element 

1:544 


A. 	
An applicant cannot avoid the intent of this chapter by submittingpiecemeal applications for site plan or subdivision plat approval. An applicant may seek approval for a portion of a development, providedthat the impact of all previously approved site plans from that development are considered during review for each subsequent application. 

B. 	
If an applicant requests to install the necessary improvements inseparate phases of development and the Director approves, then the applicant shall place 125% of the improvement cost in an interest-bearing account administered by the Town until such time as the improvement is constructed. 

C. 	
All terms and conditions contained in this section must be met to the satisfaction of the Director prior to issuance of a Building permit. 


of the adopted Comprehensive Plan, including but not limited to
parks and recreation, police and fire protection, shall be computed 

as follows:  
Benefitting Property  
Requirement  
Impact Requirement ($)  =  X  Total Estimated Improvement Cost ($)  
Total of All Necessary  
Improvements  
§ 265-5. Compliance.  

Chapter 272 
ITINERANT DEALERS, PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Comprehensive plans and development Stands, carts or displays on sidewalks — Seeregulations — See Ch. 165. Ch. 410, Art. III. 
Pawnbrokers — See Ch. 339. 	Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 450. 
§ 272-1. Definitions. [Amended 7-15-2013 by Ord. No. 761-13] 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION — 
A. 	A group which qualifies under Section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code102 as a tax-exempt organization, including any benevolent, 
1:545 

philanthropic, patriotic, nonprofit, educational, religious, or other related to or supported by a charity. 
B. 	A volunteer fire company which is organized for the prevention andextinguishment of fires. 
ITINERANT DEALER — Any person without an established place of business within the limits of the Town, selling or offering for sale anyfruits, vegetables, garden produce, eggs, cheese, meat, ice cream, shavedice, snowballs or other food product from any cart, wagon, truck, trailer, automobile or other vehicle. 
PEDDLER — Any person, either principal or agent, who in any publicplace, street, private property, or by going from place to place, delivering or distributing advertising material, literature, pamphlets, samples or handbills; or sells or offers for sale, barters or exchanges any goods, wares,merchandise, services or any other article or thing whatsoever. 
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, incorporated association, firm,partnership, sole proprietorship or any other recognized legal entity. 
SOLICITOR — A person who goes from place to place visiting residential dwellings: 
A. 	Seeking orders for products or subscriptions; or 
B. 	Soliciting or collecting funds or donations of any kind. 
§ 272-2. License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of itinerantdealer, peddler or solicitor in the Town of Bel Air without having first secured a license from the Town. The license shall be valid for not more than one year. Prior to the Town issuing a license, itinerant dealers and peddlersmust submit any applicable state or county license and, if any type of food is being sold, a food service license from Harford County Health Department. 
§ 272-3. Exemptions. 
The following are exempt from the provisions of this chapter: 
A. 	Agents of or employed by a bona fide charitable organization as definedin § 272-1 of this chapter. 
B. 	Persons, businesses, firms or organizations who or which engage in any of the following activities: 
(1) 	
Persons selling merchandise or commodities directly to manufacturers, wholesalers or retail establishments for use in their business or for resale. 

(2) 
Persons engaged in promotional activities within an enclosed mall. 



102.Editor's Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 501 et seq. 
1:546 
(3) 	
Persons conducting a yard, garage or attic sale from his or herpersonal residence for not more than four days in any one calendar year. 

(4) 	
Persons participating in Town-sponsored events. 

(5) 	
Persons participating in the Bel Air Independence Day activities that are approved and licensed by the Bel Air Independence DayCommittee, Inc. 

(6) 	
Persons participating in any Town of Bel Air Parks and Recreation-sponsored events in or around any Town park or parking lot thatare approved by the event coordinators. 

(7) 	
Persons participating in an event that is not sponsored by the Town but approved by the Town's Event Committee and the eventcoordinators. 

(8) 	
Persons participating in an event at Rockfield Manor approved and licensed by the Rockfield Foundation. 

(9) 	
Persons approved by the Bel Air Downtown Alliance participatingin an event sponsored by the Bel Air Downtown Alliance. 


(10)A person who owns, leases, uses or occupies any space or locationin any building or structure within the Town for a period of morethan 12 weeks' duration and who wishes to sell or offer commodities consistent with the business in the building in, on, oradjacent to the building or structure which the person occupies. 
(11)Route delivery people who make regular deliveries to customers and whose solicitation is only incidental to their deliveries. 
(12)Other persons declared exempt by resolution by the Board of TownCommissioners adopted at a regularly scheduled public meeting. 
§ 272-4. Contents of license application. 
A. 	A written application for a license shall be made on a form prepared bythe Town and shall be submitted to the Director of Administration, 39 North Hickory Avenue, Bel Air, Maryland. 
B. 	The application shall document the following information for eachperson licensed: 
(1) 	
Name (first, middle and last), permanent address, name and address of employer, if not self-employed. 

(2) 	
Birth date, weight, height and color of hair and eyes. 

(3) 	
A brief description of the business and nature of the merchandiseto be sold and the method or methods to be used in conductingsolicitation. 


1:547 

(4) 	
If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together withtag number. 

(5) 	
A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convictedof any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance,the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed. 


§ 272-5. Location. [Amended 7-15-2013 by Ord. No. 761-13] 
A. 	Itinerant dealers, peddlers or solicitors shall operate at all times soas not to interfere or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Where permitted, all itinerant dealers and peddlers selling from meteredparking spaces along public rights-of-way must pay the required feeand comply with the parking time restrictions on the parking meter. Itinerant dealers and peddlers may not utilize the Town's parkingvouchers for metered parking spaces. Itinerant dealers and peddlersmay sell from private property with written permission of the owner, or from public property in accordance with the itinerant dealers andpeddlers map. The Department of Planning shall maintain an itinerantdealers and peddlers map depicting permitted locations dealers and peddlers may conduct business within the Town of Bel Air. The map willbe available at the Planning Department and on the Town's website. Atno time shall an itinerant dealer or peddler sell from the right-of-way of Main Street or Bond Street, between Broadway and Heighe Street. 
B. 	Each itinerant dealer or peddler shall provide trash receptacles inclose proximity of his/her location and remove all merchandise, wagons, carts, display literature, litter and waste at the termination of saleseach day. No permanent stands or displays are permitted. 
§ 272-6. Investigation; fee; issuance of license. 
A. 	Investigation. Upon receipt of an application for a license, the Directorof Administration shall supervise an investigation as to whether theactivities proposed to be undertaken would be contrary to any law, including the Town's development regulations,103 or whether the issuance of the license would otherwise be contrary to the publichealth, safety or welfare. The Director will review the application with the Planning, Police and Economic Development departments. 
B. 	Fee required. The fee for the license shall be set by resolution adoptedby the Board of Town Commissioners of Bel Air. 
C. 	Issuance of license. 
(1) 	Once all the required documents have been submitted to theDepartment of Administration and an investigation is completed, the Director of Administration shall issue approved permits withinfive work days of receipt of the completed application, licenses and 
103.Editor's Note: See Ch. 165, Comprehensive plans and development regulations. 
1:548 
fees. The license shall terminate at the time set forth on the Town license, unless revoked as provided in this chapter. 
(2) 	Itinerate dealers and peddlers selling from a truck, automobileor other vehicle must provide a certificate of insurance showing$1,000,000 per occurrence/$2,000,000 general aggregate and $250,000 vehicle coverage. The Town of Bel Air shall limit thenumber of Itinerate dealers, peddlers, and solicitor licenses issuedfor public convenience and necessity. In determining public convenience and necessity, the Director of Administration, Directorof Economic Development, Director of Planning and the Chief ofPolice shall act to protect the public health, safety, welfare and the demands on public services. 
D. 	Display of license. itinerant dealers, peddlers and solicitors are required to carry the issued license with them at all times while engaged in the business. All itinerant dealers and peddlers are requiredto display their license on their cart, wagon, truck, automobile or othervehicle. 
E. 	Itinerant dealers and peddlers operating on private property must bein possession of written permission from that property owner duringhours of operation. 
§ 272-7. Adoption of additional regulations. 
A. 	All signage for sales from a wagon, truck, automobile or other vehiclemay only be displayed on the mobile unit. If parked at a parking meter, the mobile unit shall not occupy more than two spaces. 
B. 	The Board of Town Commissioners shall adopt additional regulationsgoverning the conduct of licenses by resolution. Violation of such regulations by any licensed person shall result in a forfeiture of licenseafter such violation has been substantiated by the Bel Air PoliceDepartment. 
§ 272-8. Hours and days of operation. 
A. 	No solicitor shall solicit before 9:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. Except forprivate property, no itinerant dealer or peddler shall sell before 9:00 
a.m. or after midnight. 
B. 	Solicitors and those itinerant dealers and peddlers not on privateproperty shall not conduct business on the day of the Bel Air Festival of Arts, Thanksgiving Day, or Christmas Day, unless the event coordinatorfor the event scheduled on those days has approved participation, andthe seller will be located within the boundaries of the event. 
§ 272-9. Prohibited conduct. 
No person shall: 
1:549 

A. 	Enter into or upon a private residence in the Town under false pretenses to solicit or sell for any purpose. 
B. 	Enter into or upon the premises of a private residence for soliciting orpeddling when the owner or occupant has displayed a "No Soliciting"sign or remain in the premises after the resident has requested the solicitor leave. 
C. 	No person shall engage as a solicitor, peddler, or itinerant dealer, orknowingly permit an employee or agent to sell or solicit in the Town without a license required by this chapter. 
D. 	No itinerant dealer, peddler or solicitor may connect to utility servicesin the area if located on a public road. 
E. 	No itinerate dealer, peddler or solicitors not on private property mayconduct business within 300 feet of a Town-or Parks and Recreation-sponsored event without permission from the event coordinator. 
F. 	The Chief of Police or his designee has the authority to require anyitinerate dealer or peddler to cease operation and relocate if there is anissue with the health, welfare or safety of the public. 
§ 272-10. Revocation or suspension of license. 
The Director of Administration of the Town may suspend for a period ofup to 60 days, or revoke, or refuse to renew, any license upon a finding that the licensee, while selling or soliciting and in connection therewith, hasengaged in fraud or willful misrepresentation, has violated any provision ofthis chapter, or has committed any unlawful act. Any revocation, suspension or failure to renew shall be by written notice sent by certified mail tothe licensee's address listed on the application. The notice shall contain astatement of the reason for the action taken. The licensee has one week from the date of issuance in which to appeal the revocation or suspensionof the license. 
§ 272-11. Violations and penalties. 
Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a municipal infraction.Each day any violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
1:550 

Chapter 301 
LIVABILITY CODE, MINIMUM 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Building construction — See Ch. 145.  Health and sanitation — See Ch. 240.  
Electrical standards — See Ch. 180.  Plumbing and gas fitting standards — See Ch.353.  
Fire prevention — See Ch. 204.  Property maintenance — See Ch. 364.  

1:551 

ARTICLE I 
General Provisions 
§ 301-1. Title. 
These regulations shall be known as the "Minimum Livability Code" or "this code." 
§ 301-2. Scope. 
This code is created to protect the public health, safety and welfare in rental housing units and premises by: 
A. 	Establishing minimum property maintenance standards for basic equipment and facilities used for light, ventilation, heating, and sanitation for rental housing units and premises and for safe andsanitary maintenance of rental housing units and premises; 
B. 	Establishing minimum requirements for rental housing units and premises for means of egress, fire protection systems and otherequipment and devices necessary for safety from fire; 
C. 	Fixing the responsibilities of property owners, operators, and tenants of rental housing units and premises; and 
D. 	Providing for administration, enforcement, and penalties. 
§ 301-3. Intent. 
This code shall be construed liberally and justly to protect public health,safety, and welfare insofar as they are affected by the continued use andmaintenance of rental housing units and premises. 
1:553 

ARTICLE II 
Word Usage and Definitions 
§ 301-4. Rules of interpretation. 
A. 	Unless otherwise expressly stated, the terms defined in § 301-5 of this code shall have the meanings indicated for purposes of this code. 
B. 	Words used in the present tense include the future. The singularnumber includes the plural, and the plural the singular. 
C. 	When terms are not defined, through the methods authorized by thissection, they shall have their ordinarily accepted meanings such as thecontext may imply. 
§ 301-5. Definitions. 
As used in this code the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
ACT — Section 12-203 of the Public Safety Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland.104 
BASEMENT — That portion of a structure which is partly or completely below grade. 
BUILDING CODE — The Building Code adopted by the Town of Bel Air orsuch other code(s) as may be designated by the Town of Bel Air for theregulation of construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy, or maintenance of premises and structures. 
CENTRAL HEATING — The heating system permanently installed andadjusted so as to provide the distribution of heat to all habitable areas from a source outside of these areas. 
CODE — The Minimum Livability Code. 
CODE OFFICIAL — The official or duly authorized designee of the Town in which the housing is located who is authorized to enforce this code. 
CONDEMN — To declare a structure or part of it, premises, or equipmentunsafe or unfit for use and occupancy. 
COUNTY — Harford County. 
DEPARTMENT — The Bel Air Department of Public Works. 
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other pests by: 
A. 	Eliminating their harborage places. 
B. 	Removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food. 
104.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:555 
C. 	Poison spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by any other pest eliminationmethods which have received all necessary and legally required approvals. 
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,preparation, cooking, and consumption of food. 
HABITABLE AREA — The space in a structure used for living, sleeping,eating or cooking, including bathrooms and toilet compartments. Closets,halls, storage or utility space, and similar areas are not considered habitable areas. 
HOUSING UNIT — A single unit of a structure providing or intended toprovide complete living and sleeping facilities for one or more persons. 
INFESTATION — The presence, within or contiguous to a structure orpremises, of insects, rodents, vermin, or other pests. 
LEASE — A verbal or written agreement between tenant and landlord. 
MAINTENANCE — The repair and other acts intended to prevent a declinein the condition of a structure, premises, or equipment below the standardsestablished by this code and other applicable statutes, codes, and ordinances. 
OCCUPANT — An individual having possession of a space within a housingunit. 
OPERATOR — A person who has charge, care, or control of a structure orpremises which is offered for occupancy. 
PERSON — Includes an individual, partnership, limited partnership, trust, estate, association, or corporation. 
PLUMBING — The practice, materials, facilities, and fixtures used in theinstallation, maintenance, extension, or alteration of all piping, fixtures, appliances, and appurtenances within the scope of the applicable plumbingcode. 
PLUMBING FIXTURE — A receptacle or device which: 
A. 	Is either permanently or temporarily connected to the water distribution system of the premises and demands a supply of water fromit; 
B. 	Discharges used water, liquid-borne waste materials, or sewage eitherdirectly or indirectly to the drainage system of the premises; or 
C. 	Requires both a water supply connection and a discharge to the drainage system of the premises. 
PREMISES — A lot, plot, or parcel of land, including the structures on it. 
PROPERTY OWNER — A person having a legal or equitable interest in the premises, including the guardian of the estate of the person, or the executoror administrator of the estate of the person, if ordered to take possession ofthe premises by a court. 
1:556 

REFUSE — All solid wastes with the exception of body wastes. 
RUBBISH — Paper, rags, cartons, boxes, woods, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery,dust, and other similar materials as well as the residue from the burning ofwood, coal, coke, and other combustible materials. 
STRUCTURE — A rental unit used for human habitation. 
TENANT — An occupant other than a property owner. 
VENTILATION — The process of supplying and removing air by natural or mechanical means to or from a space. 
A. 	MECHANICAL VENTILATION — Ventilation by power-driven devices. 
B. 	NATURAL VENTILATION — Ventilation by opening to outer air through windows, skylights, doors, louvers, or stacks without power-driven devices. 
1:557 

ARTICLE III 
Application 
§ 301-6. Applicability; repairs or alterations; unsafe structures. 
A. 	The Minimum Livability Code shall apply to structures used for human habitation except: 
(1) 	
Owner-occupied single-family housing units. 

(2) 	
Housing exempted by the Department. 


B. 	Repairs or alterations to a structure, or changes of use to it, whichmay be caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this codeshall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of any applicable local building code, plumbing code, mechanical code, andelectrical code, or other code or standard applicable to housing. 
C. 	The provisions in this code do not abolish or impair any remedies available to the Town of Bel Air or its officers or agencies relating tothe removal or demolition of any structures which are deemed to bedangerous, unsafe and unsanitary. 
1:559 

ARTICLE IV 
Enforcement 
§ 301-7. Local enforcement. 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Town of Bel Air to enforce the provisions of this code. 
§ 301-8. Local waiver. 
A. 	The Department may waive applicability of this code, in whole or part, to a unit of rental housing on application of the property owner if: 
(1) 	
Adequate notice in a form and manner specified by the Town isafforded a tenant of the unit; 

(2) 	
The tenant is afforded an opportunity to comment on the application either in writing or in person; and 

(3) 	
The waiver would not threaten the health or safety of a tenant. 


B. 	A waiver may be granted by the code official and shall continue in fullforce and effect beyond the term of the lease of the current tenant. Anyprospective tenant shall be notified, upon application for a lease for this unit of rental housing, that this unit has been granted a waiver from aprovision(s) of this code and that his/her occupancy will be subject tothat waiver. The prospective tenant shall have the right to request the Town to review the waiver. The Town reserves the right to review thewaiver at any time.105 
C. 	The Department may waive applicability of this code if the waiver is granted on the basis of the religious practices of the occupant of theunit of rental housing. 
§ 301-9. Departmental authority. 
The Director of the Department or designee shall decide questions of interpretation of this code. 
§ 301-10. Displacement. 
A person may not be displaced by enforcement of this code unless alternatehousing of comparable affordability is available within the county, exceptwhere there is an imminent threat to health and safety due to unsafe conditions. 
105.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:561 
§ 301-11. Effect on state laws.106 
Enforcement and waiver application are not intended to supersede any state laws. 
106.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:562 ARTICLE V 
Duties and Powers of Code Official 
§ 301-12. Designation of code official. 
The Town shall designate a code official. The code official or designee shall enforce the provisions of this code. 
§ 301-13. Notices and orders. 
The code official shall issue all notices and orders necessary to ensure compliance with this code. 
§ 301-14. Interference with inspections. 
If a property owner, tenant or operator of a structure refuses, impedes, inhibits, interferes with, restricts, or obstructs entry and free access to anypart of the structure or premises where inspection authorized by this codeis sought, the code official or designee may seek, in a court of competent jurisdiction, an order that the property owner, tenant, or operator cease anddesist from the interference. 
§ 301-15. Right of entry. 
The code official or designee is authorized to enter a structure or premisesat any reasonable time upon providing prior notice to the property ownerand tenant for the purpose of making inspections and performing duties under this code, such as but not limited to instances where there is an imminent threat to health and safety due to unsafe conditions. 
§ 301-16. Alterations and repairs. 
A. 	The code official or designee shall have the authority to require andapprove any alterations or repairs necessary to bring a structure orpremises into compliance with this code. The determination of what may be necessary to bring the premises into compliance shall takeinto consideration the use of alternatives and equivalent approaches asprovided for in this code. 
B. 	The code official or designee shall have the authority to approve, uponthe request of the property owner, changes in alterations or repairs inthe field when conditions are encountered which make the originally approved work impractical, if the changes in approved work can bereadily determined to be in compliance with this code. 
C. 	The changes shall be specifically documented by the property owner or by his or her agent or code official, describing the change in work andthe reasons and justification for the change, and shall be filed with thepermit for the project. 
1:563 

§ 301-17. Access by property owner or operator. 
A tenant of a structure or premises shall give the property owner or operator, or agent or employee, access to any part of the structure or itspremises at reasonable times upon being given reasonable notice for thepurpose of making the inspection, maintenance, repairs, or alterations as are necessary to comply with the provisions of this code. 
§ 301-18. Credentials. 
The code official shall disclose his or her identification for the purpose of inspecting a structure or premises. 
§ 301-19. Coordination of enforcement. 
A. 	The inspection of structures and premises, the issuance of notices and orders, and the enforcement of them shall be the responsibility of thecode official. 
B. 	Whenever, in the opinion of the code official initiating an inspection under this code, it is deemed necessary or desirable to have inspectionsby any other governmental official or agency, the code official shallmake a reasonable effort to arrange for the coordination of the inspections so as to minimize the number of visits by inspectors. 
C. 	The code official shall confer with the other governmental official oragency for the purpose of eliminating conflicting orders before any are issued. 
D. 	The code official may not, however, cause the delay of the issuance ofany emergency orders by a governmental official or agency which the governmental official or agency determines must be issued. 
§ 301-20. Additional rules and regulations. 
The Director of the Department shall have power to adopt and promulgate rules and regulations to interpret and implement the provisions of the codeto further its intent. 
1:564 

ARTICLE VI 
Condemnation 
§ 301-21. Order to vacate; unsafe equipment placed out of service. 
A. 	When a structure or part of it is found by the code official to be unsafe or unfit for human occupancy or use, the code official may condemn thestructure or part of it and may order the structure or part of it to beplacarded and vacated pursuant to the provisions of this code. 
B. 	The structure or part of it may not be reoccupied without approval ofthe code official. 
C. 	Unsafe equipment may be condemned, placarded, and placed out of service pursuant to the provisions of this code. 
§ 301-22. Unsafe structures. 
An unsafe structure is one in which all or part of it is found by the code official to be dangerous to life, health, property, or the safety of its tenantsby not providing minimum protection from fire or because it is so damaged,decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe, or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation that it is likely to partially or completely collapse. 
§ 301-23. Unsafe equipment. 
A. 	Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating equipment, cooking equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid containers, or other equipment on the premises orwithin the structure which is in such disrepair or condition that it is found by the code official to be hazardous to the life, health, property,or safety of the tenants of the premises or structure. 
B. 	Unsafe equipment may contribute to the finding that the structure is unsafe or unfit for human occupancy or use. 
§ 301-24. Structure unfit for human occupancy. 
A structure is unfit for human occupancy or use whenever the code official finds that it is unsanitary or vermin or rodent infested, contains filth orcontamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heatingfacilities, or other essential equipment required by this code. 
§ 301-25. Closing of vacant structures. 
Upon failure of a property owner to close or vacate a premises within thetime specified in an order, the code official may cause the premises to be closed through any available public agency or by contract or arrangementwith private persons, and the cost shall be charged against the real estateupon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon the real estate. 
1:565 

ARTICLE VII 
Notices and Orders 
§ 301-26. Conditions for issuance of notice. 
A. 	Whenever the code official determines that there has been a violation of this code or has reasonable grounds to believe that a violation hasoccurred, or whenever the code official has determined to condemn a structure, or part of it, or equipment in accordance with this code, notice shall be given to the property owner and to the tenant in themanner prescribed in this code. 
B. 	If the code official has condemned the structure, or part of it, or equipment, the code official shall serve prior notice to the propertyowner and to the tenants of the intent to: 
(1) 	
Order the structure or part of it placarded or vacated; or 

(2) 	
Order the equipment placed out of service. 


§ 301-27. Service of notice. 
A. 	Notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon a property owner or tenant by one of the following methods: 
(1) 	
By delivering to the person to be served or his or her agent a copyof the notice and all other necessary papers; or 

(2) 	
By mailing to the person to be served at his or her last knownaddress or to his or her agent by first-class and certified or registered mail with return receipt requested a copy of the notice and all other necessary papers. 


B. 	If the certified or registered letter is returned with receipt showing thatit has not been delivered, notice shall be served by posting a copy of it in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by the notice. 
§ 301-28. Notice to vacate. 
When a condemnation order is served on a tenant, the tenant shall be given a reasonable time to vacate the structure, except that where thereis an imminent threat to health and safety due to unsafe conditions, theoccupants of the building will be required to vacate immediately. 
§ 301-29. Transfer of ownership. 
A property owner who has received a compliance order or upon whom anotice of violation has been served may not sell, transfer, mortgage, lease, or otherwise dispose of the premises until: 
A. 	The provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have beencomplied with; or 
1:567 

B. 	The property owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee, or lessee a true copy of the compliance order or notice of violation issued by the code official and shall furnish to the codeofficial a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee,mortgagee, or lessee in which he or she acknowledges the receipt of the compliance order or notice of violation and states that he or she fullyaccepts and assumes the responsibility without condition for makingthe corrections or repairs required by the compliance order or notice of violation. 
§ 301-30. Removal of placard. 
No individual may deface or remove a condemnation placard without the approval of the code official. 
1:568 

ARTICLE VIII 
Violations 
§ 301-31. Violations and penalties. 
A. 	A property owner who willfully violates any provision of this code is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction for each violation is subjectto a penalty as provided in Chapter 1, Article II of this Code.107 
B. 	Other penalties. A penalty ordered under this code is in addition to and is not a substitute for any other penalty authorized under a federal,state, or local law. 
107.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:569 
ARTICLE IX 
Appeals 
§ 301-32. Request for hearing.108 
A person affected by a decision of the code official which has been made in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this code, or of aregulation adopted pursuant to this code, may request and may be granteda hearing in accordance with the Town Building Code adopted pursuant to Chapter 145 of the Town Code. 
108.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:571 
ARTICLE X 
Environmental Requirements 
§ 301-33. Scope. 
The provisions of this code shall establish the minimum standards for maintenance of premises and structures. 
§ 301-34. Sanitation; insect and rodent control. 
A. 	Sanitation. The premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe, and sanitary condition free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage. 
B. 	Insect and rodent control. The premises shall be free from infestationof insects, rodents, vermin, or other pests. 
§ 301-35. Exterior structure. 
A. 	General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repairand shall be structurally sound and maintained in a sanitary condition so as not to pose a threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the occupants. 
B. 	Structural members. Supporting components of a structure shall be kept sound, well maintained, and capable of safely bearing the dead andlive loads imposed upon them. 
C. 	Exterior surfaces. Each foundation, exterior wall, roof, and all other exterior surfaces shall be maintained in good repair and shall be keptin such condition so as to exclude rodents and other pests. 
D. 	Foundation walls. Foundation walls shall be structurally sound and shall be maintained free from open cracks and breaks that would behazardous or unsafe. 
E. 	Exterior walls. 
(1) 	
Each exterior wall shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rottingboards or timbers, and any other conditions which admit elementsor dampness to the interior portions of the walls or to the occupied areas of the structure. 

(2) 	
All exterior surface materials shall be maintained weatherproof toprevent deterioration. 


F. 	Roofs and drainage. The roof shall be structurally sound and may nothave defects which admit elements. Roof drainage shall be adequate toprevent rainwater from causing dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure. 
G. 	Decorative features. All cornices, entablatures, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings, and similar decorative features shall 
1:573 

H. 

I. 

J. 
K. 
L. 
M. 
N. 
O. 

be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safecondition or removed at the property owner's option. 
Signs, marquees and awnings. All canopies, marquees, signs, metalawnings, stairways, fire escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts, and similaroverhang extensions shall be maintained in good repair, be properly anchored, and kept in a safe and sound condition. They shall beprotected from the elements and against decay and rust by the periodicapplication of a weather-coating material such as paint or other protective treatment. 
Chimneys. 
(1) 	
All chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks, and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally sound, safe, and ingood repair. 

(2) 	
All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic applicationof weather-coating materials such as paint or similar surface treatment. 


Stairs and porches. Each exterior stair, porch, fire escape, balcony, andall appurtenances attached to them shall be safe to use and capable ofsupporting the anticipated loads and shall be maintained in a safe and sound condition and good repair. 
Windows, doors and frames. Each window, door, and frame shall be maintained so as to exclude rain and rodents as completely as possible and to substantially exclude wind from entering the structure. 
Weathertight. Each window and exterior door shall be fitted reasonablyin its frame and be weathertight. Each window shall be free of cracks and holes. 
Openable windows. Each window, other than a fixed window, shall becapable of being easily opened from the inside and shall be capable of being held in position and have proper locking apparatus. 
Insect screens. 
(1) 	
During the period from April 1 to December 1, every door and window or other outside opening used for ventilation purposesshall be supplied with tight-fitting insect screens. 

(2) 	
Exception. Upon the prior approval of the code official, screens may not be required for exterior doors or other types of openingswhich make screening impractical, such as openings equipped withair-conditioning units or openings above the fourth floor. The code official may require alternatives to screens. 


Door hardware. Each exterior door and its hardware shall be maintained in good condition; door locks on all interior and exterior 
1:574 

doors entering housing units shall be in good repair and capable oftightly securing the door. 
§ 301-36. Interior structure. 
A. 	General. The interior of a structure and its equipment and facilitiesshall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound, and in a sanitary condition so as not to pose a threat to the health, safety, or welfare ofthe occupants. 
B. 	Structural members. The supporting structural members of a structure shall be maintained structurally sound and maintained capable of safelycarrying the imposed loads. 
C. 	Interior surfaces. Floors, walls (including windows and doors), ceilings, and other interior surfaces shall be maintained in good repair and in aclean, safe, and sanitary condition. 
D. 	Bathroom and kitchen floors. Each toilet, bathroom, and kitchen floor surface shall be maintained so as to be substantially impervious towater to permit the floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitarycondition. 
E. 	Sanitation. 
(1) 	
The interior of a structure shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage. 

(2) 	
Rubbish or garbage shall be properly kept inside sealed, animal-proof containers. 

(3) 	
Garbage or rubbish may not be allowed to accumulate or be storedin public halls or stairways. 


F. 	Insect and rodent harborage. 
(1) 	
A structure shall be kept free from infestation, and where infestation is found, the area shall be promptly exterminated byprocesses which are not injurious to human health. 

(2) 	
Continuing or repeated incidents of infestation, as determined bythe code official, shall require the installation of rodent-andvermin-proof walls. The rodent-and vermin-proof walls shall be installed in accordance with the applicable local building code. 


G. 	Exit doors. Each door available as an exit shall be capable of beingopened easily from the inside. 
H. 	Exit facilities. 
(1) 	All interior stairs and railings and other exit facilities of a structureshall be maintained in sound condition and good repair. 
1:575 

(2) Each interior stair used for exit shall be maintained so as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the anticipated loads. 
1:576 

ARTICLE XI 
Light and Ventilation 
§ 301-37. Scope; alternative methods and devices. 
A. 	Scope. The provisions of this code shall govern the minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities used for light and ventilation of a structure. 
B. 	Alternative methods and devices. In place of the means for natural light and ventilation prescribed in this code, alternative arrangementof windows, louvers, or other devices or methods that will provide theequivalent minimum performance requirements shall be permitted in order to comply with the applicable local building code. 
§ 301-38. Light. 
A. 	General. All areas in a structure shall be provided sufficient light so as not to endanger health and safety. All areas in a structure shall beprovided with natural light or equipment to accommodate artificial lightof sufficient intensity and distributed so as to permit the maintenance of sanitary conditions and the safe use of the area and the appliances,equipment, and fixtures. 
B. 	Common halls and stairways. Each common hall and stairway in a structure, other than one-and two-family structures, shall be adequately lighted at all times with an illumination equivalent to thefootcandles provided by at least a sixty-watt standard incandescent light bulb for each 200 square feet of floor area, provided that thespacing between lights may not be greater than 30 feet. Each exteriorstairway shall be illuminated. 
§ 301-39. Ventilation. 
A. 	General. All areas in a structure shall be provided sufficient ventilationso as not to endanger health and safety. 
B. 	Mechanical ventilation. 
(1) 	
When mechanical ventilation is provided instead of natural ventilation, the mechanical ventilating system shall be maintained in good operating condition during the occupancy of the structureor portion of it. 

(2) 	
When part of the air provided by a mechanical ventilation system is recirculated, the portion or volume of air recirculated may not berecirculated to a different habitable area. 


1:577 

ARTICLE XII 
Plumbing Facilities and Fixtures 
§ 301-40. Scope. 
The provisions of this code shall govern the minimum standards for plumbing facilities and fixtures. 
§ 301-41. Required plumbing facilities. 
Each housing unit shall include its own plumbing facilities which shall be maintained in proper operating condition, can be used in privacy, and areadequate for personal cleanliness and the disposal of human waste. Thefollowing minimum plumbing facilities shall be supplied and maintained in a sanitary and safe working condition: 
A. 	Water closet and lavatory. 
(1) 	
Each housing unit shall contain within its walls a room separate from other habitable areas which provides a water closet suppliedwith cold running water and which affords privacy. 

(2) 	
A lavatory shall be placed in the same room as the water closet or located in another room in close proximity to the door leadingdirectly into the room in which the water closet is located. 

(3) 	
The lavatory shall be supplied with hot and cold running water. 


B. 	Bathtub or shower. Each housing unit shall contain a room which isequipped with a bathtub or shower supplied with hot and cold runningwater and which affords privacy. 
C. 	Kitchen sink. Each housing unit shall contain a kitchen sink apart fromthe lavatory required by this section. The sink shall be supplied with hotand cold running water. 
§ 301-42. Alternative plumbing. 
Alternative plumbing facilities and fixtures for use in housing units maybe allowed as approved on a case-by-case basis by the Director of the Department or designee. 
§ 301-43. Plumbing fixtures. 
A. 	General. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe and usable condition. All plumbing fixtures shall be of nonabsorbent material andshall have received all necessary and legally required approvals. 
B. 	Connections. 
(1) 	Water supply lines, plumbing fixtures, vents and drains shall beproperly installed, connected, and maintained in working order, 
1:579 

shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects, and shall becapable of performing the function for which they are designed. 
(2) 	All repairs and installations shall be made in accordance with theprovisions of the applicable local building code or applicable localplumbing code. 
C. 	Maintenance. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a clean andsanitary condition so as not to breed insects and rodents or producedangerous or offensive gases or odors. 
D. 	Access for cleaning. Plumbing fixtures shall be installed to permit easyaccess for cleaning both the fixture and the area around it. 
§ 301-44. Water system. 
A. 	General. Each sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain,water closet, or other plumbing facility shall be properly connected toeither a public water system or to a private water system which has received all necessary and legally required approvals. 
B. 	Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained free from contamination. All water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located above the overflow rim of the fixture. 
C. 	Water supply. The water supply system shall be installed and maintained to provide at all times a supply of water to plumbing facilities, fixtures, devices, and appurtenances in sufficient volume andat pressures adequate to enable them to function satisfactorily. 
D. 	Water-heating facilities. 
(1) 	
Water-heating facilities shall be installed in a manner which hasreceived all necessary and legally required approvals, properlymaintained, and properly connected with hot-water lines to the fixtures required to be supplied with hot water. 

(2) 	
Water-heating facilities shall be capable of heating water to sucha temperature so as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub, shower, andlaundry facility or other similar facilities at a temperature requiredby the local plumbing code. 


E. 	Alternative water systems. Alternative water systems may be allowedas approved on a case-by-case basis by the Director of the Departmentor designee. 
§ 301-45. Sewage system. 
A. 	General. Each sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain,water closet, or other plumbing facility shall be properly connected to either a public sewer system or private sewage disposal system whichhas received all necessary and legally required approvals. 
1:580 

B. Maintenance. 

(1) 	
Each plumbing stack, waste and sewer line shall be installed and maintained so as to function properly and shall be kept free fromobstructions, leaks, and defects to prevent structural deteriorationor health hazards. 

(2) 	
All repairs and installations shall receive all necessary and legallyrequired approvals. 


1:581 

ARTICLE XIII 
Mechanical and Electrical Facilities 
§ 301-46. Scope. 
The provisions of this code shall govern the minimum standards for mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment. 
§ 301-47. Heating facilities. 
A. 	Structures. 
(1) 	
Each housing unit shall be supplied with sufficient heat or heatingequipment capable of supplying sufficient heat during the periodfrom October 1 to May 15 to maintain a room temperature of not less than 68° F. in all habitable areas during the hours between

6:30 a.m. and 10:30 p.m. of each day and maintain a temperatureof not less than 60° F. during other hours. 

(2) 	
The temperature shall be measured at a point three feet above thefloor and three feet from exterior walls. 

(3) 	
Exception. When the outside temperature falls below 0° F. and the heating system is operating at its full capacity, a minimum roomtemperature of 60° F. shall be maintained at all times. 


B. 	Cooking and heating equipment. 
(1) 	
All cooking and heating equipment, components, and accessoriesin heating, cooking, and water-heating devices shall be maintainedfree from leaks and water flow obstructions and kept functioning properly so as to be free from fire, health, and safety hazards. 

(2) 	
All installations and repairs shall be made in accordance with theprovisions of the applicable local building code or other applicable laws or ordinances. 

(3) 	
Portable cooking equipment employing flame is prohibited, exceptfor residential-type food trays or salvers which are heated by a candle or alcohol lamp and which have received all necessary andlegally required approvals. 


C. 	Installation. All mechanical equipment used for heating and cooking shall be properly installed, safely maintained in good workingcondition, and shall be capable of performing the function for which itwas designed and intended. 
D. 	Fuel-burning equipment. All fuel-burning equipment shall be connectedto a chimney, flue, or vent in accordance with applicable local or statecodes, or according to the manufacturer's instructions in cases where no local or state codes apply. 
1:583 

E. 	Clearances. All necessary and legally required clearances to combustible materials shall be maintained. 
F. 	Safety controls. All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall bemaintained in effective operation in accordance with applicable localor state codes, or according to the manufacturer's instructions in cases where no local or state codes apply. 
G. 	Combustion air. A supply of air for complete combustion of the fueland for ventilation of the space shall be provided the fuel-burning equipment. 
H. 	Unauthorized devices. Devices purporting to reduce gas consumptionby attachment to a gas appliance, the gas supply line, or the vent outlet or vent piping may not be used unless labeled for that use and theinstallation has specifically received all necessary and legally requiredapprovals. 
I. 	Fireplaces. Fireplaces and other construction and devices intended foruse similar to a fireplace shall be stable and structurally safe andconnected to chimneys which have received all necessary and legally required approvals. 
J. 	Climate control. When facilities for interior climate control (heating,cooling, and humidity) are integral functions of housing units, these facilities shall be maintained and operated in accordance with thedesigned capacity. 
§ 301-48. Electrical facilities. 
A. 	Facilities required. All units shall be supplied with an electrical serviceof no less than 60 amps, 120/240 volts. 
B. 	Receptacles. Each habitable area in a housing unit shall contain at least one receptacle outlet. Every laundry area shall contain at least onereceptacle outlet. Every bathroom shall contain at least one groundfault circuit-interrupter-protected receptacle. Every kitchen shall have at least two receptacle outlets. All receptacle outlets are to be thegrounded type. 
C. 	Lighting fixtures. 
(1) 	
Each rental unit hall, interior stairway, bathroom, laundry room,and kitchen shall contain at least one switch-operated electric lighting fixture. 

(2) 	
Public or common areas. Each public or common area shall haveat least one switch-operated electric lighting fixture as approvedunder the applicable electrical code. 


D. Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring, and appliances shall beinstalled and maintained in a safe manner in accordance with 
1:584 

applicable laws. All electrical equipment shall be of a type which hasreceived all necessary and legally required approvals. 
1:585 

ARTICLE XIV 
Firesafety 
§ 301-49. Scope. 
The provisions of this code shall govern the minimum standards for firesafety facilities and equipment. All structures shall be constructed andmaintained to prevent and avoid fire hazards and in a manner conducive tofiresafety. 
§ 301-50. Means of egress. 
A. 	General. A safe, continuous, and unobstructed means of egress shall beprovided from the interior of a structure to the exterior at a street, yard, court, or passageway leading to a public open area at grade. 
B. 	Direct exit. Each housing unit shall have access directly to the outsideor to a common area that leads directly to the outside. 
C. 	Doors. All doors in the required means of egress shall be easily openedfrom the inner side. Double-cylinder dead bolts shall not be permittedon main egress doors unless the lock is designed to prevent the removal of the key from the inside in the locked position. 
D. 	Fire escapes. All fire escapes shall be maintained in working conditionand be structurally sound and adhere to local building codes and all applicable local and state laws. 
E. 	Exit signs. All exit signs shall be maintained and visible in accordancewith the applicable state and local code. 
F. 	Emergency escape. 
(1) 	
Every basement sleeping room shall have at least one operablewindow or exterior door approved for emergency egress or rescue. The unit must be operable from the inside opening without theuse of separate tools. Where windows are provided as a means ofegress or rescue they shall have a sill height not more than 44 inches above the floor. All egress or rescue windows from sleeping rooms must have a minimum net clear opening of five squarefeet. The minimum net clear opening height dimension shall be 24 inches. The minimum net clear opening width dimension shall be20 inches. Bars, grills or screens placed over emergency escapewindows shall be releasable or removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool or excessive force. 

(2) 	
Exception. A complete residential fire sprinkler system may beinstalled. Installation must be in accordance with the State Fire Prevention Code. 


§ 301-51. Accumulations and storage. 
1:587 

A. 	General. Garbage or rubbish may not be allowed to accumulate instairways, passageways, doors, windows, fire escapes, or other means of egress. 
B. 	Flammable matter. Highly flammable or explosive matter, such as paints, volatile oils and cleaning fluids, or combustible rubbish, such as wastepaper, boxes and rags, may not be accumulated or stored onpremises except in reasonable quantities consistent with normal usage. 
C. 	Residential unit. A housing unit may not be located within a structure containing an establishment handling, dispensing, or storing flammableliquids with a flashpoint of 100° F. or lower. 
§ 301-52. Fire-resistance ratings. 
Floors, walls, ceilings, and other elements and components which are required by the applicable fire code to comply with a fire-resistance ratingshall be maintained so that the respective fire-resistance rating of the enclosure, separation, or construction is preserved. 
§ 301-53. Fire-protection systems. 
A. 	General. All fire-protection systems and equipment shall be maintained in proper operating condition at all times. 
B. 	Smoke detectors. 
(1) 	
All housing units shall be provided with a minimum of one single station smoke detector in the vicinity of each sleeping area. 

(2) 	
The smoke detectors shall be installed and maintained in accordance with Title 9, Subtitle 1, Smoke Detection Systems, of the Public Safety Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland.


[Amended 11-17-2008 by Ord. No. 715-08] 
(3) 	When actuated, the smoke detector shall provide an alarm suitable to warn the occupants within the unit. 
C. 	Fire-suppression system. Fire-suppression systems in housing units soequipped shall be maintained in good condition, free from mechanical defect. Sprinkler heads shall be kept clean and free of corrosion andpaint and may not be bent or damaged. 
D. 	Fire extinguishers. All portable fire extinguishers in housing units so equipped shall be visible and accessible and maintained in an efficientand safe operating condition. 
§ 301-54. Fire doors. 
A. 	All necessary and legally required fire-resistance rated doors or smokebarriers shall be maintained in good working order, including all hardware necessary for their proper operation. 
1:588 

B. Only approved door stops, hold-open devices or other door hardwareshall be used on egress doors, fire doors or smoke barrier doors. 
1:589 

ARTICLE XV 
Responsibility of Persons 
§ 301-55. Property owners. 
Only the property owner shall be responsible for compliance with the provisions of this code and may be cited for violations of it, except asprovided in this code. A person may not rent or lease to another personfor occupancy or use any housing unit unless the structure and premises comply with the provisions of this code. 
§ 301-56. Tenants. 
A. 	A property owner may not be cited for a violation of this code that is caused by the negligent, wrongful or malicious acts or omissions of atenant, provided that the property owner's acts or omissions have notcontributed in any way to cause the violation. 
B. 	The code official shall have the authority to cite a tenant for violation ofthe provisions that are the tenant's responsibility. A tenant's violationof the provisions that are a tenant's responsibility shall be a municipal infraction and any violator shall be fined as provided in Chapter 1,Article II, of this Code, and/or a court of competent jurisdiction mayrecognize the violation as a breach of the lease agreement and as sufficient cause for lease termination. [Amended 11-17-2008 by Ord. No. 715-08] 
§ 301-57. Sanitary conditions. 
A. 	Cleanliness. 
(1) 	
The tenant shall be responsible for keeping that part of thestructure or premises which the tenant occupies, controls, or uses in a clean and sanitary condition. 

(2) 	
Each property owner of a structure containing two or more housingunits shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary condition, the common areas of the structure and premises. 


B. 	Disposal and storage of rubbish and garbage. The tenant shall beresponsible for the storage and disposal of rubbish and garbage in a clean and sanitary manner as may be required by applicable laws orordinances. 
C. 	Supplied fixtures and equipment. 
(1) 	
The tenant shall be responsible for keeping owner-suppliedequipment and fixtures clean and sanitary and for the exercise ofreasonable care in their proper use and operation. 

(2) 	
The property owner shall be responsible for maintaining the equipment and fixtures in good and proper operating condition. 


1:591 

D. 	Furnished by tenant. The tenant shall be responsible for the maintenance of equipment and fixtures furnished by the tenant. The equipment and fixtures shall be properly installed and shall be maintained in good working condition and kept clean and sanitary andfree of defects, leaks or obstructions. 
§ 301-58. Extermination. 
A. 	All structures. If necessary, the property owner shall be responsible forextermination within the structure and on the premises before renting or leasing the structure. 
B. 	Single occupancy. The tenant of a structure containing a single housingunit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests in the structure or the premises. 
C. 	Multiple occupancy. Each property owner or operator of a structurecontaining two or more housing units shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests in the structureor on the premises except where infestation within a housing unit iscaused by a failure of the tenant to take reasonable action to prevent the infestation within the housing unit. 
§ 301-59. Smoke detectors.109 
Responsibility for installing and maintaining in good working order any smoke detector installed pursuant to this code shall be in accordance withTitle 9, Subtitle 1, Smoke Detection Systems, of the Public Safety Article ofthe Annotated Code of Maryland. 
109.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). See also § 301-53. 
1:592 ARTICLE XVI 
Retaliatory Evictions 
§ 301-60. Eviction of complainant prohibited. 
No property owner or operator shall evict an occupant of any rental housing unit solely because the occupant has filed a written complaint or complaintswith the Department. Nothing contained herein is intended to supersedethe application or provisions of § 8-208.1 of the Real Property Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland. 
1:593 

Chapter 312 
MASSAGE PARLORS 
§ 312-1. Definitions. 
Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires, the definitions and provisions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning and application of words and phrases used in thischapter: 
CERTIFIED MASSAGE THERAPIST — An individual who is certified by the State Board of Chiropractic Examiners to practice massage therapy. 
MASSAGE THERAPY — The use of manual techniques on the soft tissuesof the human body, including effleurage (stroking), petrissage (kneading), tapotement (tapping), stretching, compression, vibration, and friction, withor without the aid of heat, limited to hot packs and hearing pads, cold water,or nonlegend topical applications, for the purpose of improving circulation, enhancing muscle relation, relieving muscular pain, reducing stress, orpromoting health and well-being. "Massage therapy" does not include thediagnosis or treatment of illness, disease or injury or the adjustment, manipulation or mobilization of any articulation of the osseous structures ofthe body or spine. 
PRACTICE MASSAGE THERAPY — To engage professionally and for compensation in massage therapy. 
PRACTICE NONTHERAPEUTIC MASSAGE — To engage professionally andfor compensation in massage therapy that is not in a health care facility. 
REGISTERED MASSAGE PRACTITIONER — An individual who is registeredby the State Board of Chiropractic Examiners to practice nontherapeutic massage. 
REGISTRATION — A registration issued by the State Board of ChiropracticExaminers to practice nontherapeutic massage. 
§ 312-2. State license required. 
In accordance with the Health Occupations Article of the MarylandAnnotated Code, Title 3, Subtitle 5A, Certification of Massage Therapists,no individual shall engage in or carry on the business of massage therapy or nontherapeutic massage unless he or she has valid certification from theState Board of Chiropractic Examiners that he or she has been authorizedto practice as a certified massage therapist. 
§ 312-3. Display of certification. 
The state certification received by a massage therapist or a nontherapeuticmassage practitioner must be displayed in an area visible by the customers of the place of business. The Chief of Police of his/her designee may inspect 
1:594 

a business offering massage therapy without notice to assure certification iscurrent and posted. 
§ 312-4. Violations and penalties.110 
In compliance with state law, any individual who violates a provision ofthe state certification is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction shall be subject to a penalty as provided in § 3-5A-11 of the Health OccupationsArticle of the Annotated Code. 
Chapter 334 
PARKS AND RECREATION 
GENERAL REFERENCES  
Amusements — See Ch. 128.  Fireworks — See Ch. 198.  
Animals — See Ch. 134.  Itinerant  merchants,  vendors  and  
solicitors — See Ch. 272.  

§ 334-1. Applicability. [Amended 11-17-2008 by Ord. No. 715-08] 

These provisions shall apply in and upon the following Town park lands andfacilities: Shamrock Park, not including the William Humbert Ampitheater, Aquilla Scott Park, Rockfield Park, Alice Anne Park, Plumtree Park, Homestead Park and Majors Choice Park. 
§ 334-2. Permits. 
A. 	Permits for exclusive use of any park facility may be issued by theDirector of the Department of Administration. Permits for reserving theball fields can be obtained from the Bel Air Parks and Recreation Office. No permit shall be issued for exclusive use of Rockfield Playground. TheWilliam Humbert Ampitheater is used exclusively for Town and Parks and Recreation events. [Amended 11-17-2008 by Ord. No. 715-08] 
B. 	Application for permit shall be made on a form furnished by the Director of the Department of Administration. 
C. 	No permit shall be issued to anyone under the age of 18 years. 
D. 	The holder of a group permit issued by the Department of Administration shall be financially responsible for the destruction ofpark property by any person or persons covered by the permit. 
110.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:595 
E. 	All permits shall be displayed upon the request of the Department ofPublic Works personnel or law enforcement agencies with enforcement duties within the Town of Bel Air. 
F. 	In addition, the Director of Administration shall have the authority torevoke or suspend any license or permit of any person violating any of these provisions. 
§ 334-3. Destruction of property. 
No person shall deface, alter, injure or disturb any monument, boundary line, physical structure, land, trees, shrubs or gardens, installation notices,signs, or historical or prehistorical site. 
§ 334-4. Fires. 
A. 	No person shall build or cause to be built any fire except withindesignated areas nor leave any fire unless attended by a responsible person. 
B. 	Permits for bonfires may be issued by the Director of Administration.No bonfires shall be built without a permit. 
§ 334-5. Animal protection and control. 
A. 	No person shall pursue, catch, molest, or kill any wildlife or disturb thenest, den or burrow thereof. 
B. 	No person shall permit any domesticated animal to create a nuisance or to run at large unless posted to the contrary. 
C. 	Pet owners shall not allow a dog to soil, defile, defecate or commit anyother nuisance upon any property. 
D. 	Pet owners must take immediate steps to eliminate any such nuisance, as cited in this section, including feces caused by a dog, in an appropriate and sanitary manner. 
§ 334-6. Swimming. 
No person shall swim in any park waters or pools, except at such times andplaces as may be designated for such purpose. 
§ 334-7. Operation and parking of motor-driven vehicles. 
A. 	No vehicle shall block or partially block any trail or road. This subsection shall not apply to law enforcement officers or Public Works Department employees in the discharge of their official duties. 
B. 	No person shall operate any type of minibike, trail bike, all-terrainvehicle, snowmobile or other vehicle that cannot be registered for operation on the public highways. 
1:596 

C. 	No person shall operate any vehicle of a class eligible for registrationfor operation on public highways, except upon roadways or within areas otherwise designated by the Chief of Police or his designee. 
§ 334-8. Horses. 
A. 	No one shall ride a horse in a negligent manner. 
B. 	No person shall ride a horse, pony or other animal on park property,unless designated by the Director of Administration or his/her designee. 
§ 334-9. Trespass. 
A. 	No persons shall remain upon park property at any time betweensunset of any day and sunrise of the following day, unless under permitissued by the Director of the Department of Administration. 
B. 	No person shall remain upon park property after a lawful commandto leave the area is issued by any law enforcement officer or by theDirector of Public Works or his authorized representative. 
§ 334-10. Peddling and soliciting. 
No person shall peddle or solicit business of any nature. No person shallcollect any funds for any service or charity, distribute handbills or other advertising matter, or post any signs on any park lands, waters, or structures unless authorized to do so by the Department of Administrationin writing. 
§ 334-11. Hindering employees. 
No person shall interfere with any employee or agent of the Town in theperformance of any official duty. 
§ 334-12. Use of loudspeaker, public address system or amplifier. 
No person shall use a loudspeaker, public address system, or amplifierwithin or upon park property unless permitted as part of a Town-approved special event. 
§ 334-13. Firearms. 
No person shall have in his possession any firearm, hunting equipment or bow/arrows while upon park property. This section shall not apply to anypersons authorized by law to carry firearms in the discharge of their officialduties. 
§ 334-14. Littering. 
A. 	All litter shall be discarded in the container provided for such purpose. 
1:597 

B. 	Only refuse that is a result of use within park property shall be discarded in the container provided. 
§ 334-15. Skating and coasting. 
A. 	No person shall skate, sled or walk on any ice, or ski, except when andwhere designated by the Department of Public Works. 
B. 	No person shall skate, sled or coast in a negligent manner. 
C. 	Skateboards, in-line skates, roller blades, roller skates or other similar devices are prohibited in any playground or parkland. Violation of this restriction is subject to penalties specified in § 450-38 of the Bel AirTown Code. 
§ 334-16. Public exhibition. 
No person shall indulge in any exhibitions or carry on any performancewhich interferes with the proper use of the park by the general publicwithout first having a permit from the Department of Administration. 
§ 334-17. Fees and charges. 
No person shall use any facility, land or area for which a fee or charge hasbeen established by the Town without payment of such fee or charge. 
§ 334-18. Violations and penalties. 
A. 	Except where otherwise provided herein, any person violating thischapter will be issued a civil citation and shall be fined as provided in Chapter 1, Article II of this Code. Each offense shall be treated asa separate infraction. It shall be a municipal infraction to violate anyregulation or rule stated herein.111 
B. 	In addition, the Director of Administration shall have the authority torevoke or suspend any license or permit of any person violating any ofthese provisions. 
Chapter 339 
PAWNBROKERS 
§ 339-1. County regulations to apply. 
Pawnbrokers within the Town of Bel Air are hereby regulated under theprovisions of Part II, General Legislation, Chapter 157, Licenses andPermits, § 157-24 and Chapter 188, Pawnbrokers, respectively, of the Harford County Code. The provisions of the County Code shall be enforcedwithin the corporate limits of the Town of Bel Air in the same manner and 
111.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:598 
by the same officials and with the same effect as in unincorporated areas ofHarford County, and all persons with the Town shall be required to abide by said provisions and to pay the required fee to Harford County, Maryland, inthe manner prescribed in said provisions. Violation of said provisions shallbe a misdemeanor punishable under the provisions of Chapter 1, Article II of the Code of the Town of Bel Air. 
Chapter 345 
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER 
GENERAL REFERENCES  
Alarm systems — See Ch. 122.  Itinerant merchants, solicitors — See Ch. 272.  vendors  and  
Animals — See Ch. 134.  

Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 450. 
Firearms, fireworks and explosives — See Ch.
198. 
1:599 

ARTICLE I 
Noise 
§ 345-1. Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases are defined as follows: 
DAYTIME HOURS — From 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. every day. 
dBA — Abbreviation for the sound level in decibels determined by the A-weighting network of a sound-level meter or by calculation from octaveband or one-third octave band data. 
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Planning and Community Development and/or the Police Department. 
NIGHTTIME HOURS — From 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. every day. 
NOISE — The intensity, frequency, duration, and character of sound, including sound and vibration of subaudible frequencies. 
NOISE POLLUTION — The presence of noise of sufficient loudness, character and duration which, whether from a single source or multiple sources, is, or may be predicted with reasonable certainty to be, injuriousto health or which unreasonably interferes with the proper enjoyment ofproperty or with any lawful business or activity. 
PERSON — Any individual, group of individuals, firm, partnership,voluntary association, or private, public, or municipal corporation, or political subdivision of the state, or department, bureau, agency, or instrument of federal, state, or local government, responsible for the use of property. 
PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Any sound produced by a radio, tape player, phonograph, disc player, computer, loudspeaker, microphone or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument, including an amplified,acoustic or percussive instrument, that can be clearly heard by a person using his or her own normal hearing faculties. Any law enforcement officerwho hears a sound that is plainly audible, as defined herein, shall be entitledto measure the sound according to the following standards: 
A. 	The primary means of detection shall be by means of the officer'sordinary auditory senses, so long as his or her hearing is not enhancedby any mechanical device, such as a hearing aid. 
B. 	The police officer need not determine the particular words or phrasesbeing produced or the name of any song or artist producing the sound.The detection of a rhythmic bass reverberating-type sound is sufficient to constitute a plainly audible sound. 
C. 	The police officer must be able to determine the source or origin ofthe sound, whether by direct line of sight from the affected residential property or by articulating such other reasonable basis for such 
1:601 

determination if there is no direct line of sight confirmation of thesource or origin of the sound. 
SOURCE — Any person or property, real or personal, contributing to noisepollution. 
ZONING DISTRICT — An area within the Town within which certain uniform regulations or requirements apply under the Town's Zoning Ordinance. Forthe purposes of this article, zoning districts shall be classified as follows.Boundaries of the zoning districts shall be determined as specified on the attached map, shown as Exhibit A.112 
A. 	COMMERCIAL — Zones B1, B2 and B3. 
B. 	INDUSTRIAL — Zone M1. 
C. 	RESIDENTIAL — Zones R-0, R-1, R-2 and R-3. 
§ 345-2. Noise prohibitions. 
A. 	Except as provided for herein, no person shall create or permit noise levels that exceed those specified in Table 1; such noise levels are themaximum levels permitted by state law. 
Table 1 
Maximum Allowable Noise Levels (dBA) for Receiving ZoningDistricts 
construction or demolition site activities which exceed: 
Day/Night  Industrial  Commercial  Residential  
Day  75  67  65  
Night  75  62  55  
B. A person may not cause  or permit  noise  levels  emanating  from  

(1) 	
During daytime hours: 90 dBA. 

(2) 	
During nighttime hours: the levels specified in Table 1. 


C. 	It is unlawful for any person or persons to play, use or operate orpermit to be played, used or operated any radio, tape recorder, cassetteplayer or other machine or device for reproducing sound if the sound generated is audible at a distance of 50 feet from the device producingthe sound and if the device is located in or on either of the following: 
(1) 	
Any public property, including any public street, highway, building, sidewalk, park, parking lot or thoroughfare; or 

(2) 	
Any motor vehicle on a public street, highway or public space. 


112.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is posted in the Town Hall. 
1:602 
D. 	Possession by a person or persons of any of the machines or devices orinstruments enumerated in Subsection C shall be prima facie evidence that the person operates, or those persons operate, the machine ordevice. [Amended 12-3-2012 by Ord. No. 756-12] 
E. 	It is unlawful for any person to cause or permit, beyond the propertyline of a source, vibration of such direct intensity to cause anotherperson to be aware of the vibration by such direct means as sensation of touch or visual observation of moving objects. The observer shall belocated at or within the property line of the receiving property when vibration determinations are made. [Added 12-3-2012 by Ord. No. 756-12] 
§ 345-3. Exemptions. 
A. 	The provisions of this article do not apply to devices used solely for the purpose of warning, protecting, or alerting the public, or some segmentthereof, of the existence of an emergency or hazardous situation. 
B. 	The provisions of this article do not apply to the following: 
(1) 	
Household tools and portable appliances in normal usage duringthe daylight hours. 

(2) 	
Lawn care and snow removal equipment (daytime only) when used and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications. 

(3) 	
Blasting operations for demolition and construction (daytime only). 

(4) 	
Emergency operations. 

(5) 	
Pile driving equipment during the daytime hours of 8:00 a.m. to

5:00 p.m. 

(6) 	
Sound created by sporting events, amusement and entertainment events or other public gatherings operated in accordance withproperly issued permits and/or licenses and conducted in accordance with all applicable local laws, ordinances and regulations, provided that said sound is not electronicallyamplified. 

(7) 	
Construction and repair work on public property. 

(8) 	
Air-conditioning or heat pump equipment used to cool or heat housing on residential property. For this equipment, a person may not cause or permit noise levels which exceed 70 dBA for air-conditioning equipment at receiving residential property and 75dBA for heat pump equipment at receiving residential property. 


§ 345-4. Variance procedure. 

1:603 

A. 	Any person who believes that meeting the requirements of §§ 345-1and 345-2 above will create undue hardship in a particular case may request a variance to the requirements. 
B. 	Variance requests submitted to the Town shall be in writing and shallinclude evidence to show that compliance will create undue hardship and that no reasonably practicable alternative is available. 
C. 	Upon receipt of a request for a variance, the Town Events Committeeshall schedule a hearing to be held within 60 days. 
D. 	Upon receipt of a variance application, the Town Events Committeeshall publish notice of the public hearing in at least one newspaperof general circulation in the Town. Such notice shall be published at least seven days prior to the hearing date. The notice shall includethe name of the applicant and such additional information as the TownEvents Committee may require. The applicant shall be responsible for all advertising fees. 
E. 	Based upon evidence presented at the hearing, the Town Events Committee may grant a variance to §§ 345-1 and 345-2 above for a period not to exceed 180 days under terms and conditions appropriateto reduce the impact of the variance. 
F. 	Variances shall be renewable after a public hearing scheduled following the receipt by the Town Events Committee of evidence that conditionsunder which the variance was originally granted have not changedsignificantly. All renewals require the same notice and timing as the initial application. 
G. 	The applicant for a variance shall reimburse the Town Events Committee for any costs incurred by the Town associated with hearings and decisions related to the variance. 
H. 	In issuing variances under this article, the Town Events Committeeshall consult with the Maryland Department of the Environment to assure that consistency with state noise laws and regulations is maintained. 
§ 345-5. Measurement. 
A. 	The equipment and techniques employed in the measurement of noiselevels may be those recommended by the Maryland State Departmentof the Environment, which may, but need not, refer to currently accepted standards of recognized organizations, including but not limited to the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), AmericanSociety for Testing and Materials (ASTM), Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE), and United States Environmental Protection Agency(EPA). 
B. The measurement of noise levels shall be conducted at points on or within the property line of the receiving property or the boundary of a 
1:604 

zoning district and may be conducted at any point for the determinationof identity in multiple source situations. 
C. 	Sound-level meters used to determine compliance shall meet or exceedthe specifications of the American National Standards Institute or itssuccessor bodies, ANSI S1.4-1971 for Type II sound-level meters. 
D. 	Sound levels assessed under the plainly audible standard shall be inaccordance with § 345-2 above. 
§ 345-6. Determination of violation. 
A. 	It will be prima facie evidence of a violation of this article if the soundor noise can be heard and measured at the levels described in § 345-2above. 
B. 	Where the noise source is located in a building or other structure, theowner, occupant, resident, manager, or other person in charge of thepremises shall, if present, be presumed to have permitted the noise in the absence of evidence to the contrary. 
C. 	Where portable noise-producing devices such as radios, tape recorders/players, compact disc players, stereos, etc., are present in, or being transported through, a public area, street, park, etc., either by a personor in a vehicle, the person or persons in possession of the device and/orvehicle shall be presumed to have permitted the noise in the absence of evidence to the contrary. 
D. 	A police officer, or other designated enforcement official of the Town,may, if he has probable cause to believe a prima facie violation of this article is being committed in his presence, view, or hearing, issue amunicipal infraction or citation as hereafter provided. 
§ 345-7. Violations and penalties. 
A. 	Penalty for violation. Violation by any person of any provision of thisarticle is declared to be a municipal infraction punishable as providedin Chapter 1, Article II of this Code.113 
B. 	Each day a violation occurs will be considered a separate offense,and each time that a violation is committed in any one day shall beconsidered a separate offense. 
C. 	Police officers, or other duly appointed and authorized Town officials,may issue orders to cease and desist under guidelines approved by theTown of Bel Air. 
D. 	In addition to the foregoing remedy, the Town may seek any otherremedies available to it at law or in equity. 
113.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:605 
E. 	A violator who has submitted to the Town a plan for compliance withthis article and has that plan or amendments to it approved by the Town may not be considered to be in violation of this article as long as heacts in accordance with the original or amended plan. All such plans forcompliance will be on file with the Town of Bel Air Police Department. 
F. 	Nothing herein should be construed to prohibit enforcement of the state laws and regulations by the Maryland Department of the Environment. 
1:606 

ARTICLE II 
General Regulations 
§ 345-8. Obstructing streets; obscene language; disorderly conduct. 
No person shall willfully obstruct or hinder the free passage of persons passing along or by any public street or highway in the Town or shallprofanely curse and swear or use obscene language upon or near to anysuch street or highway within the hearing of persons passing by or along such highway or shall willfully act in a riotous and disorderly manner. 
§ 345-9. Loitering. 
A. 	Definitions. As used in this section, the following words or phrases shall have the meanings set forth below: 
COMMERCIAL PREMISES — Any business premises operating forprofit or any place of amusement or entertainment to which the general public is invited or permitted, including parking lots adjacent to orconnected with such premises. 
LOITER — To idle, stand, remain or tarry or to collect, gather or be a member of a group or crowd of people who are gathered togetheron any commercial premises without conducting any lawful businesswith the owner or operator thereof or, having patronized such business establishment, to remain on such premises an unreasonable length oftime after having been directed to leave by such owner, operator orauthorized agent and a police officer, as prescribed in Subsection B of this section. 
B. 	Prohibited conduct. 
(1) 	
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter on or about any commercial premises, during ordinary business hours, after havingbeen requested to leave by the owner, operator or authorized agentof such premises and after having been directed to leave by a police officer. 

(2) 	
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, without the consentof the owner, operator or authorized agent, on or about any commercial premises after such premises have been closed forbusiness purposes and after such person has been requested toleave by a police officer. 

(3) 	
Nothing herein shall be construed so as to prevent any orderlypicketing or other lawful assembly. 


§ 345-10. Trespassing on public property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to trespass on any public parkinglot or other public property posted by resolution of the Board of TownCommissioners of Bel Air and owned or leased by the Town of Bel Air after 
1:607 

closing hours set by resolution of the Board of Town Commissioners of BelAir. Such persons so trespassing after said closing hours shall be guilty of a municipal infraction of trespassing on public property and shall be subjectto the fines and penalties as set forth in § 345-12 of this article. 
§ 345-11. Prohibited conduct on public property or in public view.[Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 723-09] 
It shall be unlawful for any person to eat food or drink any beverageor to play a radio, tape deck, cassette player or other electronic device or musical instrument which broadcasts the human voice, music or other sounds on any public parking lot posted by resolution of the Board of TownCommissioners of Bel Air and owned or leased by the Town of Bel Air, and it shall be unlawful for any person to congregate on any public parkinglot so posted and owned or leased by the Town of Bel Air for the purposeof eating, drinking, or listening to any radio, tape deck, cassette player or other electronic device or musical instrument. No person shall urinate ordefecate in any public place or in public view, except within proper facilitiesdesignated as public restrooms. Persons violating this section shall be guilty of a municipal infraction and shall be subject to the fines and penalties asset forth in § 345-12 of this article. 
§ 345-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-17-2008 by Ord.No. 715-08] 
Any person violating any of the provisions of §§ 345-8, 345-9, 345-10 and345-11 of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, of this Code. 
§ 345-13. Wagering and betting. 
No game, device or contrivance at which money or any other thing shall be bet, wagered or risked shall be allowed within the corporate limits of theTown of Bel Air. 
§ 345-14. Alcoholic beverages. 
A. 	Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms arehereby defined: 
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Alcohol, brandy, whisky, rum, gin, cordial, beer, ale, porter, stout, wine, cider, or any other spirituous, vinous, malt,or fermented liquor, liquid or compound, by whatever name called,containing 1/2 of 1% or more of alcohol by volume, which is fit for drinking purposes. 
LOCATED ON — A person's physical presence upon an area hereinafterdesignated in this section without regard as to whether such a person may be the occupant of a motor vehicle. 
OPEN CONTAINER — Any bottle, can, glass, cup, or other container which is not closed or sealed by a permanent seal in the case of 
1:608 

B. 
C. 
D. 
nonresealable container or by a cap, lid, or cork in the case of a resealable container. 
PUBLIC PARKING LOT — Any improved parking lot which is maintainedfor access by the public without regard to whether such a parking lotis owned and maintained by a governmental agency or by an individual partnership or corporation. 
PUBLIC SIDEWALK — Any sidewalk paralleling any public street, lane, or highway, as defined in this subsection, which is available to pedestrian traffic by the public at large. "Public sidewalk" shall also mean any sidewalk providing access from a public street, lane, or highway to a building or facility owned by any governmental agency and used for a public purpose. 
PUBLIC STREET, LANE OR HIGHWAY — Any street, lane, highway, orother thoroughfare maintained by public funds and lying within the Town of Bel Air. Such street, lane, highway, or thoroughfare shall bedeemed public without regard to whether it is actually maintained bythe State of Maryland, Harford County, or the Town of Bel Air. 
Prohibited acts. 
(1) 	
It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or consume anyalcoholic beverage while located on any public street, lane or highway. 

(2) 	
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or drink any alcoholic beverage while located on any public sidewalk. 

(3) 	
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or drink anyalcoholic beverage while located on any public parking lot whichhas been posted by a sign in accordance with the provisions of this article indicating that the consumption of alcoholic beverages uponsaid parking lot is prohibited during designated hours or that theconsumption of alcoholic beverages is prohibited on said parking lot at all times. 

(4) 	
It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or consume anyalcoholic beverages within the confines of any park owned by the Town of Bel Air between the hours of sunset and sunrise. 


Possession of open container. The action of drinking or consumingalcoholic beverages in Subsection B(1), (2), (3) and (4) as set forth above shall also include the act of possessing an open container of anyalcoholic beverages. 
Provisions for warning. Before any person shall be convicted of drinking or consuming alcoholic beverages while located on a public parkinglot, it shall be first shown that the parking lot was posted by legiblesigns giving notice that the consumption of alcoholic beverages while located on said parking lot is prohibited or that the person charged hadpreviously been verbally warned by the owner, by a person acting for 
1:609 

the owner, or by a police officer that the consumption of an alcoholicbeverage while located on said parking lot was prohibited. 
E. 	Penalties. Any person convicted of violating the provisions of thissection shall be deemed guilty of a municipal infraction and shall befined as provided in Chapter 1, Article II of this Code.114 
114.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:610 ARTICLE III 
Obscene Performance 
§ 345-15. Definition. 
For the purpose of this article, an obscene performance, movie, film, peep show, exhibition, drama, play, show, dancing exhibition, tableau or entertainment shall be defined as one which the average person, applyingcontemporary community standards, would find, taken as a whole, appeals to his or her prurient interest and which, taken as a whole, lacks seriousliterary, artistic, political, or scientific value and where, in a patentlyoffensive way, it conveys to the observer sexual conduct: 
A. 	As specifically defined in any statute of Maryland proscribing obscenityor obscene performances; or 
B. 	As specifically defined as follows, whether actual or simulated: sexual or anal intercourse, masturbation, fellatio, cunnilingus, or the fondlingof the buttocks, anus, breasts, or genitalia of oneself or another, orsexual stimulation by means of contact with animals or inanimate objects, or urination or defecation. For the purposes of this article,"stimulation" shall mean the representation of an activity by mimicry, gesture, or bodily movement in a manner that would clearly and unmistakably convey to an average adult that such activity is intendedto be represented thereby. 
§ 345-16. Offenses. 
Any person who as actor, dancer, owner, manager, producer, director, movie or film projectionist, agent, or in any other capacity prepares, shows,projects, gives, directs, presents, performs, or participates in any obscene performance, movie, film, peep show, exhibition, drama, play, show, dancingexhibition, tableau, or entertainment in the presence of any other person orpersons who have paid a consideration of any type whatsoever to observe the obscene performance, movie, film, peep show, exhibition, drama, play,show, dancing exhibition, tableau or entertainment and every owner, lessee,or manager of any theater, garden, building, room, place or structure who knowingly permits the same to be used for the purpose of any obsceneperformance, movie, film, peep show, exhibition, drama, play, show, dancingexhibition, tableau or entertainment, or who assents to its use for any such purpose, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,shall be fined or imprisoned as provided hereafter. 
§ 345-17. Violations and penalties. 
A. 	Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall bedeemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, be subject to apenalty as provided in Chapter 1, Article II of this Code.115 
115.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:611 
B. 	Each occurrence of a violation of this article in a separate twenty-four­hour period shall be considered a separate violation and punished as such. 
1:612 

Chapter 353 
PLUMBING AND GAS FITTING STANDARDS 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Building construction — See Ch. 145. Sewers — See Ch. 397. Fire prevention — See Ch. 204. 
§ 353-1. Adoption of Plumbing Code and Fuel Gas Code. 
For the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the proper design, acceptable installation and adequate maintenance of plumbing and fuel-operated systems within the Town of Bel Air, permits and the fixing ofpenalties and fees, the Town of Bel Air hereby adopts the 2015 International Plumbing Code, the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 Edition, published bythe International Code Council and the American Gas Association and the 2015 International Residential Code, saving and excepting such portions as are deleted, modified or amended by this chapter, and the same arehereby adopted and made part of this chapter with the same force andeffect as though set forth in full herein. A copy of the Plumbing Code and supplements thereto are on file with the Town of Bel Air and open for publicuse, examination and inspection. 
§ 353-2. Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide practical plumbing and gas fittingrequirements to safeguard persons and gas fitting conditions in the Town ofBel Air. 
§ 353-3. Scope and applicability. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to and govern plumbing and gasfitting work performed in the Town of Bel Air and are designed to safeguard persons and property in the Town of Bel Air. 
§ 353-4. Modifications. 
A. 	Definitions. As used in this Code, the term "authority having jurisdiction" means the Town of Bel Air Director of Public Works. 
B. 	The following sections are changes or additions to certain sections ofthe 2015 International Plumbing Code. 
(1) 	Subsection 101.1, Title, is hereby amended by substituting thewords "Town of Bel Air" for the words "name of jurisdiction." 
1:613 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

(7) 

(8) 

(9) 


Subsection 103.1, General, is hereby amended by deleting "TheDepartment of Plumbing Inspection is hereby created and the executive official in charge thereof 'the Director of Public Works'." 
Subsection 106.3, Application for permit, is hereby amended byadding "who shall meet with the requirements of § 202-5 of the Harford County Plumbing Code" after the word "agent" in the sixthline. 
Subsection 106.3.1, Construction documents, is hereby amended by adding "All plans shall be prepared in accordance with § 202-7of the Harford County Plumbing Code" in the fourth line after "fora permit." 
New Subsection 106.3.4 is added as follows: 
106.3.4 Emergency work. When work of an emergency nature, other than sewage disposal work, must be performed to rectify acondition that is potentially unsanitary or hazardous to life, healthor property, the master plumber, master natural gas fitter, water pump contractor or on-site contractor, as the case may be, mayundertake such work prior to the issuance of a permit, but he or she shall notify the authority having jurisdiction over the emergency and shall obtain a permit for such work within 48 hoursof the commencement of the work. 
Subsection 106.5.3, Expiration, is hereby amended by deleting "180" in the fourth line and inserting, in lieu thereof, "365." 
Subsection 106.5.3, Expiration, is hereby amended by deleting"one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work" starting in the ninth line and inserting, in lieu thereof, "in accordance with Chapter 157 of the Harford County PlumbingCode, as amended." 
Subsection 106.6.1 is deleted and the following is inserted in lieuthereof: 
106.6.1 Fee schedule. The fees for all plumbing work, includingpermit fees, plan review, inspections and reinspections, shall be charged in accordance with Chapter 157 of the Harford CountyPlumbing Code, as amended. 
Subsection 106.6.2 and 106.6.3 are deleted and the following is inserted in lieu thereof: 
106.6.2 Refunding of fees. Fees shall be refunded in accordance with Chapter 157 of the Harford County Plumbing Code, as amended. 
(10)Subsection 108.4, Violation penalties, is hereby amended by deleting "[specify offense], punishable by a fine of not more than[amount] dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding [number of 
1:614 

days], or both such fine and imprisonment" in the seventh lineand inserting, in lieu thereof, and replacing with "misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, of the Bel Air TownCode." 
(11)Subsection 108.5, Stop work orders, is hereby amended by deleting "[amount] dollars or more than [amount]" in the 14th line andinserting, in lieu thereof, and replacing with "misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, of the Bel Air Town Code." 
(12)Subsection 109.1, Application for appeal, is hereby amended byadding "created under Chapter 82 of the Harford County Plumbing Code" after "Board of Appeals" in the third and fourth lines. 
(13)Subsections 109.2 through 109.7 are deleted. 
(14)Section 202, General definitions, is hereby amended by deleting the definition of "plumbing" and inserting the following in lieu thereof: 
PLUMBING. The practice, materials and fixtures used in the installation, maintenance, extension, alteration and removal of all piping, plumbing fixtures, plumbing appliances, and plumbingappurtenances in connection with any of the following: sanitary drainage, storm facilities, venting systems, public or private watersupply systems, within or adjacent to any building structure orconveyance; also the practice and materials used in the installation, maintenance, extension, alteration or removal of stormwater, refrigeration and air-conditioning drainage, liquid waste or sewage, and water supply, of any premises to their connection with the water supply system or to an acceptable disposal facility."Plumbing" also means the practice and materials in the installation, repair, service and replacement of gas piping, gas utilization equipment, and associated accessories. 
Except for the initial connection to a potable water supplydownstream of the backflow preventer and the final connection that discharges indirectly into a public or private disposal system,the following are excluded from the definition: all piping,equipment or material used exclusively for environmental control, for incorporation of liquids or gases into any product or processfor use in the manufacturing or storage of any product, includingproduct development, or for the installation, alteration, repair or removal of automatic sprinkler systems installed for fire protectiononly or their related appurtenances or standpipes connected toautomatic sprinkler systems or overhead or underground fire lines beginning at a point where water is used exclusively for fire protection. 
1:615 

(15) 
(16) 

(17) 

(18) 

(19) 

(20) 

(21) 

(22) 


Section 202, General definitions, is amended by adding the definition of "Plumbing Board" between the terms "plumbing appurtenance" and "plumbing fixture": 
PLUMBING BOARD. The Harford County Plumbing Board as defined in § 16-7 of the Harford County Plumbing Code, as amended. 
Subsection 301.3, Connections to drainage system, is hereby amended by adding the following to the end of the sixth line: "Thedrainage system of any building in which plumbing fixtures areinstalled shall be connected to a public sewer system if the public sewer system is within 10 feet of any property line of the premises,or other reasonable distance as determined by the authority havingjurisdiction." 
Subsection 301.4, Connections to water supply, is hereby amendedby adding the following to the end of the fifth line: "The waterdistribution system of any building in which plumbing fixtures are installed shall be connected to a public water supply system if thepublic water supply system is within 10 feet of any property lineof the premises, or other reasonable distance as determined by the authority having jurisdiction." 
New Subsection 404.2 is added as follows: 
404.2 Maryland Accessibility Code. Plumbing fixtures, materialsand clearances for those fixtures shall be accessible to individuals with disabilities as specified in the Maryland Accessibility Code,COMAR 05.02.02 et seq. 
New Subsection 405.3.6 is added as follows: 
405.3.6. Faucet installations. Fiberglass or plastic tub andshower enclosures cannot be installed with faucets back-to-back unless approved by the authority having jurisdiction. 
Subsection 504.6, Requirements for discharge piping, is herebyamended by deleting item 5 and inserting in lieu thereof, "discharge to a waste receptor or to the outdoors." 
Subsection 504.7, Required pan, is hereby amended by adding thewords, "clothes washing machine" after the word "heater" in the first line. 
New Subsection 603.3 is added as follows: 
603.3 Water meters. Each dwelling unit which meets the definition of a "dwelling, carriage court" contained in § 267-4 of the Harford County Plumbing Code, as amended, shall be providedwith a private, individual water meter. 
1:616 

(23)Subsection 604.8 is deleted and the following is inserted in lieuthereof: 
604.8 Water-pressure-reducing valve or regulator. When connected to a public water supply system, an approved pressure-reducing valve shall be installed in the building water service pipe near its point of entrance to the building. Pressure to the buildingwater distribution piping shall be limited to a maximum pressureof 80 P.S.I. under no-flow conditions. The water distribution piping shall be relieved of excessive pressure due to thermal expansionby one of the following methods: 
1. 	
Air chambers when equipped with an accessible means restoring the air. 

2. 	
Approved mechanical devices. Pressure at any fixture shall belimited to no more than 80 P.S.I. under no-flow conditions. 


Exceptions: Where the water service pipe supplies waterdirectly to: 
1. 	
A water pressure booster system; or 

2. 	
An elevated water gravity tank; or 

3. 	
Pumps provided in connection with a hydro pneumatic or elevated gravity water supply tank system. 


(24)Subsection 605.3 is deleted and the following is inserted in lieuthereof: 
605.3. Water service pipe. Approved water service pipe to the point of the entrance of a building, including piping to the pressure-reducing valve, shall have a minimum pressure rating of 200 P.S.I.,73° F. Acceptable materials for a water service include brass pipe, copper tube or copper pipe, cast iron water pipe, polyethyleneplastic tubing and chlorinated polyvinyl chloride service pipe.Copper tube or copper pipe, when used underground, may not be less than Type L. All threaded ferrous pipe and fitting shallbe galvanized or cement lines and, when used underground incorrosive soil or filled ground, shall be coal tar enamel coated, or the equivalent, and threaded joints shall be coated and wrappedwhen installed. 
(25)New Subsection 605.3.2 is added as follows: 
605.3.2 Backflow prevention on commercial properties. For a commercial property with multiple tenants, the water service for each tenant space shall be separate and shall have a testablebackflow preventer installed. 
(26)Subsection 605.4 is deleted and the following is inserted in lieu thereof: 
1:617 

605.4 Water distribution pipe. Water distribution pipe shall be of brass pipe, copper tube or copper pipe, galvanized steel pipe,polyethylene and chlorinated polyvinyl plastic when approved forhot or cold use. Copper tube or copper pipe, when used underground, may not be less than Type L and, when used aboveground, may not be less than Type M. 
(27)Subsection 1002.4.1.4 is deleted. 
(28)Subsection 1003.3.1, Grease interceptors and automatic greaseremoval devices required, is amended by adding, prior to the word"A" in the second line, "except in special cases as determined by the authority having jurisdiction." 
(29)Subsection 1003.3.1, Grease interceptors and automatic greaseremoval devices required, is hereby amended by inserting the following sentence after "to be discharged" in the 14th line: "uponrequest by the authority having jurisdiction or the Harford CountyHealth Department, the owner of the establishment shall provide a copy of a pumping contract or pumping receipts for the interceptor.The minimum size of a grease interceptor shall be 1,000 gallons.The grease interceptor shall be located outside of the building unless otherwise determined by the authority having jurisdiction.The discharge from a commercial dishwasher shall not passthrough a grease interceptor unless approved by the authority having jurisdiction." 
(30)Subsection 1003.3.1, Grease interceptors and automatic greaseremoval devices required, is hereby amended by inserting the following sentence at the end of the subsection: "Where installedinside building, a grease interceptor shall be located in a separateroom which has outside access." 
(31)New subsection 1101.10 is added as follows: 
1101.10. Parking and fuel island storm drainage. On parkinglots, fuel islands or parking garages where oil waste product issubject to mixing with rain water, ice and melting snow, drains for the runoff shall not be connected to the sanitary sewer. Anystormwater runoff shall be drained separately to the storm sewer. 
C. 	The following sections are changes or additions to certain sections of the 2015 International Fuel Gas Code. 
(1) 	
Subsection 101.1, Title, is hereby amended by substituting thewords "Town of Bel Air" for the words "[name of jurisdiction]." 

(2) 	
Subsection 101.3, Appendices, is hereby deleted and the followingis inserted in lieu thereof: 


1:618 

101.3 Appendices. The provisions of Appendix A, Appendix B, Appendix C and Appendix D are hereby adopted as part of thiscode. 
(3) 	
Subsection 103.1, General, is hereby amended by deleting "The Department of Inspection is hereby created and the executiveofficial in charge thereof" starting in the first line and inserting, inlieu thereof, "The Director of the Department of Public Works." 

(4) 	
Subsections 103.2 through 103.4 are hereby deleted and the following is inserted in lieu thereof: 

103.2 Deputy. The Code Official shall have the authority to designate an employee of the Department of Public Works as a Deputy Code Official, for the purposes of enforcing the code. 

(5) 	
Subsection 104.2, Applicants and permits, is amended by adding"and rules and regulations adopted in accordance with Section 807 of the Harford County Charter" after the words "of this code" in thesixth line. 

(6) 	
Subsections 106.1.1 through 106.1.2 are deleted. 

(7) 	
Subsection 106.3.1, Construction documents, is amended bydeleting "by a registered design professional when required bystate law" and replacing with "in accordance with § 202-7 of the Harford County Plumbing Code." 

(8) 	
Subsection 106.3.3 is added as follows: 

106.3.3 Applicants. Only an individual holding a certificate ofregistration in accordance with § 202-5 of the Harford CountyPlumbing Code shall be eligible to make application for a permit to do work governed by this code. 

(9) 	
Subsection 106.5.3, Expiration, is amended by deleting "180 days"in the fourth line and replacing with "365 days." 


(10)Subsection 106.5.3, Expiration, is amended by deleting "one-halfthe amount required for a new permit" in the eighth line andreplacing with "in accordance with Chapter 157 of the Harford County Plumbing Code, as amended." 
(11)Subsection 106.6.1, Work commencing before permit issuance, isamended by deleting "100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required" in the fourth line and replacing with "thefees prescribed in Chapter 157 of the Harford County PlumbingCode, as amended." 
(12)Subsection 106.6.2, Fee schedule, is amended by deleting "thefollowing section schedule. [jurisdiction to insert appropriateschedule]" and replacing with "as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, of the Bel Air Town Code." 
1:619 

(13)Subsection 106.6.3, Fee refunds, is deleted and the following isinserted in lieu thereof: 
106.6.3 Fee refunds. All refunds of permit fees shall be inaccordance with Chapter 157 of the Harford County Plumbing Code, as amended. 
(14)Subsection 108.4, Violation penalties, is amended by deleting"[specify offense]" in sixth line, "[amount]" in seventh line and "[number of days]" in the eighth line and replacing with "misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, ofthe Bel Air Town Code." 
(15)Subsection 108.5, Stop work orders, is amended by deleting "liablefor fine of not less than [amount] dollars or more than [amount]dollars" in the 13th line and replacing with "misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, of the Bel Air TownCode." 
(16)Subsection 109.1, Application for appeal, is hereby amended by adding "created under Chapter 82 of the Harford County Code"after "Board of Appeals" in the third and fourth lines. 
(17)Subsections 109.2 through 109.7 are deleted. 
(18)Section 202 (IFGC), General definitions, is amended by deleting thedefinition of "code official" and replacing with the following in lieuthereof: 
CODE OFFICIAL. The Director of Public Works for the Town of Bel Air or his/her designee. 
(19)Section 202 (IFGC), General definitions, is amended by addingthe following definition of "Department of Inspection" between the terms "demand" and "design flood elevation": 
DEPARTMENT OF INSPECTION. The Harford County Department of Inspections, Licenses and Permits. 
(20)Section 202 (IFGC), General definition, is amended by adding thedefinition of "Plumbing Board" between the terms "plumbing appurtenance" and "plumbing fixture": 
PLUMBING BOARD. The Harford County Plumbing Board as defined in § 16-7 of the Harford County Plumbing Code, as amended. 
§ 353-5. Certificate of registration. 
All persons performing plumbing or gas fitting services in the Town ofBel Air shall be registered with the Harford County Division of Plumbing Services and certified in accordance with § 202-4, Certificate of registration, of the Harford County Plumbing Code. 
1:620 

§ 353-6. Adoption of county regulations. 
The following sections of the Harford County Plumbing Code are adopted by reference and shall apply to plumbing and gas fitting services in theTown of Bel Air: § 202-5, Permit applicants, § 202-6, Change of registeredcontractors, § 202-7, Plans and specification, and § 202-8, Inspection of plumbing, gas fitting and sewage disposal systems. 
§ 353-7. Piping through adjacent property. 
Sewer, water and gas piping shall not be connected or installed through a property other than the property to be served except as provided herein.Plumbing or gas piping connections which cannot be made except by thecrossing of nonserviced property may, with the permission of the Town of Bel Air, be carried through a right-of-way or easement across nonservicedproperty, provided that: 
A. 	All privileges of such right-of-way or easement are obtained by the property owner desiring service, without any cost or liability to theTown of Bel Air; and 
B. 	Such easement or right-of-way shall meet all applicable regulatory requirements of the authority having jurisdiction; and 
C. 	Such easement or right-of-way shall be granted and conveyed by platand/or formal deed recorded in the land records of Harford County. 
§ 353-8. Water conservation. 
A. 	Plumbing shall be designed and adjusted to use the minimum quantityof water consistent with proper performance and cleaning and in conformity with the water conservation requirements established in theMaryland State Plumbing Code. 
B. 	Executive authority. The Board of Town Commissioners may institute measures to adopt plans to increase the water supply of the Town of BelAir and decrease consumption, such as, but not limited to, requiring theuse of fixtures as stated herein and requiring a limited use of potable water for purposes other than for human consumption and use. 
§ 353-9. Violations and penalties. 
Any person, firm or corporation who or which individually, collectively or through others shall construct, erect, alter or repair any plumbing, gasfitting or sewage disposal work in violation of any provision of this chaptershall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, of this Code. 
Chapter 360 
PROPERTY, LOST, STOLEN OR ABANDONED 

1:621 

§ 360-1. Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth: 
CUSTODIAN — The Chief of Police or his successor in office or his designeeand his successor in office. 
§ 360-2. Chief deemed custodian.116 
The Chief of Police of Bel Air is designated as the official custodian of eachand every article or object of personal property lost, stolen, confiscated or abandoned, which property is not in the lawful custody of any other personor court, and which property has been delivered to the Chief of Police orone of his subordinates for care, custody and control. 
§ 360-3. Property held as evidence. 
The custodian shall keep in his custody all articles of personal propertyseized or held as evidence, which property has been delivered to the custodian or one of his subordinates for care, custody and control for usein a pending or prospective trial, unless otherwise ordered by the courthaving jurisdiction or upon the proper authorization of the Town Counsel or the State's Attorney for Harford County, until the final disposition of anypending charges, including appeals or the lapse of time for filing an appeal.Thereafter, unless ordered to the contrary by the court having jurisdiction, the custodian or his designee shall make disposition of such property inaccordance with the provisions of this chapter hereinafter set forth. 
§ 360-4. Disposition generally. 
All lost, stolen, confiscated, or abandoned property, which property hasbeen delivered to the custodian for care, custody and control, not being heldpending the disposition of charges pursuant to § 360-3 shall be subject to disposition according to the provisions of §§ 360-5 through 360-10 unlessotherwise provided in this chapter or ordered to the contrary by any court. 
§ 360-5. Notification of owner.117 
The custodian shall examine any such property and, if the identity of theowner is readily available to the custodian from public records availableto him or otherwise known to him, the custodian shall notify the apparent owner by phone or, if unable to contact by phone, by United States first-class mail, postage prepaid, to the last known address of such apparentowner, mailed within a reasonable time after identification of the apparent owner, describing the property and stating that the same is held by the 
116.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
117.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:622 
custodian and may be sold or otherwise disposed of unless claimed within60 days of the giving or mailing of such notice. 
§ 360-6. Disposal of unclaimed property. 
If any such property remains unclaimed 60 days after the same is no longerrequired to be held in evidence, pursuant to § 360-3 or 60 days after the mailing of any letter of notice provided for in § 360-5, whichever is thelonger time, such property may be retained by the custodian and kept foruse by the Town for training programs or otherwise disposed of from time to time by the custodian or his designee as hereinafter set forth. 
A. 	Bicycles, tricycles, or other articles made for use by children maybe sold as hereinafter provided or may, as an alternative, be given either directly or by making the same available for distribution throughreligious, charitable, civic or other organizations or institutions; provided, however, that at least 10 days prior to any such disposition, a public notice of intention to dispose of any such articles shall bepublished in a local newspaper published in Harford County withcirculation in the Town of Bel Air, together with a description thereof, and the rightful owner may claim any such article within the periodbetween the final publication and donation upon satisfactory proof ofidentity and ownership. 
B. 	Any such property may be sold at public sale, provided that thecustodian shall cause to be published in a local newspaper, not lessthan 10 days before such sale, a notice setting forth a description of each article to be sold, the time, date, and place of sale and that anyperson who claims to be the owner of or claims any interest in anyarticle so described may appear at the Bel Air Police Department before the time and date set for sale to reclaim the same upon presentation ofsatisfactory proof of identity and ownership of such article. 
C. 	Such property which consists of jewelry, gems, watches, precious metals or other property having a unique value, including firearms, orwhich in the judgment of the custodian may bring a higher price if soldon sealed bids may, at the discretion of the custodian, be sold either at public sale as heretofore provided or to the highest bidder, after thesolicitation of sealed bids from at least three regular dealers in theparticular type of property. No such sale shall be conducted until there shall have been published in a local newspaper published in HarfordCounty with circulation in the Town of Bel Air a notice setting forth adescription of each article to be sold, the time, date, and place of bid opening and that any person who claims to be the owner of or claimsany interest in any article so described may appear at the Bel Air PoliceDepartment before the time and date set for opening of such bids to reclaim the same upon presentation of satisfactory proof of identityand ownership. Any person desiring to submit a sealed bid may do so,and such bids shall be opened and the property shall be sold to the highest bidder at the time and place specified in such notice; provided,however, that the right to reject any and all bids shall be reserved, 
1:623 

and any and all bids may be rejected if deemed too low or for anyother reason. Sales of firearms shall be made only to properly licensed dealers. 
D. 	Whenever any property is retained by the Town as provided for inthis section, it shall be added to the Town's capital assets inventory, which shall also indicate the location of the assigned property and thedesignated use thereof. 
§ 360-7. Reclaiming property. 
All such property may be reclaimed by the lawful owner upon proof ofidentity and ownership satisfactory to the custodian, or his designee, ifclaimed before the donation or sale thereof. 
§ 360-8. Failure to claim property. 
Failure to make a claim of ownership within the time limits prescribed inthis chapter, and before the sale or donation of any article, shall forever bar the owner or any person claiming ownership by, through or under the ownerfrom making any subsequent claim of ownership. 
§ 360-9. Readvertisement. 
If any property is advertised for sale or donation as in this chapter but isnot sold or donated according to the advertisement, the same may again beadvertised for sale or donation according to the provisions of this chapter and sold or donated accordingly. 
§ 360-10. Disposition after second notice. 
If any property has been twice advertised for sale or donation, the same may be destroyed, donated, kept, or used by the Town without further notice ifa claim of ownership is not made within the time limit prescribed in thesecond notice, and the owner or any person claiming ownership by, through, or under the owner shall thereafter be barred from making any claim ofownership to such property. 
§ 360-11. Proceeds of sale. 
All proceeds of a sale shall be paid to the Town Treasurer, who shall depositthe same in the general fund of the Town. 
§ 360-12. Exceptions. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, objects and articles of propertyas described in §§ 360-13 through 360-16 may be kept, held, or disposedof as herein provided without compliance with the provisions of §§ 360-4 through 360-11 relating to donation or sale. 
1:624 

§ 360-13. Firearms and weapons. 
Unless ordered to the contrary by a court of competent jurisdiction or otherwise required by state or national law, firearms and other weaponswhich may not lawfully be kept, possessed, or retained by the owner orperson otherwise entitled to the possession thereof or which may not otherwise lawfully be returned to the owner thereof or which are unclaimedafter notice to the owner pursuant to § 360-5 or the owner of which isnot known may be kept and retained by the Bel Air Police Department for use in its training programs, or otherwise, or may be donated to museumsor historical societies as the Chief may order for purposes of historicalpreservation. If said firearms or weapons are declared surplus by the Bel Air Police Department, disposition of the same may be made as otherwiseprovided in this chapter. Whenever such firearms or weapons are retainedby the Bel Air Police Department or the Town for use in its training programs, or otherwise, said items shall be accounted for in accordancewith the provisions of § 360-6. 
§ 360-14. Destruction of certain property.118 
If the property consists of burglar tools of any description, or unlawfulfirearms, or cartridges, or explosives, or armored or bulletproof clothingor other dangerous weapons, or gambling apparatus, or soiled, bloody, or unsanitary clothing, or solids or liquids of unknown or uncertain composition, or drugs, or hallucinogenic substances, or hypodermicsyringes and needles, obscene pictures, prints, effigies, statues, or any poisonous, noxious or deleterious solids or liquids, or any other propertywhich reasonably might result in injury to the health or safety of the publicor which might be subject to unlawful use, the Chief or his designee may destroy each and every article of any such nature. 
§ 360-15. Property subject to disposition under other laws. 
Motor vehicles, lost or stray animals and other property which is required to be disposed of otherwise than as provided in this chapter, by the terms ofany law or ordinance, shall not be disposed of according to the terms of thischapter. 
§ 360-16. Forfeited property revenue account. [Amended 10-6-2008by Ord. No. 713-08] 
A. 	There is established a seized property revenue account within the general fund of the Town of Bel Air to receive funds seized under thePolice Department's drug enforcement efforts or other investigativeprograms. At the end of each fiscal year, seized funds in the seized property revenue account will be rolled to a seized property fundbalance reserve account. Funds in the seized property fund balancereserve account shall be used as evidence in a judicial or administrative 
118.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:625 
proceeding and shall remain in this account until all properproceedings are complete. After proper documentation showing default judgment or administrative forfeiture action has been presented to theTown Administrator by the Chief of Police, the Director of Finance,upon written authorization from the Town Administrator, will transfer the appropriate funds from the seized property fund balance reserveaccount in the general fund to a forfeited property fund balance reserve account in the special revenue fund. Funds transferred into the forfeited property fund balance reserve account are to be used exclusively to purchase police equipment and to finance drugenforcement and community policing operations of the Bel Air Police Department and shall not be used as a source of financing for theannual current operating budget of the Police Department. Funds in theforfeited property fund balance reserve account will be used to fund current or subsequent year expenditures as noted. A forfeited propertyexpense account within the special revenue fund of the Town will bebudgeted each fiscal year. 
B. 	Where applicable, the disposition of all personal property and fundswhich accrue to the Town of Bel Air by virtue of its Police Departmentdrug enforcement operations will be governed by the provisions of the Criminal Law Article, Title 5, Controlled Dangerous Substances,Prescriptions and Other Substances, of the Annotated Code of Maryland or § 12-403 of the Criminal Procedures Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland. All monies received by the Town either pursuant to Criminal Law Article Title 5 or Criminal Procedures § 12-403 of the Annotated Code of Maryland or under the U.S. Department of Justice program for the disposition of forfeited propertyshall be credited to the seized property revenue account. 
C. 	Expenditures from the forfeited property expense account will also be governed by Administrative Policy I.E.6 and will require the jointapproval of the Chief of Police and Town Administrator. 
§ 360-17. Sales conducted by Treasurer. 
The Treasurer or his designee shall conduct all sales made pursuant to theterms of this chapter. 
§ 360-18. Rights of finder. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, whenever any item oflost or abandoned property has been found and delivered to the custodian,or one of his subordinates, for care, custody, and control, such item shall be returned to the original finder whenever claim has been made by the finderand the following conditions have been met: 
A. 	The claimant is the person who originally found the lost or abandoned article. 
1:626 

B. 	The claimant, after surrendering the property to the custodian, hasserved written notice of his intention to make a claim on that item within 60 days of the surrender of the item. 
C. 	The lost or abandoned property has remained unclaimed by the owneror person having a right to said property for 60 days after the surrender of the same to the custodian. 
D. 	The lost or abandoned property is not stolen or confiscated property, nor is it property held under the exceptions outlined in §§ 360-12 through 360-15 of this chapter, nor is it property held as evidencepursuant to § 360-3 of this chapter. 
Chapter 364 
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Building construction — See Ch. 145.  Health and sanitation — See Ch. 240.  
Electrical standards — See Ch. 180.  Minimum Livability Code — See Ch. 301.  
Fire prevention — See Ch. 204.  Plumbing and gas fitting standards — See Ch. 353.  

§ 364-1. Maintenance required; duties of occupants.119 
Every dwelling and every part thereof shall be kept clean and free from any accumulation of dirt, filth, rubbish, garbage or similar matter and shall bekept free from vermin or rodent infestation. All yards, lawns, lots, or courtsshall be similarly kept clean and free from rodent infestation. It shall be the duty of each occupant of a dwelling unit to keep in a clean condition theportion of the property which he occupies or over which he has exclusivecontrol. If an occupant shall fail to keep his portion of the property clean, the Town Building Official may send a written notice to the occupant toabate such nuisance within the time specified in such notice. Failure of anoccupant to comply with such notice shall be deemed a municipal infraction and a violation of this chapter. In the event of such failure, an occupantshall be fined as provided in § 364-13 for each day or portion thereof duringwhich the violation continues. 
§ 364-2. Obstruction of sanitary sewer.120 
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully or maliciously to deposit anymaterial in any toilet, bathtub, sink or other plumbing fixture which may 
119.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
120.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:627 
result in the obstruction of any sanitary sewer. Violations of this sectionshall be a municipal infraction and any violator shall be fined as provided in § 364-13 for each violation. Liability on the part of the occupant shall notrelieve the owner of the responsibility of cleaning any resultant chokage. 
§ 364-3. Dwelling to be maintained in good repair. 
Every dwelling and every part thereof shall be maintained in good repairby the owner or agent and fit for human habitation. The roof shall bemaintained so as not to leak, and all rainwater shall be drained and conveyed therefrom so as not to cause dampness in the walls or ceilings. 
§ 364-4. Order to abate dangerous or unhealthy conditions.121 
A. 	Whenever any dwelling or any building, structure, excavation, business pursuit, matter, condition or thing in or about a dwelling or the lot on which it is situated or the plumbing, sewerage, drainage, light or ventilation thereof is found by the Town Building Official to be dangerous or detrimental to life or health, the Town Building Officialmay order that the matter, condition or thing be removed, abated,suspended, altered or otherwise improved, as his or her order may specify. If any such order of the Town Building Official issued under theauthority of the provisions of this section is not complied with within 10days after the service thereof, or within such shorter time as he or she may designate as being necessary under the circumstances, then suchorder may be executed, and the expenses incurred incident to suchorder shall be paid by the owner of the property and until so paid shall be a lien upon the realty and recoverable as other liens on realty in theTown, or the Town Building Official may order the premises vacated. 
B. 	Before proceeding to execute an order under Subsection A, the Town Building Official shall post a notice on the front of the building statingthat since such order was not complied with within the time mentionedin such notice, the Town Building Official will proceed to execute the same at the expiration of an additional five days and charge the costthereof to the owner of the premises. A copy of such notice shall besent to the owner of the property, or his agent, if names and addresses, on diligent search, can be ascertained, and such notice shall be postedon the premises at least five days before the Town Building Officialproceeds to incur expenses, unless the condition is of such a character requiring immediate action, in which case the time of the notice shall besuch as, in the judgment of the Town Building Official, is reasonable andproper. The Town Building Official shall deliver a copy of said expense to the Town Director of Finance, who shall record or file the same in a book or file open to public inspection. 
121.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:628 
§ 364-5. Order to vacate dwelling.122 
Whenever it shall be found by the Town Building Official that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation or dangerous to life or health by reason of wantof repair, of defects in the drainage, plumbing, lighting, or ventilation orthe construction of the same, or by reason of the existence on the premises of any condition likely to cause sickness or injury among the occupants ofthe dwelling, or for any other cause affecting the public health, the TownBuilding Official may issue an order requiring such dwelling to be vacated. A copy of such order shall be posted on the front of the dwelling at least10 days before it shall be effective, unless the situation is of a characterrequiring immediate action, in which case the effective time of the order shall be such as in the judgment of the Town Building Official is reasonableand proper. A copy of such order shall be sent to the owner of the property,or his agent, if names and addresses, on diligent search, can be ascertained. The dwelling so ordered to be vacated shall not again be occupied until awritten statement shall have been secured from the Town Building Officialshowing that the dwelling or its occupation has been made to comply with this Code or any other existing law. Any violation of said order shall be amunicipal infraction and a violator shall be fined as provided in § 364-13 foreach day or fraction thereof during which a violation continues. 
§ 364-6. Determination of owner.123 
Whenever any person shall be in actual possession of or have charge,care, or control of any property within the Town as executor, administrator, trustee, guardian or agent, such person shall be deemed and taken to be theowner of such property within the true intent and meaning of this chapterand shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this chapter to the same extent as the owner, and notice to any such person of any order or decisionof the Town Building Official shall be deemed and taken to be a good andsufficient notice as if such person were actually the owner of such property. 
§ 364-7. Additional rules and regulations. 
The Commissioners are hereby authorized and empowered to make andadopt such rules and regulations as they may deem proper and necessary for the enforcement of this chapter for the better protection of the health ofthe Town. 
§ 364-8. Minimum Livability Code. 
A Minimum Livability Code is established to provide minimum standardsfor property maintenance for basic equipment and facilities used for light,ventilation, heating and sanitation for rental housing units and premises and for safe and sanitary maintenance of rental housing units and premises. 
122.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
123.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:629 
The rules and regulations of the Minimum Livability Code are set forth inChapter 301 of the Town Code. 
§ 364-9. Unlawful conditions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, leasing, renting, occupying orhaving charge or possession of any property in the Town to maintain or to allow to be maintained such property in such manner that any of thefollowing conditions are found to exist thereon, except as may be allowedby any other provision of law: 
A. 	The accumulation of dirt, litter, rubbish, garbage or debris on the property which is visible from a public street. 
B. 	Clotheslines or clothes hanging in front yards, porches or balconies. 
C. 	Trash, garbage or refuse cans, bins, boxes or other such containersstored in front or side yards and visible from a public street except aspermitted by Chapter 240, Article III of the Town Code. 
D. 	Packing boxes, lumber, trash, salvage materials, or other debris kept onthe property and visible from a public street. 
E. 	Attractive nuisances dangerous to children, including abandoned, broken or neglected automotive equipment or machinery, visible froma public street, and refrigerators and freezers, hazardous pools, pondsand open excavations in any location. 
F. 	Broken or discarded furniture, household equipment and furnishings,or shopping carts stored on the property and visible from a public street. 
G. 	Overgrown vegetation likely to harbor rats, vermin and other nuisancesdangerous to public health, safety and welfare or obstructing thenecessary view of drivers on public streets or private driveways and visible from a public street. 
H. 	Dead, decayed, diseased or hazardous trees, weeds or other vegetationconstituting unsightly appearance, dangerous to public safety and welfare or visible from a public street. 
I. 	Graffiti or other words or letters which remain on the exterior of anybuilding or fence and are visible from a public street. 
J. 	Vehicle parts, an accumulation of bicycles or bicycle parts or otherarticles of personal property which are abandoned or left in a stateof partial construction or repair for an unreasonable period of time in front yards, side yards, driveways, sidewalks or walkways and arevisible from a public street. 
K. Mobile homes, recreational vehicles, utility trailers and unmounted camper tops, automobiles, trucks, or other vehicles that are stored in 
1:630 

violation of Article 6 or Article 9 of the Town of Bel Air DevelopmentRegulations. 
L. 	Buildings which are not being maintained in a state of good repair,abandoned, partially destroyed, or left in a state of partial constructionand such buildings which are unpainted or where the paint on the building exterior is mostly worn off. 
M. 	Vehicles parked on grassed areas which are not part of an establishedor approved driveway or lane and which are visible from a public street. 
N. 	Parking lots which abut commercial properties and which are not beingmaintained in a state of good repair and present a safety hazard to thegeneral public due to trash, potholes, broken curb, broken wheel stops, or loose gravel or macadam. 
§ 364-10. Declaration of public nuisance. 
Any property found to be maintained in violation of the foregoing section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated byrehabilitation, removal, demolition, or repair pursuant to the proceduresset forth herein. The procedures for abatement set forth herein shall not be exclusive and shall not in any manner limit or restrict the Town fromenforcing other Town ordinances or abating public nuisances in any othermanner provided by law. 
§ 364-11. Notification of nuisance. 
Whenever the Town Building Official determines that any property withinthe Town is being maintained contrary to one or more of the provisions of § 364-9, he shall give written notice ("notice to abate") by certified mailto the owner and/or tenant of said property stating the section(s) beingviolated. Such notice shall set forth a reasonable time limit as determined by the Building Official in his sole discretion for correcting the violation(s)and may also set forth suggested methods of correcting the same. 
§ 364-12. Abatement by Town; recovery of costs. [Amended6-18-2007 by Ord. No. 699-07] 
A. 	If such nuisance is not abated as ordered within said abatement period,the Town Building Official shall cause the same to be abated by Town employees or private contract. The Town Building Official is expresslyauthorized to enter upon said property for such purposes. The cost,including incidental expenses, of abating the nuisance shall be billed to the owner and/or occupant and shall become due and payable 30 daysfrom the bill date and will incur interest at the rate of 1 1/2% per monthuntil paid. The term "incidental expenses" shall include, but not be limited to, personnel costs, both direct and indirect, including attorneyfees; costs incurred in documenting the nuisances; the actual expensesand costs of the Town in the preparation of notices, specifications and contracts and in inspecting the work; and the costs of printing and 
1:631 

mailing required hereunder. A person shall not obstruct, impede, orinterfere with the Town Building Official, or his representative, or with any person who owns or holds any interest or estate in any property inthe performance of any necessary act, preliminary to or incidental, incarrying out an abatement order issued pursuant to this chapter. 
B. 	The nuisance abatement costs to be assessed against each propertypursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be a lien upon suchproperty until paid, to be collected in the same manner as municipal taxes are collected. Liens hereby established shall be subject only toliens for state, county, and municipal real estate taxes. 
§ 364-13. Violations and penalties.124 
For any violation hereunder, the property owner and/or occupant will beguilty of a municipal infraction and a fine may be imposed as provided inChapter 1, Article II of this Code per violation per day for every day the violation continues. 
§ 364-14. Appeals. 
Any person shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Building Appeals, as established pursuant to Town of Bel Air Building Code,125 a decision of the Town Building Official regarding the provisions of this chapter. 
Chapter 390 
SEDIMENT CONTROL 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Building construction — See Ch. 145. Stormwater management — See Ch. 405. 
Floodplain management — See Ch. 210. 
§ 390-1. Purpose and authority. 
A. 	The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain, and enhance thepublic health, safety, and general welfare by establishing minimumrequirements and procedures to control the adverse impacts associated with land disturbances. The goal is to minimize soil erosion and preventoff-site sedimentation by using soil erosion and sediment control practices designed in accordance with the Code of Maryland Regulations (COMAR) 26.17.01, the 2011 Maryland Standards andSpecifications ("Standards and Specifications") and the Stormwater 
124.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
125.Editor's Note: See Ch. 10, Art. VIII, Board of Building Appeals, and Ch. 145, BuildingConstruction. 
1:632 
Management Act of 2007 ("Act"). Implementing this chapter will helpreduce the negative impacts of land development on water resources, maintain the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of streams, andminimize damage to public and private property. 
B. 	The provisions of this chapter pursuant to Title 4, Environment Article, Subtitle 1, Annotated Code of Maryland, are adopted under the authority of the Town of Bel Air Code and shall apply to all land gradingoccurring within the Town of Bel Air. The application of this chapter and the provisions expressed herein shall be the minimum erosion andsediment control requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation orrepeal of any other powers granted by state statute. 
§ 390-2. Definitions. 
The words and phrases as used in this chapter shall have the followingmeanings: 
ADMINISTRATION — The Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE)Water Management Administration (WMA). 
ADVERSE IMPACT — Any deleterious effect on waters or wetlands, including their quality, quantity, surface area, species composition,aesthetics, or usefulness for human or natural uses, which are or maypotentially be harmful or injurious to human health, welfare, safety or property, biological productivity, diversity, or stability or that unreasonablyinterfere with the enjoyment of life or property, including outdoor recreation. 
AGRICULTURAL LAND MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — Those methods and procedures used in the cultivation of land in order to further crop andlivestock production and conservation of related soil and water resources. Logging and timber removal operations are not to be considered a part ofthis definition. 
APPLICANT — Any person, firm, or government agency that executes the necessary forms to apply for a grading permit, standard sediment anderosion control plan or approval to carry out construction of a project. 
APPROVED PLAN — A set of representational drawings or other documents submitted by an applicant as a prerequisite to obtaining a grading permitor building permit and containing such information and specifications asrequired by the Department and the District under regulations adopted in accordance with established procedures in order to minimize off-sitesedimentation from land-disturbing activities and approved by the Districtas being adequate to meet the requirements of Title 4, Environment Article, Annotated Code of Maryland, and approved by the Department as beingadequate to meet the provisions of this chapter. 
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — A structural device or nonstructural practice designed to temporarily store or treat stormwaterrunoff in order to mitigate flooding, reduce pollution, and provide otheramenities. 
1:633 

CLEAR — To remove the vegetative ground cover while leaving the root matintact. 
CONCEPT PLAN — The first of three plans submitted under the comprehensive review and approval process required by the Act anddescribed in COMAR 26.17.02 and shall include the information necessary to allow an initial evaluation of a proposed project. 
DEPARTMENT — The Town of Bel Air Department of Public Works. 
DIRECTOR — The Town of Bel Air Director of the Department of Public Works. 
DISTRICT — The Harford Soil Conservation District. 
DRAINAGE AREA — That area contributing runoff to a single point measured in a horizontal plane that is enclosed by a ridge line. 
ENVIRONMENTAL SITE DESIGN (ESD) — Using small-scale stormwatermanagement practices, nonstructural techniques, and better site planning to mimic natural hydrologic runoff characteristics and minimize the impactof land development on water resources. 
EROSION — The process by which the land surface is worn by the action of wind or water, ice or gravity. 
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL — A system of structural andvegetative measures that minimizes soil erosion and off-site sedimentation. 
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — An erosion and sediment control strategy or plan designed to minimize erosion and prevent off-sitesedimentation. 
EXEMPTION — Those land development activities that are not subject tothe erosion and sediment control requirements contained in this chapter. 
FINAL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — Along with the final stormwater management plan, the last of three plans submitted underthe comprehensive review and approval process required by the Act anddescribed in COMAR 26.17.02. Final erosion and sediment control plans shall be prepared and approved in accordance with the specificrequirements of the Director and this chapter and designed in accordancewith the Standards and Specifications. 
EXCAVATING — Any act by which soil, earth, sand, gravel, rock or anysimilar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,relocated or bulldozed, including the conditions resulting therefrom. 
FILL, FILLED and FILLING — Any act by which soil, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any similar material is deposited, placed, pushed, pulled or transported, and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom. 
GRADE — To disturb earth by, including, but not limited to, excavating,filling, stockpiling, grubbing, removing root mat or topsoil, or anycombination thereof. 
1:634 

GRADING PERMIT — The Town grading permit issued by the Departmentauthorizing land-disturbing activities in excess of 30,000 square feet or moving 1,000 or more cubic yards of earth in accordance with the requirements in this chapter. 
GRADING UNIT — The maximum contiguous area allowed to be graded at a given time. For the purposes of this chapter, a grading unit is 20 acres orless. 
HIGHLY ERODIBLE SOILS — Those soils with a slope greater than 15% or those soils with a soil erodability factor, K, greater than 0.35 and with slopesgreater than 5%. 
INSPECTION AGENCY — The Administration or, if delegated enforcement authority, the Town of Bel Air Department of Public Works. 
LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITY — Any earth movement and changes whichmay result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into any waters or waterway or onto any lands in the state,including but not limited to tilling, clearing, grading, excavating, stripping,filling and related activities and the covering of land surfaces with an impermeable material. 
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE (MEP) — Designing stormwater management systems so that all reasonable opportunities for using ESD planning techniques and treatment practices are exhausted and only whereabsolutely necessary is a structural BMP implemented. 
NATURAL GROUND SURFACE — The ground surface in its existing state before grading, stripping, excavating or filling and other land-disturbingactivities commence or continue after the effective date of this chapter. 
OWNER/DEVELOPER — A person undertaking, or for whose benefit, activities covered by this chapter are carried on. General contractors orsubcontractors, or both, without a proprietary interest in a project are notincluded within this definition. 
PERMITTEE — Any person to whom a building or grading permit has beenissued. 
PERSON — The federal government, the state, any county, municipal corporation, or other political subdivision of the state, or any of theirunits, or an individual, receiver, trustee, guardian, executor, administrator,fiduciary, or representative of any kind, or any partnership, firm, association, public or private corporation, or any of their affiliates, or anyother entity. 
PROFESSIONAL ARCHITECT — An architect duly registered by the state to practice professional architecture, including a landscape architect. 
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER — An engineer duly registered by the stateto practice professional engineering under the requirements of Title 14 of the Business Occupations and Professions Article of the Annotated Code ofMaryland, as amended. 
1:635 

PROFESSIONAL LAND SURVEYOR — A person who has been dulyregistered and licensed under the requirements of Title 14 of the Business Occupations and Professions Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, asamended. 
RESPONSIBLE PERSONNEL — Any foreman, superintendent, or project engineer who is in charge of on-site clearing and grading operations or theimplementation and maintenance of an erosion and sediment control plan. 
SEDIMENT — Soils or other surficial materials transported or deposited by the action of wind, water, ice, gravity, or artificial means. 
SITE — Any tract, lot, or parcel of land, or combination of tracts, lotsor parcels of land that are in one ownership, or are contiguous and in diverse ownership, where development is to be performed as part of a unit,subdivision, or project. 
SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The second of three plans submitted under the comprehensive review and approval process required by the Act anddescribed in COMAR 26.17.02. A site development plan shall include theinformation necessary to allow a detailed evaluation of a proposed project. 
SLOPE — The inclined surface of a fill, excavation or natural terrain. 
SOIL — Any earth, sand, gravel, rock or other similar material. 
STABILIZATION — The protection of exposed soils from erosion by the application of seed and mulch, seed and matting, sod, other vegetativemeasures, and/or structural means. 
STANDARD PLAN — The Town sediment and erosion control standard plan authorizing land-disturbing activities of less than 30,000 square feet andinvolving less than 1,000 cubic yards of earth movement. 
STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS — The 2011 Maryland Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control or any subsequentrevisions. 
STORMWATER — Water that originates from a precipitation event. 
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM — Natural areas, ESD practices,stormwater management measures, and any other structure through whichstormwater flows, infiltrates, or discharges from a site. 
STRIPPING — Any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover, including tree removal, clearing, grubbing and storage or removal of topsoil. 
TOWN — The Town of Bel Air. 
VARIANCE — The modification of the minimum erosion and sediment control requirements for exceptional circumstances such that strict adherence to the requirements would result in unnecessary hardship andnot fulfill the intent of this chapter. 
WATERCOURSE OR DRAINAGEWAY — Any natural or artificial watercourse, including but not limited to streams, rivers, creeks, ditches, 
1:636 

channels, canals, conduits, culverts, drains, waterways, gullies, ravinesor washes, in which water flows in a definite direction or course, either continuously or intermittently, and including any area adjacent theretowhich is subject to inundation by reason of overflow of floodwater. 
WATERSHED — The total drainage area contributing runoff to a single point. 
§ 390-3. Scope. 
No person shall disturb land without implementing soil erosion and sediment controls in accordance with the requirements of this chapter andthe Standards and Specifications except as provided within this chapter. 
§ 390-4. Exemptions. 
The following activities are exempt from the provisions of this chapter: 
A. 	Agricultural land management practices and agricultural BMPs; 
B. 	Clearing or grading activities that are subject exclusively to state approval and enforcement under state law and regulations. 
C. 	Authorized public works projects, provided that sediment and erosioncontrol measures have been and are being employed in accordance with an approved plan for grading, erosion and sediment controlapproved by the District. 
D. 	Grading and trenching for utility installations upon sites covered by an approved sediment control plan and grading permit; provided, however,that any erosion or sediment control measures, including vegetative measures, that are disturbed by a utility installation must be reestablished by the end of each workday. 
§ 390-5. Variances. 
The Director may only grant a variance from the requirements of the Standards and Specifications when strict adherence will result in exceptional hardship and not fulfill the intent of this chapter. The owner/developer shall submit a written request for a variance to the Director. The request must state the specific variance sought and the reasons for therequest. The Director shall not grant a variance unless and until sufficientinformation is provided describing the unique circumstances of the site to justify the variance. 
§ 390-6. Review and approval of erosion and sediment controlplans. 
A. 	A person may not grade land without an erosion and sediment controlplan approved by the District and the Director. 
1:637 

B. 

C. 
D. 
E. 

F. 
G. 
H. 
I. 
The District and the Director shall review erosion and sediment control plans to determine compliance with this chapter and the Standards and Specifications prior to approval. In approving the plan, the Directormay impose such conditions that may be deemed necessary to ensurecompliance with the provisions of this chapter, COMAR 26.17.01, the Standards and Specifications, and the preservation of public health andsafety. 
The review and approval process shall be in accordance with the comprehensive and integrated plan approval process described in theStandards and Specifications (see note above), the Town's StormwaterChapter,126 and the Act. 
At a minimum, a concept plan must include the mapping of naturalresources and sensitive areas including highly erodible soils and slopesgreater than 15% as well as information required under the Town's Stormwater Chapter. These areas are to remain undisturbed, or an explanation must be included with either the concept or site development plan describing enhanced protection strategies for these areas during construction. 
A site development plan submittal must include all concept planinformation and indicate how proposed erosion and sediment control practices will be integrated with proposed stormwater managementpractices. The latter is be done through a narrative and an overlayplan showing both ESD and erosion and sediment control practices. An initial sequence of construction and proposed project phasing toachieve the grading unit restriction should be submitted at this time. 
An applicant shall submit a final erosion and sediment control plan to the Director for review and approval. The plan must include all of theinformation required by the concept and site development plans as wellas any information in § 390-7 not already submitted. 
A final erosion and sediment control plan shall not be consideredapproved without the inclusion of the signature and date of signatureof the Director on the plan. 
Approved plans remain valid for two years from the date of approvalunless extended or renewed by the District and the Director. 
Grandfathering of approved plans: 
(1) 	
Any plans that receive final approval after March 1, 2013, mustbe in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and theStandards and Specifications. 

(2) 	
A plan that receives final approval by March 1, 2013 may bereapproved under its existing conditions if grading activities have 


126.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Stormwater Management. 
1:638 
begun on the site by March 1, 2015, with the exception ofstabilization requirements. 
(3) 	Stabilization practices on all sites must be in compliance with therequirements of this chapter and the Standards and Specificationsby March 1, 2013, regardless of when an approved erosion and sediment control plan was approved. 
§ 390-7. Contents of erosion and sediment control plans. 
A. 	An applicant is responsible for submitting erosion and sediment control plans that meet the requirements of the Director, this chapter, theTown's Stormwater Ordinance,127 the Standards and Specifications,and the Act. The plans shall include sufficient information to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the affected areas, the potentialimpacts of the proposed grading on water resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of measures proposed to minimize soil erosion and off-site sedimentation. 
B. 	At a minimum, applicants shall submit the following information: 
(1) 	
A letter of transmittal and/or application; 

(2) 	
Name, address, and telephone number of: 

(a) 	
The owner of the property where the grading is proposed; 

(b) 	
The developer; and 

(c) 	
The applicant; 



(3) 	
A vicinity map indicating North Arrow, scale, site location, andother information necessary to easily locate the property; 

(4) 	
Drainage area map(s) at a one-inch-equals-two-hundred-feetminimum scale showing existing, interim, and proposedtopography, proposed improvements, standard symbols for proposed sediment control features, and pertinent drainageinformation, including provisions to protect downstream areas from erosion for a minimum of 200 feet downstream or to the next conveyance system; 

(5) 	
The location of natural resources, wetlands, floodplains, highlyerodible soils, slopes 15% and steeper, and any other sensitive areas; 

(6) 	
A general description of the predominant soil types on the site,as described by the appropriate soil survey information available through the local soil conservation district or the United StatesDepartment of Agriculture Natural Resources Soil ConservationService; 


127.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Stormwater Management. 
1:639 
(7) 
Proposed stormwater management practices; 

(8) 
Erosion and sediment control plans, including: 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 




The existing topography and improvements as well as proposed topography and improvements at a scale betweenone inch equals 10 feet and one inch equals 50 feet with two-foot contours or other approved contour interval. For projectswith more than minor grading, interim contours may also berequired; 
Scale, project and sheet title, and North Arrow on each plansheet; 
The limit of disturbance (LOD), including: 
[1] 	Limit of grading (grading units, if applicable); and 
[2] Initial, interim, and final phases; 
The proposed grading and earth disturbance, including: 

[1] 	Total disturbed area; 
[2] 	Volume of cut and fill quantities; and 
[3] Volume of borrow and spoil quantities; Storm drainage features, including: 
[1] 	Existing and proposed bridges, storm drains, culverts,outfalls, etc.; 
[2] 	Velocities and peak flow rates at outfalls for the two-yearand ten-year frequency storm events; and 
[3] 	Site conditions around points of all surface water discharge from the site; 
Erosion and sediment control practices to minimize on-siteerosion and prevent off-site sedimentation, including: 
[1] 	The salvage and reuse of topsoil; 
[2] 	Phased construction and implementation of grading unit(s)to minimize disturbances, both in extent and duration; 
[3] 	Location and type of all proposed sediment control practices; 
[4] 	Design details and data for all erosion and sediment control practices; and 
[5] 	Specifications for temporary and permanent stabilizationmeasures, including, at a minimum: 
1:640 

(g) 

[a] The "standard stabilization note" on the plan stating: 
"Following initial soil disturbance or redisturbance, permanent or temporary stabilization must be completed within: 
[i] 	Three calendar days as to the surface of all perimeter dikes, swales, ditches, perimeterslopes, and all slopes steeper than three horizontal to one vertical; and 
[ii] 	Seven calendar days as to all other disturbed orgraded areas on the project site not under activegrading." 
[b] 	Details for areas requiring accelerated stabilization;and 
[c] 	Maintenance requirements as defined in the Standards and Specifications; 
A sequence of construction describing the relationshipbetween the implementation and maintenance of controls, including permanent and temporary stabilization, and thevarious stages or phases of earth disturbance and construction. Any changes or revisions to the sequence of construction must be approved by the Director prior to proceeding with construction. The sequence of construction, ata minimum, must include the following: 
[1] 	Request for a preconstruction meeting with the appropriate enforcement authority; 
[2] 	Clearing and grubbing as necessary for the installation of perimeter controls; 
[3] 	Construction and stabilization of perimeter controls; 
[4] 	Remaining clearing and grubbing within installed perimeter controls; 
[5] 	Road grading; 
[6] 	Grading for the remainder of the site; 
[7] 	Utility installation and connections to existing structures; 
[8] 	Construction of buildings, roads, and other construction; 
[9] 	Final grading, landscaping, and stabilization; 
[10]Installation of stormwater management measures; 
[11]Approval of the appropriate enforcement authority prior toremoval of sediment controls; and 
1:641 

[12]Removal of controls and stabilization of areas that are disturbed by removal of sediment controls. 
(h) 	
A statement requiring the owner/developer or representativeto contact the inspection agency or its agent at the followingstages of the project or in accordance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan, grading permit, or buildingpermit: 

[1] 	Prior to the start of earth disturbance; 
[2] 	Upon completion of the installation of perimeter erosionand sediment controls, but before proceeding with anyother earth disturbance or grading; 
[3] 	Prior to the start of another phase of construction or opening of another grading unit; and 
[4] 	Prior to the removal of sediment control practices; 

(i) 	
Certification by the owner/developer that any clearing,grading, construction, or development will be done pursuant to the approved erosion and sediment control plan. The certification must also require that the responsible personnelinvolved in the construction project have a certificate of training at an MDE-approved training program for the control of erosion and sediment prior to beginning the project. Thecertificate of training for responsible personnel may be waivedby the Director on any project involving four or fewer residential lots. Additionally, the owner/developer shall allowright of entry for periodic on-site evaluation by the Director orhis designated representative and/or MDE; and 

(j) 	
Certification by a professional engineer, land surveyor,landscape architect, architect, or forester (for forest harvestoperations only) registered in the state that the plans have been designed in accordance with erosion and sediment control laws, regulations, and standards, if required by theDirector or the Administration. 


(9) 	Any additional information or data deemed appropriate by the Director. 
§ 390-8. Modifications to erosion and sediment control plans. 
A. 	The Director and/or the District may revise approved plans as necessary. Modifications may be requested by the owner/developer inaccordance with COMAR 26.17.01.09(H) Plan Modifications. 
B. 	The Director may develop a list of minor modifications that may beapproved as field revisions by the inspection agency. The 
1:642 

Administration must approve any list of minor modifications prior to itsimplementation. 
§ 390-9. Standard erosion and sediment control plan. 
A. 	The Director may adopt a standard erosion and sediment control planfor activities with minor earth disturbances, such as single-family residences, small commercial and other similar building sites, minormaintenance grading, and minor utility construction. 
B. 	A standard erosion and sediment control plan must meet the requirements of this chapter and the Standards and Specifications. 
C. 	The Administration shall review and approve a standard plan prior toits adoption. 
D. 	The plans accompanying the standard plan shall be neatly and clearlydrawn by the applicant. The plans shall contain, at a minimum, thefollowing: 
(1) 	
A vicinity sketch and boundary line delineation of the site forwhich the standard plan is sought and on which the work is to beperformed. 

(2) 	
Location of any buildings, structures, utilities, sewers and waterand storm drains on the site where the work is to be performed. 

(3) 	
Location of proposed construction. 

(4) 	
Location of proposed sediment control. 

(5) 	
Existing and proposed drainage. 


E. 	The Department shall waive the requirement for scale plans or drawings if it finds that the information on the standard plan issufficient to show that the work will conform to the requirements of thischapter, provided that no such waiver shall be construed as waiving the requirements of the District. 
F. 	No standard plan shall be transferable without the written consent ofthe Department. 
G. 	No standard plan shall be issued for land disturbance in conjunctionwith building or development not permitted by existing zoning. 
§ 390-10. State and county review of plans; validity of approvedplans and permit. 
A. 	Prior to the issuance of a permit, a copy of the plan shall be referredto the District for review and approval of the proposed erosion and sediment control measures and shall be referred to the Departmentof the Environment where required by state law. The Department ofthe Environment and the District shall, within 30 days, notify the 
1:643 

Department of their recommendations and/or approval so that the applicant may be notified in a timely manner. 
B. 	If a permit has not been issued within two years of approval of plans,the plans shall be subject to an updated review by the District.Approved plans remain valid for two years from date of approval. The permit is valid for two years from date of issuance. 
§ 390-11. Permit and standard plan. 
A. 	No person shall engage in any land-disturbing activity over 30,000 square feet or moving more than 1,000 cubic yards of earth withoutfirst obtaining a grading permit from the Department, except as provided for in this chapter. 
B. 	No person shall engage in any land-disturbing activity less than 30,000square feet or less than 1,000 cubic yards of earth movement withoutfirst executing a standard erosion and sediment control standard plan from the Department, except as provided for in this chapter. 
C. 	Any land-disturbing activity must comply with all other laws and regulations of the Town of Bel Air. 
D. 	Nothing set forth in this chapter shall be construed to conflict with Title4, Environmental Article, Annotated Code of Maryland. As provided bythe Annotated Code of Maryland, any individual or group of individuals can be held responsible for the pollution of state waters regardless ofany exemption clause included in this chapter. 
§ 390-12. Permit conditions. 
A. 	Before a grading or building permit for any site is issued by theDepartment, the Director and the District must review and approve anerosion and sediment control plan for the site. 
B. 	In granting any permit or standard plan, the Director may attach suchconditions thereto as he may deem reasonably necessary to preventsedimentation or pollution to public or private property or any sewer, storm drain or watercourse and to prevent the operation from beingconducted in a manner hazardous to life or property or in a mannerlikely to create a nuisance or source of pollution. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the erection or installation of walls, drains, dams and structures, plantings, erosion and sedimentcontrol measures or devices, furnishing necessary easements and a specified method of performing the work which shall be identified onthe sediment control plan submitted for approval. No permit shall beissued until a sediment control plan is approved by the District and the owner certifies that all land-disturbing activities shall be performedpursuant to the sediment control plan and modifications incorporatedpursuant to § 390-8 herein. The approved plan shall be a condition of 
1:644 

and part of the permit. No person shall violate any such conditions soimposed. 
§ 390-13. Expiration and extension of permit. 
A. 	Every permit issued hereunder shall expire at the end of the periodof time set out in the permit. However, no permit period shall exceed 24 months. The permittee shall fully perform and complete all of thework required to be done within two years after the date of issuance,unless specified otherwise by the Department for good cause shown. If the permittee shall be unable to complete the work within the specifiedtime, he shall, within not less than 60 days prior to expiration of thepermit, present in writing to the Department a request for an extension of time, not to exceed six months, setting forth therein the reasons forthe requested extension. If, in the discretion of the Director, such anextension is warranted, he may grant additional time for the completion of the work for an additional fee that shall be 1/2 of the original fee foreach month or part of a month that the extension is granted. Where theDirector determines that the extension of time will require a substantial modification of the grading, erosion and sediment control plan, anyextension of a permit shall be subject to approval of a revised sedimentcontrol plan by the District. 
B. 	The sediment control standard plan shall stay in effect for as long as theaccompanying building permit is in effect. If the standard plan is notaccompanied by a building permit, then the standard plan shall expire one year from date of issuance. 
§ 390-14. Revocation or suspension of permit. 
A. 	Any permit or standard plan issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the Director, after notice, for: 
(1) 	
Violation of the plan or of any other condition of the permit orstandard plan. 

(2) 	
Violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicablelaw, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the work. 

(3) 	
Existence of any condition or the doing of any act constituting or creating a nuisance or hazard or endangering human life or theproperty of others. 


B. 	In addition to the authority set forth in Subsection A, the Director and/or inspector may post a site with an order directing the permitteeto cease all land-disturbing activity being performed under permitsor standard plans issued under this chapter when such activity does not conform to the specifications, including modifications thereof, ofan approved plan or other conditions of the permit issued hereunder,provided that: 
1:645 

(1) 	
Written notice to comply will be furnished within seven days tothe permittee by regular mail and addressed to the address of the permittee as stated on the application for a permit or standardplan. 

(2) 	
The notice includes the nature of the corrective measures required and the time within which corrections shall be made. 


C. 	Nothing contained in this section shall be interpreted as restricting theDepartment from proceeding directly with a cease-and-desist order or with alternative enforcement procedure as set forth in § 390-23. 
§ 390-15. Fees. 
Fees for grading permits and sediment control standard plans shall be as established pursuant to § 192-1 of the Code of the Town of Bel Air. The feesshall be collected at the time of application and shall be nonrefundable. 
§ 390-16. Performance bond. 
A. 	The Director shall, before issuing a permit, require a cash or corporatebond in the form and manner prescribed by the Town Attorney,conditioned upon the faithful performance of the conditions in the permit and soil erosion and sediment control measures specified in thepermit within the time specified by the Director. Collateral required by this section shall be equal to the approved sediment control construction, maintenance and removal cost. A corporate bond shall bemaintained and renewed annually and shall be executed by a surety orguarantee company listed on the Department of the Treasury's Listing of Approved Sureties (Department Circular 570) and qualified to transact business in the State of Maryland. A cash bond shall bedeposited with the Treasurer of the Town of Bel Air, who shall give his receipt therefor, reciting that the cash has been deposited incompliance with and subject to the provisions of this section. Thebond or approved security shall obligate the principal, his executors, administrators, successors and assigns jointly and severally with thesurety and shall inure to the benefit of the Town, its officers andemployees and to any person aggrieved by the principal's failure to comply with the conditions thereof. The principal and the surety shall,under the bond, continue to be firmly bound under a continuingobligation for the payment of all necessary costs and expenses or liabilities which may be incurred or expended by the Department tomeet the minimum requirements of this chapter. 
B. 	Whenever the Department shall find that a default has occurred in the performance of any term or condition of the permit, bond or otherapproved security, written notice thereof shall be given to the principaland to the surety of the security. Such notice shall state the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof and the period of time deemed bythis Department to be reasonably necessary for the completion of suchwork. 
1:646 

C. 	If a cash bond has been posted, notice of default as provided by thepreceding subsections shall be given to the principal, and, if compliance is not had within the time specified, the Department shall proceedwithout delay and without further notice or proceedings whatsoever touse the cash deposited, or any portion of such deposit, to cause the required work to be done by contract or otherwise in the discretion ofthe Director. 
D. 	In the event of any default in the performance of any term or condition of the permit, bond, or other approved security, the Town, the suretyor any person employed or engaged on his behalf shall have the rightto go upon the site to complete the required work necessary to control erosion and sedimentation or make it safe. In the event that the Department undertakes the required work or makes the site safe withthe funds from the forfeited cash or corporate security, such funds shall be used to pay the cost of contracting, including engineering andadministration, for necessary restoration of the site to control erosionand sedimentation within the requirements of the plan, permit, bond, security or this chapter. If the cost of the work necessary to controlerosion and sedimentation or to make it safe exceeds the amount of security posted, the permittee shall continue to be firmly bound under a continuing obligation for payment of all excess costs and expensesincurred by the Town. The cost and expenses shall be a lien upon allproperty and all rights to property, real or personal, of any person liable to pay the same from and after the time said cost is due and payable.The cost shall be listed on the tax bill and shall be collected in the manner of ordinary taxes. 
E. 	No person shall interfere with or obstruct the ingress or egress to orfrom any such site or premises by an authorized representative or agentof any surety or of the Department engaged in completing the work required to be performed under the permit or in complying with theterms or conditions thereof. 
F. 	The security posted shall remain in full force and effect until a letter of bond release is issued pursuant to § 390-24. A cash bond shall bereturned to the depositor or to his successors or assigns upon issuanceof a letter of completion for the work in accordance with § 390-24, except any portion thereof that may have been used. Failure to maintainthe above-required surety shall automatically operate as a temporaryrevocation of any and all permits issued by the Town of Bel Air to the permittee, his successors and assigns in interest. 
§ 390-17. Liability insurance. 
The permittee shall maintain sufficient insurance so as to protect the Town from any claims for personal injury or property damage which may arisefrom his acts or those of his agents or employees. Insurance coverage shallbe not less than $2,000,000 for bodily injury and $1,000,000 for property damage. A certificate of that insurance shall be provided the Town at timeof application for grading permit or sediment control standard plan. Failure 
1:647 

to maintain such insurance shall automatically operate as a revocation ofthe permit or standard plan. 
§ 390-18. Inspection. 
A. 	The Administration is responsible for the inspection and enforcement ofall land-disturbing activities, including those sites requiring an erosion and sediment control plan as specified by this chapter. This enforcement authority may be delegated to the Town through a requestby the Department or required as a condition of a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NDPES) municipal separate storm sewer system permit. This section applies to the Administration, or theDepartment, if delegated enforcement authority. 
B. 	Inspection frequency and reports. 
(1) 	
The owner/developer shall maintain a copy of the approved erosionand sediment control plan on site. 

(2) 	
Every active site having a designed erosion and sediment controlplan should be inspected for compliance with the plan on averageonce every two weeks. 

(3) 	
A written report shall be prepared by the inspection agency afterevery inspection. The report shall describe: 

(a) 	
The date and location of the site inspection; 

(b) 	
Whether the approved plan has been properly implementedand maintained; 

(c) 	
Practice deficiencies or erosion and sediment control plan deficiencies; 

(d) 	
If a violation exists, the type of enforcement action taken; and 

(e) 	
If applicable, a description of any modifications to the plan. 



(4) 	
The inspection agency shall notify the on-site personnel or theowner/developer in writing when violations are observed, describing: 

(a) 	
The nature of the violation; 

(b) 	
The required corrective action; and 

(c) 	
The time period in which to have the violation corrected. 




§ 390-19. Right of entry. 
It shall be a condition of every grading or building permit that theinspection agency has the right to enter property periodically to inspect for compliance with this chapter. 
1:648 

§ 390-20. Complaints. 
The inspection agency shall accept and investigate complaints regarding erosion and sediment control concerns from any interested parties and: 
A. 	Conduct an initial investigation within three working days from receiptof the complaint; 
B. 	Notify the complainant of the initial investigation and findings withinseven days from receipt of the complaint; and 
C. 	Take appropriate action when violations are discovered during the course of the complaint investigation. 
§ 390-21. Maintenance of structures, measures and devices. 
The permittee or the owner of any property on which work has been done pursuant to a permit or standard plan granted hereunder, or any otherperson or agent in control of such property, shall maintain in good conditionand promptly repair or restore all grade surface, walls, drains, dams and structures, planting, vegetation, erosion and sediment control measuresand other protective devices. Such repair or restoration and maintenanceshall be in accordance with the approved plans, specifications and permits as required by this chapter until permanent measures are accepted by theDepartment. 
§ 390-22. Grading requirements. 
All persons desiring to grade or excavate within the Town shall be requiredto follow the procedures and requirements of the 2011 Maryland Standardsand Specifications for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control as published by the Maryland Department of the Environment Water ManagementAdministration in association with the Natural Resources Conservation Service and the Maryland Association of Soil Conservation Districts, as amended from time to time. 
A. 	No person shall change the natural ground level of any lot or parcel inany way which results or may result in any changing of the direction, volume, distribution or velocity of the flow of surface water on or overany adjoining private or public property without obtaining the approvalof the Department and having been issued a valid permit to perform the proposed grading. Whenever groundwater and/or surface water existson a lot or parcel, the method of disposal shall be approved by theDepartment. 
B. 	Cut slopes. When grading a lot or parcel, if the new grade is loweredbelow the ground level of the adjoining property, the new grade shallslope at an angle less than one foot vertical to two feet horizontal, to meet the grade of the adjoining property at the line. If the sloperequirements stated herein cannot be met, a retaining wall shall bebuilt entirely on the ground of the owner causing the grading, for which a building permit will be required. 
1:649 

C. 	Fill slopes. If, when grading a lot or parcel, the new grade is raisedabove the surface of the ground level of the adjoining property, the fill shall be sloped down to meet the existing grade on an angle lessthan the angle of repose of the material but not steeper than one footvertical to two feet horizontal, and at no point shall the toe of the slope, plus an adequate storm drain system or swale extending to anapproved termination, extend beyond the adjoining property line. If theslope requirement herein cannot be met, a retaining wall shall be built entirely upon the land of the owner causing the fill to be made, forwhich a building permit will be required. 
D. 	All stumps, logs and other materials subject to decay shall be removed before any fill materials are placed, and no such fill material shallcontain more than 10% of organic matter. However, stumps may remainin place if cut off at ground level where filling exceeds three feet or more and is a minimum of 20 feet from any proposed footing. On siteswhere buildings or other structures are to be erected, fill with greaterthan ten-percent organic matter will be permitted in all areas a distance of 40 feet from any proposed footings. 
E. 	In the final grading around any building, a positive grade is requiredaway from the building and outfalling into an existing storm drain system, drainage swale or other approved suitable area. All gradingshall be accomplished in such a manner as to prevent the ponding ofsurface drainage in low areas or the standing of water in stabilized areas due to the installation of gradients inadequate to carry surfacedrainage. 
F. 	Upon the completion of the final grading, all denuded (stripped) areas, with the exception of any critical areas which may require specialtreatment, are to be stabilized with sod or seed and mulch. Stabilization of property improved with residential or commercial buildings shall be completed and approved prior to the issuance of an occupancy permitfor the structure. 
G. 	The permittee shall stabilize, permanently or temporarily, with seed and/or straw mulch all disturbed areas within seven calendar days afterstripping and grading activities have ceased in that disturbed area. 
H. 	Whenever any excavation is made at or close to an existing public right­of-way, no part of any such excavation shall extend into said street,alley or other public way without the approval of the Department ofPublic Works. The sides and/or banks of any such excavation shall be supported by adequate and approved means, so that there will be nomoving, settling or caving of the same and so that there will be nodamage to any paving or any surface or subsurface structures. 
§ 390-23. Enforcement. 

1:650 

A. 	The inspection agency shall, through the authority of this chapter andCOMAR 26.17.01, use enforcement action when erosion and sediment control violations occur. 
B. 	Enforcement actions may include, but are not limited to: 
(1) 	
Issuance of a corrective action order; 

(2) 	
Issuance of a stop-work order, the extent of which is determined bythe inspection agency; 

(3) 	
Issuance of a penalty or fine as allowed; and 

(4) 	
Referral for legal action. 


C. 	The Director may deny the issuance of any permits to an applicantwhen it determines that the applicant is not in compliance with the provisions of a building or grading permit or approved erosion andsediment control plan. 
D. 	The inspection agency shall stop work on a site where land disturbance is occurring without an approved erosion and sediment control plan.Measures shall be required to be implemented to prevent off-sitesedimentation. 
§ 390-24. Final inspection and bond release. 
If, upon final inspection of any work, it is found by the Department that thework subject to inspection has been satisfactorily completed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, the permit, conditions, plans,drawings and specifications, as the case may be, and the required reportshave been submitted, a letter acknowledging the completion of the standard plan or permit requirements has occurred and a release of bond will beissued. 
§ 390-25. Protection of adjacent property during excavation. 
No person shall excavate on land sufficiently close to the property line ofanother to endanger any adjoining property, public street, sidewalk, alleyor other public or private property without supporting and protecting such public street, sidewalk, alley or other property from settling, cracking orother damage which might result from excavation. If, in the opinion of theDirector, the nature of the excavation is such as to create a hazard to life or property unless adequately safeguarded, the applicant shall construct suchwalls, fences, guardrails or other structures to safeguard the public street,sidewalk, alley or other property and persons using such, as the Director may require. 
§ 390-26. Severability. 
If any portion, section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of 
1:651 

competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct,and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this chapter, it being the intent of the Townthat this chapter shall stand, notwithstanding the invalidity of any portion,section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase, hereof. 
§ 390-27. Violations and penalties. 
A. 	Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of amisdemeanor and, upon conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction, is subject to a fine not exceeding $10,000 or imprisonment not exceeding one year or both for each violation with costs imposed inthe discretion of the court. Each day upon which the violation occurs constitutes a separate offense. 
B. 	Any agency whose approval is required under this chapter or anyinterested person may seek an injunction against any person who violates or threatens to violate any provision of this chapter. 
C. 	In addition to any other sanction under this chapter, a person who failsto install or to maintain erosion and sediment controls in accordance with an approved plan shall be liable to the Town or the state in a civilaction, for damages in an amount equal to double the cost of installingor maintaining the controls. 
D. 	Any governing authority that recovers damages in accordance with thissubsection shall deposit them in a special fund, to be used solely for: 
(1) 	
Correcting to the extent possible the failure to implement or maintain erosion and sediment controls; and 

(2) 	
Administration of the sediment control program. 


Chapter 397 
SEWERS 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Building construction — See Ch. 145.  Plumbing and gas fitting standards — See Ch.353.  
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 240.  
Minimum Livability Code — See Ch. 301.  Stormwater management — See Ch. 405.  

1:652 

ARTICLE I 
Sewers and Sewage Disposal 
§ 397-1. Adoption of Plumbing Code and county design guidelinesand specifications. 
A. 	The Board of Commissioners does hereby adopt the National StandardPlumbing Code in accordance with Chapter 353 of this Code as a partof the rules and regulations relating to the sanitary sewerage system of the Town. 
B. 	The Board of Commissioners does hereby adopt the Harford CountyWater and Sewer Design Guidelines, Harford County Water and Sewer General Rules and Regulations, Part 4, and Harford County StandardSpecifications and Details for Water Mains and Sewer Mains as each isupdated from time to time. 
§ 397-2. Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall be used: 
COMMISSIONERS — The Board of Commissioners. 
COUNTY — Harford County, Maryland. 
INDUSTRIAL USER — Any improved property used, in whole or in part,for manufacturing, processing, cleaning, laundering or assembling any product, commodity, or article or from which any process waste, as distinctfrom domestic waste, shall be discharged to the wastewater treatment system. 
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any liquid or gaseous substance, whether or notsolids are contained therein, discharged from any industrial establishmentduring the course of any industrial, manufacturing, trade, or business process or in the course of the development, recovery, or processing ofnatural resources, as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
INDUSTRIAL WASTE DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit to deposit or discharge liquid industrial wastes into any sanitary sewer owned by thecounty/Town. 
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
PRETREATMENT — The treatment of industrial sewage from privately owned industrial sources by the generator of that source prior to introduction of the waste effluent into a publicly owned treatment works. 
TOWN — The Town of Bel Air, Maryland. 
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — The structures, equipment and processes required to collect, transport and treat domestic and industrial wastes and to dispose of the effluent and accumulatedresidual solids. 
1:653 

§ 397-3. Types of waste handled by sewage system. 
Sewage, consisting of wastewater originating within buildings of all types, shall be received into the sewerage system. Roof water and other stormwater or surface water shall not be discharged into sewers providedfor carrying the fouled water from buildings. The Commissioners reserve the right to require such preliminary treatment of industrial wastes as theymay deem proper before such wastes shall be discharged into the Town's sewers. 
§ 397-4. Information to be provided to master plumbers. 
Any available information in regard to size, location, or depth of publicsewers and drains shall be furnished to licensed master plumbers upon application in person or writing. All reasonable care shall be taken to ensurethe correctness of such information, but the Town shall make no guaranteeof the correctness of information so given. 
§ 397-5. Injury to or interference with Town property. 
A. 	It shall be unlawful for any person, not specifically authorized by theTown, to open or close any manhole, obstruct or cover, uncover, disturb, or tap any pipe or appurtenance or interfere in any way with any property belonging to the Town. Any expense to which the Commissioners shall be put as a result of such interference shall be paid by the person responsible. 
B. 	It shall be unlawful for any person to damage a valve, manhole, pipe orappurtenance or any other property belonging to the Town. Any person damaging such property shall be responsible for the damage and shallpay to the Commissioners the cost of repairing the same, includingoverhead expense. 
C. 	It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit in any manhole,sewer cleanout or appurtenance, in any sewage pumping station or inany reservoir or tank any sticks, stones, dirt, straw, rubbish, sweepings, manure, dead animals, offal, garbage, rags, clothing, leaves, ashes,cinders, or refuse of any kind. 
D. 	It shall be unlawful for any person to make or maintain any connection with any sewer or drain, or appurtenance thereof, through which there may be conveyed into the same any hot, suffocating, corrosive,inflammable, or explosive liquid, gas, vapor, or substance of any kind, or to cause to enter or flow into any sewer or drain or appurtenancethereof any hot, suffocating, corrosive, inflammable, or explosive liquid,gas, vapor, or substance of any kind. 
E. 	It shall be unlawful for any person to make or maintain any connectionwith the sewer, or drain or appurtenance thereof, through which theremay be conveyed discharge from a sump pump or rain leader or roof drain. 
1:654 

§ 397-6. Right of entry. 
Duly authorized agents or employees of the Town, when attending to their duties, shall have access to private properties at all reasonable hours. 
§ 397-7. Service to persons outside Town. 
The Commissioners shall permit owners of properties fronting on streets immediately along and adjacent to the corporate limits of the Town toconnect to the sewage system provided that: 
A. 	Any such owner consents to a proposed annexation of the property to be connected. 
B. 	Pending such proposed annexation, such an owner agrees to pay tothe Town such reasonable charge for permission to use the sewerage system as may be set by the Commissioners, including any dulyapproved charges levied by Harford County. 
§ 397-8. Unlawful discharge onto streets. 
A. 	It shall be unlawful for any property owner within the Town to permitthe contents of any bathroom, sink, or any other fouled water to flow inor upon any of the alleys or streets of the Town. 
B. 	It shall be the duty of every property owner who is aware that anyfouled water is flowing from his property into alleys or streets of theTown to immediately stop and prevent such flow and clean up same. 
§ 397-9. Sewer connections required. 
Whenever the Commissioners shall have extended the sewer main within the street frontage abutting any property line, the property owner, upon notice from the Town and within the time prescribed in such notice and inaccordance with a Town of Bel Air permit issued pursuant to Chapter 353 ofthe Code, shall make adequate connection therewith. 
§ 397-10. Extension of Town system to property line; specificationsfor connections. 
A. 	Sewer connections for each separate, developed lot fronting upon a street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is a sewer belonging tothe Town will be extended to the property line by the property owner/developer, as required. 
B. 	The size, location, depth and type of construction of all such sewerconnections shall be as specified by the Harford County StandardSpecifications and Details for Water Mains and Sewer Mains. 
1:655 

§ 397-11. Use of old connections. 
Sewer connections which have been installed but never connected or used for a period of one year or more or have been previously disconnected maybe returned to use only when they are found by the Director of Public Worksto be adequate and proper for the services to be performed. 
§ 397-12. Separate connection required; exceptions. 
A. 	No more than one building shall be served by each sewer or drainconnection on private property. A building, for this purpose, shall be any structure or part thereof intended for a single occupancy on the street floor. Garages and accessory structures, if under the same ownership as the main building on the lot, may be served by the connection for the main building. For buildings of two or more stories,the Town may allow a single connection, by special permit for specialreasons shown. 
B. 	A group of public, ecclesiastical, educational, charitable, club or industrial buildings under one ownership and on a single tract ofground may be served by one connection if the Director of Public Works shall so approve. 
§ 397-13. Maintenance. 
A. 	The Department of Public Works shall maintain all sewer connections constructed by the Town outside the property line. The Town will maintain that portion of a service lateral extending from a cleanout set at the edge of the property line to the main. All pipes and appurtenances on private property shall be maintained by and at theexpense of the property owner. The Department of Public Works, in caseof emergency, or where they shall deem such action necessary, may do maintenance or repair work on private property, in which case thelabor, material and equipment cost, including fifteen-percent overheadexpense, shall be paid by the property owner. Likewise, the cost of any inspection or work outside of the property line made necessary bytrouble on private property or by the neglect or through the action of aproperty owner or tenant shall be paid by the property owner. 
B. 	The Department of Public Works will not attend to complaintsconcerning sewage leaks, stoppages, backups or overflow occurring onprivate property. 
§ 397-14. Sanitary sewer capital contribution charge. 
By agreement with the County, the Town paid an "Annual Area ConnectionCharge Equivalent Payment" as its proportional share of the cost of basic main and other sewage treatment facilities used to treat Town-generatedsewage as such facilities existed on or before May 29, 1979. The Townmade further an "Annual Area Connection Charge Equivalent Payment" for additional basic main facilities and upgrades/expansion of the existing 
1:656 

facilities completed between May 29, 1979, and June 20, 1988. Any newbasic main facilities or other treatment facilities constructed by the county after June 20, 1988, and used to transport and/or treat Town-generatedsewage shall be financed by funds generated by collection of additionalsewer connection charges as approved by the Commissioners. 
§ 397-15. Sanitary sewer connection charges 
A. 	The Commissioners and county have agreed that the Town will collectand remit to the county a sewer connection charge of $650 for each new sewer connection made after July 1, 1988. Such charge is basedon the peak demand of each 30 fixture units requiring a 5/8 inch meterin accordance with the Harford County Division of Water and Sewer General Rules and Regulations, Part 4. 
B. 	The Commissioners may collect an additional connection charge fornew, basic main facilities for the Town sanitary sewerage system. Such funds, when and if collected, will be placed in the sanitary sewer capitalimprovement reserve to be utilized for capital upgrades to the system. 
§ 397-16. Review of charges. 
Sanitary sewer capital contribution charges, sewer connection charges andsewer service rates shall be reviewed by the Commissioners annually. 
§ 397-17. Application of sewer service rate. 
A. 	Except as provided in Subsection C of this section, the rate for sewerservice for all properties connected to and discharging domestic sewage into the Town sanitary sewerage system and metered for water use shall be applied on each 1,000 gallons of water used or fractionthereof as measured by water meters either approved by the Directorof Public Works or in use by the Maryland American Water Company, its successors and assigns, or by Harford County. 
B. 	Except as provided in Subsection C of this section, the rate for sewerservice for all properties connected to and discharging domestic sewage into the Town sanitary sewerage system for which the Directorof Public Works has determined that no approved meter which measures water use accurately can be provided shall be a flat rate which shall be determined by the use to which the property is put,and such rate shall be directly related to the average water use ofproperties used for the same or similar uses which are metered, but in no case shall such charge be less than the minimum flat rate chargesmade by Harford County to its customers with the same or similar uses. 
C. 	The rate for sewer service for those properties connected to and discharging domestic sewage into the Town sanitary sewerage systemwhich are served under a legally binding agreement between the Townand the property owner shall be as set forth in the agreement so long as said agreement is in force. Upon the termination of such agreement, 
1:657 

if the property being served is within the Town, and if such propertyis appropriately metered, Subsection A of this section shall apply; otherwise, Subsection B shall apply. 
§ 397-18. Sewer service rate determination. 
A. 	The rates for sewer service shall be applied as specified in § 397-17 and shall be computed annually, or more often if necessary, to coverboth the projected cost of operating, maintaining, and making capitalimprovements to the Town sanitary sewerage system and the projected cost of transport and treatment of sewage by Harford County and itssuccessors and assigns. The following charges/rates shall apply to all sewer customers in the Town of Bel Air unless otherwise specified:[Amended 1-27-2014 by Ord. No. 765-14; 6-15-2015 by Ord. No.771-15 
Town of Bel Air Sewer Charges and Usage Rates Water Meter 
Monthly BaseQuarterly Base
Size 
ChargeChargeUsage Rate per(inches) Amount Amount 1.000 Gallons 
5/8 $2.63 $7.89 $5.91 
3/4 $14.82 $44.44 $5.91 
1 $24.67 $74.04 $5.91 
1 1/4 $35.65 $106.92 $5.91 
1 1/2 $49.39 $148.09 $5.91 
2 $78.97 $236.91 $5.91 
3 $167.98 $503.86 $5.91 
4 $246.75 $740.28 $5.91 
6 $493.52 $1,480.56 $5.91 

Flat rate (14,212 gallons plus 5/ $91.88 
8-inch base charge): 
Flat rate affidavit (67.5% $29.86 
reduction): 
B. 	The flat rate shall be charged to all customers who are not served bya metered water connection. For flat-rate single-user customers who own and occupy the residence, the Town offers a lower flat-rate sewercharge; however, eligible customers must apply for the lower rate eachJuly 1 by signing an affidavit. 
C. 	All sewer charges and rates described herein shall be adjusted annuallybased on the Economic Indicator Consumer Price Index (CPI). Eachfiscal year these charges and rates will be adjusted to reflect the annual change of the Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers for theexpenditure category "all items not seasonally adjusted" and for all 
1:658 

regions. The annual Consumer Price Index for the period ending eachDecember, as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States Department of Labor, shall be used to adjust all charges andrates to be applied beginning July 1 of the following fiscal year. 
D. 	The current charges will be published on the Town website at the beginning of each fiscal year beginning on July 1. 
§ 397-19. Water meters required. 
All properties connected to the sanitary sewerage system of the Town of Bel Air after passage of this article shall be equipped with approved watermeters at time of connection. 
§ 397-20. Abatement of service charge. 
A. 	Abatement of a sewer service charge may be made by the Directorof Finance or the Town Administrator where it has been determined that a particular quantity of water allegedly flowing into the Town sanitary sewerage system has not been accurately measured. To beeligible for a rebate, a user must make application to the Director ofFinance, making affidavit that a particular quantity of water flowing into the Town sanitary sewerage system did not and will not enter thatsewerage system. The minimum quantity of water use which will beconsidered for rebate shall be 5,000 gallons. 
B. 	Abatement of a sewer service charge may be approved where an abatement of water use charge has been made by the MarylandAmerican Water Company, or its successors and assigns, or by Harford County. 
§ 397-21. Issuance of bills. 
Billing periods shall be quarterly or monthly as information is received for those metered users for which the Maryland American Water Company,or its successors or assigns, furnishes usage data. Billing periods shallbe quarterly for those users not served by the Maryland American Water Company or its successors or assigns. 
§ 397-22. Charges to be lien on property. 
A. 	Sewer service charges to be assessed against each property served by the Town sewer system pursuant to the provisions of this article shall bea lien upon such property until paid and are to be collected in the samemanner as municipal taxes are collected. Liens hereby established shall be subject only to liens for state and county taxes and for the Town realestate taxes. Such charges shall be due 30 days from the bill date andwill incur interest at the rate of 1 1/2% per month until paid. Neither the due dates nor the interval between such dates need be uniform throughout the area served by the Town sanitary sewerage system. 
1:659 

B. 	Bay Restoration Fund charges are included with the sewer servicecharges and shall be collected in the same manner. Bay Restoration Fund charges were enacted by the State of Maryland in 2004 as ameans to upgrade existing wastewater treatment plants to enhancednutrient removal (ENR) levels of no more than 0.30 mg/l of phosphorus and 3.0 mg/l of nitrogen in their effluent discharged to the bay. 
§ 397-23. Violations and penalties. 
Any violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be a municipal infraction, and any violator shall be fined as provided in Chapter 1, ArticleII, of this Code for each day or fraction thereof during which a violationcontinues. 
1:660 

ARTICLE II 
Pretreatment 
§ 397-24. Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to establish uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the Town sanitary sewerage system andthe collection and treatment system owned and operated by the countyand to comply with applicable federal and state laws and regulations, including the Federal General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403)and the State Water Pollution Regulations (COMAR 26.08); and to preventthe introduction of pollutants into the wastewater transport, treatment and disposal systems which singly or by interaction with other pollutants will: 
A. 	Interfere with the maintenance and operation of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW). 
B. 	Cause any county-owned, maintained or operated POTW to violate itsNPDES discharge permit. 
C. 	Contaminate the sludge at a POTW. 
D. 	Pass through a POTW, inadequately treated, into any receiving watersor the atmosphere, or otherwise adversely affect the receiving streamof a POTW. 
E. 	Pose a health threat to any workers on the collection system or POTWor constitute a hazard to humans or animals. 
F. 	Be otherwise incompatible with a POTW. 
§ 397-25. Conditions for discharge into treatment system. 
A. 	Public wastewater collection facilities are used for the deposit of humanwastes, garbage or other liquid wastes that cannot be discharged into a receiving stream or disposed of in any other manner in accordancewith federal and state law. All domestic waste and authorized industrial waste may be discharged into the treatment works, except those which are deemed harmful to the system or are specifically prohibited by thisarticle or are otherwise prohibited under the laws of the Town, county,the State of Maryland, or of the United States. 
B. 	No person shall place, deposit or discharge, or cause to be placed,deposited or discharged, directly or indirectly, upon public or privatelyowned property, any wastewaters within the Town, unless done so in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local laws andregulations. 
C. 	No person shall directly or indirectly deposit or discharge, or cause to be deposited or discharged, into any wastewater collection facilities any solid, liquid, or gaseous waste unless through a connection approved by law or regulation of the Town. 
1:661 

D. 	No person shall directly or indirectly discharge any sewage, waste ormaterial, industrial waste or any polluted water into a stream or in the air or onto the land, unless that person has provided for treatmentof such wastes in accordance with applicable Town, state, and federallaws and regulations. 
E. 	In accordance with the 1985 Harford County/Town of Bel Air industrialwastewater pretreatment agreement, any industrial user is required toobtain an industrial waste discharge permit from the Harford County Department of Public Works. Industrial users within the Town of Bel Airshall comply with all applicable provisions of Chapter 256, Article VIII,Wastewater Collection and Treatment, of the Harford County Code. 
§ 397-26. Limitations on discharge; accidental discharges. 
No person shall, directly or indirectly, discharge or cause to be dischargedany stormwater, foundation drainwater, roof runoff, surface drainage or unpolluted industrial cooling waters into any sewer connected through theTown's sewer collection system to the County's wastewater treatment plant.All connections which would result in the discharge of infiltration or inflow are hereby specifically prohibited. 
§ 397-27. Grease and sand interceptors. 
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors or retainers shall be installed and maintained by the user at the user's expense when they are necessaryfor the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease, oil or sand inexcessive amounts or any other harmful ingredients. The interceptors shall be a type and capacity approved by the Plumbing Services Division of theHarford County Department of Inspections, Licenses and Permits and theHarford County Health Department. They shall be accessible for cleaning by the user and for inspection by the Department of Public Works. 
§ 397-28. Right of entry; violations and penalties. 
A. 	Inspection rights. Any duly authorized employee or agent of the Town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted at anytime to enter upon all properties within the corporate limits of theTown which have contracted for wastewater treatment service for the purpose of inspecting, observing, measuring, sampling and testing asmay be pursuant of the implementation and enforcement of the termsand provisions of this article. 
B. 	Penalties. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to violate anyprovision of this article, and any such person, upon conviction thereof,shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, of this Code. Each day that a violation exists or continues shall constitute a separateoffense. 
1:662 

C. 	Injunctive relief. The Town reserves the right to seek injunctive relieffrom discharge to the sewer system of substances which it deems harmful. 
1:663 

Chapter 405 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Building construction — See Ch. 165. Sediment control — See Ch. 390. Floodplain management — See Ch. 210. Sewers — See Ch. 397. 
1:664 

ARTICLE I 
General Provisions § 405-1. Purpose and authority. 
A. 	The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain, and enhance the public health, safety, and general welfare by establishing minimumrequirements and procedures that control the adverse impactsassociated with increased stormwater runoff. The goal is to manage stormwater by using environmental site design (ESD) to the maximumextent practicable (MEP) to maintain after development, as nearly aspossible, the predevelopment runoff characteristics, and to reduce stream channel erosion, pollution, siltation and sedimentation, andlocal flooding, and use appropriate structural best managementpractices (BMPs) only when necessary. This will restore, enhance, and maintain the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of streams,minimize damage to public and private property, and reduce the impacts of land development. 
B. 	The provisions of this chapter, pursuant to the Environment Article,Title 4, Subtitle 2, Annotated Code of Maryland, 2009 replacementvolume, are adopted under the authority of the Town of Bel Air Code and shall apply to all development occurring within the Town of Bel Air.The application of this chapter and provisions expressed herein shallbe the minimum stormwater management requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statute. 
C. 	The Town of Bel Air shall be responsible for the coordination and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. This chapter applies to allnew and redevelopment projects that have not received final approvalfor erosion and sediment control and stormwater management plans by May 4, 2010. 
§ 405-2. Incorporation by reference. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following documents are incorporated by reference: 
A. 	The 2000 Maryland Stormwater Design Manual, Volumes I and II(Maryland Department of the Environment, April 2000), and all subsequent revisions, is incorporated by reference by the Town of BelAir and shall serve as the official guide for stormwater managementprinciples, methods, and practices. 
B. 	USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service Maryland ConservationPractice Standard Pond Code 378 (January 2000). 
§ 405-3. Grandfathering. 
A. 	In this section, the following terms have the meanings indicated: 
1:665 

ADMINISTRATIVE WAIVER — 
(1) 	
A decision by the Town of Bel Air pursuant to this chapter to allow the construction of a development to be governed by thestormwater management ordinance in effect as of May 4, 2009, inthe local jurisdiction where the project will be located. 

(2) 	
“Administrative waiver” is distinct from a waiver granted pursuantto § 405-6 of this chapter. 

APPROVAL — 

(1) 	
A documented action by the Town of Bel Air following a review todetermine and acknowledge the sufficiency of submitted material to meet the requirements of a specified stage in a local development review process. 

(2) 	
"Approval" does not mean an acknowledgment by the Town of BelAir that submitted material has been received for review. 

FINAL PROJECT APPROVAL — 

(1) 	
Approval of the final stormwater management plan and erosion andsediment control plan required to construct a project's stormwater management facilities. 

(2) 	
"Final project approval" also includes securing bonding or financing for final development plans if either is required as a prerequisite for approval. 

PRELIMINARY PROJECT APPROVAL — An approval as part of a localpreliminary development or planning review process that includes, at a minimum: 

(1) 	
The number of planned dwelling units or lots; 

(2) 	
The proposed project density; 

(3) 	
The proposed size and location of all land uses for the project; 

(4) 	
A plan that identifies: 

(a) 	
The proposed drainage patterns; 

(b) 	
The location of all points of discharge from the site; and 

(c) 	
The type, location, and size of all stormwater management measures based on site-specific stormwater management requirement computations; and 



(5) 	
Any other information required by the Town of Bel Air, including,but not limited to: 

(a) 	The proposed alignment, location, and construction type andstandard for all roads, accessways, and areas of vehicular traffic; 
1:666 

(b) 	
A demonstration that the methods by which the developmentwill be supplied with water and wastewater service are adequate; and 

(c) 	
The size, type, and general location of all proposed wastewaterand water system infrastructure. 



B. 	
The Town of Bel Air may grant an administrative waiver to a development that received a preliminary project approval prior to May4, 2010. Administrative waivers expire according to Subsection C of this section and may be extended according to Subsection D of thissection. 

C. 	
Expiration of administrative waivers. 

(1) 	
Except as provided for in Subsection D(2) of this section, an administrative waiver shall expire on: 

(a) 	
May 4, 2013, if the development does not receive final project approval prior to that date; or 

(b) 	
May 4, 2017, if the development receives final project approvalprior to May 4, 2013. 



(2) 	
All construction authorized pursuant to an administrative waivermust be completed by May 4, 2017, or, if the waiver is extended asprovided in Subsection D of this section, by the expiration date of the waiver extension. 



D. 	
Extension of administrative waivers. 

(1) 	
Except as provided in Subsection D(2) of this section, an administrative waiver shall not be extended. 

(2) 	
An administrative waiver may only be extended if, by May 4, 2010,the development: 

(a) 	
Has received a preliminary project approval; and 

(b) 	
Was subject to a development rights and responsibilities agreement, a tax increment financing approval, or an annexation agreement. 



(3) 	
Administrative waivers extended according to Subsection D(2) ofthis section shall expire when the development rights and responsibilities agreement, the tax increment financing approval,or the annexation agreement expires. 




§ 405-4. Definitions. 
The following definitions are provided for the terms used in this chapter: 
ADMINISTRATION — The Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE)Water Management Administration (WMA). 
1:667 

ADVERSE IMPACT — Any deleterious effect on waters or wetlands, including their quality, quantity, surface area, species composition, aesthetics or usefulness for human or natural uses which are or maypotentially be harmful or injurious to human health, welfare, safety or property, to biological productivity, diversity, or stability, or which unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property, includingoutdoor recreation. 
AGRICULTURAL LAND MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — Those methods and procedures used in the cultivation of land in order to further crop andlivestock production and conservation of related soil and water resources. 
APPLICANT — Any person, firm, or governmental agency which executes the necessary forms to procure official approval of a project or a permit tocarry out construction of a project. 
APPROVING AGENCY — The entity responsible for the review and approval of stormwater management plans. 
AQUIFER — A porous water-bearing geologic formation generally restrictedto materials capable of yielding an appreciable supply of water. 
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — A structural device or nonstructural practice designed to temporarily store or treat stormwaterrunoff in order to mitigate flooding, reduce pollution, and provide other amenities. 
CHANNEL PROTECTION STORAGE VOLUME (CPV) — The volume used todesign structural management practices to control stream channel erosion. Methods for calculating the channel protection storage volume are specifiedin the 2000 Maryland Stormwater Design Manual. 
CLEARING — The removal of trees and brush from the land, but shall not include the ordinary mowing of grass. 
CONCEPT PLAN — The first of three required plan approvals that includesthe information necessary to allow an initial evaluation of a proposed project. 
DESIGN MANUAL — The 2000 Maryland Stormwater Design Manual, andall subsequent revisions, that serves as the official guide for stormwater management principles, methods, and practices. 
DETENTION STRUCTURE — A permanent structure for the temporarystorage of runoff which is designed so as not to create a permanent pool of water. 
DEVELOP LAND — To change the runoff characteristics of a parcel ofland in conjunction with residential, commercial, industrial, or institutional construction or alteration. 
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The concentrated release of stormwater to tidal waters or vegetated tidal wetlands from new development or redevelopment projects in the critical area. 
1:668 

DRAINAGE AREA — That area contributing runoff to a single pointmeasured in a horizontal plane, which is enclosed by a ridgeline. 
EASEMENT — A grant or reservation by the owner of land for the use ofsuch land by others for a specific purpose or purposes and which must beincluded in the conveyance of land affected by such easement. 
ENVIRONMENTAL SITE DESIGN (ESD) — Using small-scale stormwatermanagement practices, nonstructural techniques, and better site planningto mimic natural hydrologic runoff characteristics and minimize the impact of land development on water resources. Methods for designing ESD practices are specified in the Design Manual. 
EXEMPTION — Those land development activities that are not subject to the stormwater management requirements contained in this chapter. 
EXTENDED DETENTION — A stormwater design feature that provides gradual release of a volume of water in order to increase settling of pollutants and protect downstream channels from frequent storm events.Methods for designing extended detention BMPs are specified in the DesignManual. 
EXTREME FLOOD VOLUME (Qf) — The storage volume required to controlthose infrequent but large storm events in which overbank flows reach orexceed the boundaries of the one-hundred-year floodplain. 
FINAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The last of three requiredplan approvals that includes the information necessary to allow all approvals and permits to be issued by the approving agency. 
FLOW ATTENUATION — Prolonging the flow time of runoff to reduce the peak discharge. 
GRADING — Any act by which soil is cleared, stripped, stockpiled, excavated, scarified, filled, or any combination thereof. 
IMPERVIOUS AREA — Any surface that does not allow stormwater toinfiltrate into the ground. 
INFILTRATION — The passage or movement of water into the soil surface. 
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE (MEP) — Designing stormwater management systems so that all reasonable opportunities for using ESD planning techniques and treatment practices are exhausted and, only whereabsolutely necessary, a structural BMP is implemented. 
OFF-SITE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The design and construction of a facility necessary to control stormwater from more than one development. 
ON-SITE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The design and construction of systems necessary to control stormwater within an immediate development. 
OVERBANK FLOOD PROTECTION VOLUME (Qp) — The volume controlledby structural practices to prevent an increase in the frequency of out­of-bank flooding generated by development. Methods for calculating theoverbank flood protection volume are specified in the Design Manual. 
1:669 

PERSON — The federal government, the state, any county, municipalcorporation, or other political subdivision of the state, or any of their units, or an individual receiver, trustee, guardian, executor, administrator,fiduciary, or representative of any kind, or any partnership, firm, association, public or private corporation, or any other entity. 
PLANNING TECHNIQUES — A combination of strategies employed early inproject design to reduce the impact from development and to incorporatenatural features into a stormwater management plan. 
RECHARGE VOLUME (Rev) — That portion of the water quality volume used to maintain groundwater recharge rates at development sites. Methods for calculating the recharge volume are specified in the Design Manual. 
REDEVELOPMENT — Any construction, alteration, or improvementperformed on sites where existing land use is commercial, industrial, institutional, or multifamily residential and existing site impervious areaexceeds 40%. 
RETENTION STRUCTURE — A permanent structure that provides for the storage of runoff by means of a permanent pool of water. 
RETROFITTING — The implementation of ESD practices, the constructionof a structural BMP, or the modification of an existing structural BMP in a previously developed area to improve water quality over current conditions. 
SEDIMENT — Soils or other surficial materials transported or deposited bythe action of wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
SITE — Any tract, lot, or parcel of land, or combination of tracts, lots,parcels of land, that are in one ownership, or are contiguous and in diverseownership, where development is to be performed as part of a unit, subdivision, or project. 
SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The second of three required plan approvalsthat includes the information necessary to allow a detailed evaluation of a proposed project. 
STABILIZATION — The prevention of soil movement by any of variousvegetative and/or structural means. 
STORMWATER — Water that originates from a precipitation event. 
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM — Natural areas, ESD practices,stormwater management measures, and any other structure through which stormwater flows, infiltrates, or discharges from a site. 
STRIPPING — Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover, including tree removal, clearing, grubbing, and storage or removal of topsoil. 
VARIANCE — The modification of the minimum stormwater managementrequirements for specific circumstances such that strict adherence to the requirements would result in unnecessary hardship and not fulfill the intentof this chapter. 
1:670 

WAIVER — The reduction of stormwater management requirements by theTown of Bel Air for a specific development on a case-by-case review basis. 
WATERCOURSE — Any natural or artificial stream, river, creek, ditch, channel, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine or wash, inand including any adjacent area that is subject to inundation from overflow or floodwater. 
WATER QUALITY VOLUME (WQv) — The volume needed to capture andtreat 90% of the average annual rainfall events at a development site. Methods for calculating the water quality volume are specified in the DesignManual. 
WATERSHED — The total drainage area contributing runoff to a single point. 
§ 405-5. Applicability. 
A. 	Scope. No person shall develop any land for residential, commercial, industrial, or institutional uses without providing stormwater management measures that control or manage runoff from such developments, except as provided within this section. Stormwater management measures must be designed consistent with the DesignManual and constructed according to an approved plan for new development or the policies stated in § 405-7 of this chapter for redevelopment. 
B. 	Exemptions. The following development activities are exempt from theprovisions of this chapter and the requirements of providing stormwater management: 
(1) 	
Agricultural land management practices; 

(2) 	
Additions or modifications to existing single-family detached residential structures if they comply with Subsection B(3) of thissection; 

(3) 	
Any developments that do not disturb over 5,000 square feet of land area; and 

(4) 	
Land development activities that the administration determineswill be regulated under specific state laws, which provide for managing stormwater runoff. 


§ 405-6. Waivers; watershed management plans. 
A. 	Except as provided in Subsections B and D of this section, the Town of Bel Air shall grant stormwater management quantitative controlwaivers only to those projects within areas where watershed management plans have been developed consistent with Subsection G of this section. Written requests for quantitative stormwater management waivers shall be submitted that contain sufficient descriptions, drawings, and any other information that is necessary to 
1:671 

B. 
C. 
D. 
demonstrate that ESD has been implemented to the MEP. A separatewritten waiver request shall be required in accordance with the provisions of this section if there are subsequent additions, extensions,or modifications to a development receiving a waiver. 
Except as provided in Subsection D of this section, if watershed management plans consistent with Subsection G of this section have not been developed, stormwater management quantitative controlwaivers may be granted to the following projects, provided that it has been demonstrated that ESD has been implemented to the MEP: 
(1) 	
That have direct discharges to tidally influenced receiving waters; 

(2) 	
That are infill development located in a priority funding area where the economic feasibility of the project is tied to the planned densityand where implementation of the 2009 regulatory requirementswould result in a loss of the planned development density, provided that: 

(a) 	
Public water and sewer and stormwater conveyance exist; 

(b) 	
The quantitative waiver is applied to the project for the impervious cover that previously existed on the site only; 

(c) 	
ESD to the MEP is used to meet the full water qualitytreatment requirements for the entire development; and 

(d) 	
ESD to the MEP is used to provide full quantity control for allnew impervious surfaces; or 



(3) 	
When the approving agency determines that circumstances exist that prevent the reasonable implementation of quantity controlpractices. 

Except as provided in Subsection D of this section, stormwater management qualitative control waivers apply only to: 

(1) 	
Infill development projects where ESD has been implemented tothe MEP and it has been demonstrated that other BMPs are not feasible; 

(2) 	
Redevelopment projects if the requirements of § 405-7 of thischapter are satisfied; or 

(3) 	
Sites where the approving agency determines that circumstancesexist that prevent the reasonable implementation of ESD to theMEP. 


Stormwater management quantitative and qualitative control waiversmay be granted for phased development projects if a system designedto meet the 2000 regulatory requirements and the Town of Bel Air ordinance for multiple phases has been constructed by May 4, 2010.If the 2009 regulatory requirements cannot be met for future phases 
1:672 

constructed after May 4, 2010, all reasonable efforts to incorporateESD in future phases must be demonstrated. 
E. 	Waivers shall only be granted when it has been demonstrated that ESDhas been implemented to the MEP and must: 
(1) 	
Be on a case-by-case basis; 

(2) 	
Consider the cumulative effects of the Town of Bel Air waiver policy; and 

(3) 	
Reasonably ensure the development will not adversely impact stream quality. 


F. 	If the Town of Bel Air has established an overall watershed management plan for a specific watershed, then the Town of Bel Air may develop quantitative waiver and redevelopment provisions thatdiffer from §§ 405-6B and 405-7 of this chapter. 
G. 	A watershed management plan developed for the purpose of implementing different stormwater management policies for waiversand redevelopment shall: 
(1) 	
Include detailed hydrologic and hydraulic analyses to determine hydrograph timing; 

(2) 	
Evaluate both quantity and quality management and opportunitiesfor ESD implementation; 

(3) 	
Include a cumulative impact assessment of current and proposedwatershed development; 

(4) 	
Identify existing flooding and receiving stream channel conditions; 

(5) 	
Be conducted at a reasonable scale; 

(6) 	
Specify where on-site or off-site quantitative and qualitativestormwater management practices are to be implemented; 

(7) 	
Be consistent with the General Performance Standards for Stormwater Management in Maryland found in the Design Manual;and 

(8) 	
Be approved by the Administration. 


§ 405-7. Redevelopment. 
A. 	Stormwater management plans are required by the Town of Bel Air for all redevelopment, unless otherwise specified by watershed management plans developed according to Subsection G of this section.Stormwater management measures must be consistent with the Design Manual. 
B. All redevelopment designs shall: 

1:673 

C. 
D. 
E. 
(1) 	
Reduce impervious area within the limit of disturbance (LOD) by atleast 50% according to the Design Manual; 

(2) 	
Implement ESD to the MEP to provide water quality treatment forat least 50% of the existing impervious area within the LOD; or 

(3) 	
Use a combination of Subsection B(1) and (2) of this section for at least 50% of the existing site impervious area. 

Alternative stormwater management measures may be used to meetthe requirements in Subsection B of this section if the owner/developer satisfactorily demonstrates to the Town of Bel Air that impervious areareduction has been maximized and ESD has been implemented to theMEP. Alternative stormwater management measures include but are not limited to: 

(1) 	
An on-site structural BMP; 

(2) 	
An off-site structural BMP to provide water quality treatment for an area equal to or greater than 50% of the existing impervious area; or 

(3) 	
A combination of impervious area reduction, ESD implementation, and an on-site or off-site structural BMP for an area equal to orgreater than 50% of the existing site impervious area within theLOD. 

The Town of Bel Air may develop separate policies for providing waterquality treatment for redevelopment projects if the requirements ofSubsections B and C of this section cannot be met. Any separate redevelopment policy shall be reviewed and approved by the Administration and may include but not be limited to: 

(1) 	
A combination of ESD and an on-site or off-site structural BMP; 

(2) 	
Retrofitting, including existing BMP upgrades, filtering practices,and off-site ESD implementation; 

(3) 	
Participation in a stream restoration project; 

(4) 	
Pollution trading with another entity; 

(5) 	
Payment of a fee-in-lieu; or 

(6) 	
A partial waiver of the treatment requirements if ESD is not practicable. 


The determination of what alternatives will be available may be madeby the Town of Bel Air at the appropriate point in the development review process. The Town of Bel Air shall consider the prioritization ofalternatives in Subsection D of this section after it has been determined that it is not practicable to meet the 2009 regulatory requirements using ESD. In deciding what alternatives may be required, the Town ofBel Air may consider factors including but not limited to: 
1:674 

(1) 	
Whether the project is in an area targeted for developmentincentives such as a priority funding area, a designated transit-oriented development area, or a designated Base Realignment andClosure Revitalization and Incentive Zone; 

(2) 	
Whether the project is necessary to accommodate growth consistent with comprehensive plans; or 

(3) 	
Whether bonding and financing have already been secured basedon an approved development plan. 


F. 	Stormwater management shall be addressed according to the new development requirements in the Design Manual for any net increasein impervious area. 
§ 405-8. Variance. 
The Town of Bel Air may grant a written variance from any requirementof Article II, Stormwater Management Criteria, if there are exceptional circumstances applicable to the site such that strict adherence will resultin unnecessary hardship and not fulfill the intent of this chapter. A writtenrequest for variance shall be provided to the Town of Bel Air and shall state the specific variances sought and reasons for their granting. The Town ofBel Air shall not grant a variance unless and until sufficient justification isprovided by the person developing land that the implementation of ESD to the MEP has been investigated thoroughly. 
1:675 

ARTICLE II 
Stormwater Management Criteria 
§ 405-9. Minimum control requirements. 
A. 	The minimum control requirements established in this section and the Design Manual are as follows: 
(1) 	
All counties and their incorporated municipalities shall requirethat the planning techniques, nonstructural practices, and design methods specified in the Design Manual be used to implement ESDto the MEP. The use of ESD planning techniques and treatmentpractices must be exhausted before any structural BMP is implemented. Stormwater management plans for developmentprojects subject to this chapter shall be designed using ESD sizingcriteria, recharge volume, water quality volume, and channel protection storage volume criteria according to the Design Manual.The MEP standard is met when channel stability is maintained,predevelopment groundwater recharge is replicated, nonpoint source pollution is minimized, and structural stormwater management practices are used only if determined to be absolutely necessary. 

(2) 	
Control of the two-year and ten-year frequency storm event isrequired according to the Design Manual and all subsequent revisions if the Town of Bel Air determines that additional stormwater management is necessary because historical floodingproblems exist and downstream floodplain development and conveyance system design cannot be controlled. 

(3) 	
The Town of Bel Air may require more than the minimum controlrequirements specified in this chapter if hydrologic or topographicconditions warrant or if flooding, stream channel erosion, or water quality problems exist downstream from a proposed project. 


B. 	Alternate minimum control requirements may be adopted subject toAdministration approval. The Administration shall require a demonstration that alternative requirements will implement ESD to theMEP and control flood damages, accelerated stream erosion, waterquality, and sedimentation. Comprehensive watershed studies may also be required. 
C. 	Stormwater management and development plans where applicable,shall be consistent with adopted and approved watershed management plans or flood management plans as approved by the MarylandDepartment of the Environment in accordance with the Flood HazardManagement Act of 1976. 

1:677 

§ 405-10. Stormwater management measures. 
The ESD planning techniques and practices and structural stormwater management measures established in this chapter and the Design Manualshall be used, either alone or in combination in a stormwater managementplan. A developer shall demonstrate that ESD has been implemented to the MEP before the use of a structural BMP is considered in developing thestormwater management plan. 
A. 	ESD Planning techniques and practices. 
(1) 	
The following planning techniques shall be applied according tothe Design Manual to satisfy the applicable minimum controlrequirements established in § 405-9 of this chapter: 

(a) 	
Preserving and protecting natural resources; 

(b) 	
Conserving natural drainage patterns; 

(c) 	
Minimizing impervious area; 

(d) 	
Reducing runoff volume; 

(e) 	
Using ESD practices to maintain 100% of the annual predevelopment groundwater recharge volume; 

(f) 	
Using green roofs, permeable pavement, reinforced turf, andother alternative surfaces; 

(g) 	
Limiting soil disturbance, mass grading, and compaction; 

(h) 	
Clustering development; and 

(i) 	
Any practices approved by the Administration. 



(2) 	
The following ESD treatment practices shall be designed according to the Design Manual to satisfy the applicable minimum controlrequirements established in § 405-9 of this chapter: 

(a) 	
Disconnection of rooftop runoff; 

(b) 	
Disconnection of nonrooftop runoff; 

(c) 	
Sheetflow to conservation areas; 

(d) 	
Rainwater harvesting; 

(e) 	
Submerged gravel wetlands; 

(f) 	
Landscape infiltration; 

(g) 	
Infiltration berms; 

(h) 	
Dry wells; 

(i) 	
Microbioretention; 


1:678 

B. 

C. 

D. 

(j) 	
Rain gardens; 

(k) 	
Swales; 

(l) 	
Enhanced filters; and 

(m) 	
Any practices approved by the Administration. 




(3) 	
The use of ESD planning techniques and treatment practices specified in this section shall not conflict with existing state law or local ordinances, regulations, or policies. Counties and municipalities shall modify planning and zoning ordinances and public works codes to eliminate any impediments to implementingESD to the MEP according to the Design Manual. 

Structural stormwater management measures. 

(1) 	
The following structural stormwater management practices shallbe designed according to the Design Manual to satisfy the applicable minimum control requirements established in § 405-9 of this chapter: 

(a) 	
Stormwater management ponds; 

(b) 	
Stormwater management wetlands; 

(c) 	
Stormwater management infiltration; 

(d) 	
Stormwater management filtering systems; and 

(e) 	
Stormwater management open channel systems. 



(2) 	
The performance criteria specified in the Design Manual withregard to general feasibility, conveyance, pretreatment, treatmentand geometry, environment and landscaping, and maintenance shall be considered when selecting structural stormwater management practices. 

(3) 	
Structural stormwater management practices shall be selected to accommodate the unique hydrologic or geologic regions of the state. 


ESD planning techniques and treatment practices and structural stormwater management measures used to satisfy the minimum requirements in § 405-9 of this chapter must be recorded in the landrecords of the Town of Bel Air and remain unaltered by subsequent property owners. Prior approval from the Town of Bel Air shall beobtained before any stormwater management practice is altered. 
Alternative ESD planning techniques and treatment practices and structural stormwater measures may be used for new developmentrunoff control if they meet the performance criteria established inthe Design Manual and all subsequent revisions and are approved by 
1:679 

the Administration. Practices used for redevelopment projects shall beapproved by the Town of Bel Air. 
E. 	For the purposes of modifying the minimum control requirements ordesign criteria, the owner/developer shall submit to the Town of BelAir an analysis of the impacts of stormwater flows downstream in the watershed. The analysis shall include hydrologic and hydrauliccalculations necessary to determine the impact of hydrograph timingmodifications of the proposed development upon a dam, highway, structure, or natural point of restricted streamflow. The point ofinvestigation is to be established with the concurrence of the Town ofBel Air, downstream of the first downstream tributary whose drainage area equals or exceeds the contributing area to the project or stormwater management facility. 
§ 405-11. Specific design criteria. 
The basic design criteria, methodologies, and construction specifications,subject to the approval of the Town of Bel Air and the Administration, shallbe those of the Design Manual. 
1:680 

ARTICLE III 
Stormwater Management Plans 
§ 405-12. Review and approval of stormwater management plans. 

A. 	For any proposed development, the owner/developer shall submit phased stormwater management plans to the Town of Bel Air for reviewand approval. At a minimum, plans shall be submitted for the concept,site development, and final stormwater management construction phases of project design. Each plan submittal shall include the minimum content specified in § 405-13 of this chapter and meet therequirements of the Design Manual and Article II of this chapter. 
B. 	The Town of Bel Air shall perform a comprehensive review of the stormwater management plans for each phase of site design.Coordinated comments will be provided for each plan phase that reflects input from all appropriate agencies including but not limited tothe soil conservation district (SCD) and the departments of Planning,Zoning, and Public Works of the Town of Bel Air. All comments from the Town of Bel Air and other appropriate agencies shall be addressed andapproval received at each phase of project design before subsequentsubmissions. 
§ 405-13. Contents and submission of stormwater managementplans. 
A. 	The owner/developer shall submit a concept plan that provides sufficient information for an initial assessment of the proposed projectand whether stormwater management can be provided according to§ 405-10 of this chapter and the Design Manual. Plans submitted for concept approval shall include, but are not limited to: 
(1) 	
A map at a scale specified by the Town of Bel Air showing sitelocation, existing natural features, water and other sensitive resources, topography, and natural drainage patterns; 

(2) 	
The anticipated location of all proposed impervious areas, buildings, roadways, parking, sidewalks, utilities, and other site improvements; 

(3) 	
The location of the proposed limit of disturbance, erodible soils,steep slopes, and areas to be protected during construction; 

(4) 	
Preliminary estimates of stormwater management requirements,the selection and location of ESD practices to be used, and thelocation of all points of discharge from the site; 

(5) 	
A narrative that supports the concept design and describes howESD will be implemented to the MEP; and 

(6) 	
Any other information required by the approving agency. 


1:681 

B. 

C. 

D. 

Following concept plan approval by the Town of Bel Air, the owner/developer shall submit site development plans that reflect comments received during the previous review phase. Plans submitted for sitedevelopment approval shall be of sufficient detail to allow site development to be reviewed and include but not be limited to: 
(1) 	
All information provided during the concept plan review phase; 

(2) 	
Final site layout, exact impervious area locations and acreages,proposed topography, delineated drainage areas at all points of discharge from the site, and stormwater volume computations forESD practices and quantity control structures; 

(3) 	
A proposed erosion and sediment control plan that contains the construction sequence, any phasing necessary to limit earth disturbances and impacts to natural resources and an overlay planshowing the types and locations of ESD and erosion and sediment control practices to be used; 

(4) 	
A narrative that supports the site development design, describeshow ESD will be used to meet the minimum control requirements, and justifies any proposed structural stormwater managementmeasure; and 

(5) 	
Any other information required by the approving agency. 

Following site development approval by the Town of Bel Air, the owner/developer shall submit final erosion and sediment control and stormwater management plans that reflect the comments received during the previous review phase. Plans submitted for final approvalshall be of sufficient detail to allow all approvals and permits to beissued according to the following: 

(1) 	
Final erosion and sediment control plans shall be submitted according to COMAR 26.17.01.05; and 

(2) 	
Final stormwater management plans shall be submitted for approval in the form of construction drawings and be accompaniedby a report that includes sufficient information to evaluate theeffectiveness of the proposed runoff control design. 

Reports submitted for final stormwater management plan approvalshall include but are not limited to: 

(1) 	
Geotechnical investigations, including soil maps, borings, site-specific recommendations, and any additional information necessary for the final stormwater management design; 

(2) 	
Drainage area maps depicting predevelopment and post-development runoff flow path segmentation and land use; 

1:682 

(3) 	
Hydrologic computations of the applicable ESD and unified sizingcriteria according to the Design Manual for all points of discharge from the site; 

(4) 	
Hydraulic and structural computations for all ESD practices andstructural stormwater management measures to be used; 

(5) 	
A narrative that supports the final stormwater management design;and 

(6) 	
Any other information required by the Town of Bel Air. 



E. 	
Construction drawings submitted for final stormwater managementplan approval shall include but are not limited to: 

(1) 	
A vicinity map; 

(2) 	
Existing and proposed topography and proposed drainage areas,including areas necessary to determine downstream analysis forproposed stormwater management facilities; 

(3) 	
Any proposed improvements, including location of buildings or other structures, impervious surfaces, storm drainage facilities,and all grading; 

(4) 	
The location of existing and proposed structures and utilities; 

(5) 	
Any easements and rights-of-way; 

(6) 	
The delineation, if applicable, of the one-hundred-year floodplain and any on-site wetlands; 

(7) 	
Structural and construction details, including representative crosssections for all components of the proposed drainage system or systems, and stormwater management facilities; 

(8) 	
All necessary construction specifications; 

(9) 	
A sequence of construction; 




(10)Data for total site area, disturbed area, new impervious area, andtotal impervious area; 
(11)A table showing the ESD and unified sizing criteria volumes required in the Design Manual; 
(12)A table of materials to be used for stormwater management facilityplanting; 
(13)All soil boring logs and locations; 
(14)An inspection and maintenance schedule; 
(15)Certification by the owner/developer that all stormwater management construction will be done according to this plan; 
1:683 

(16)An as-built certification signature block to be executed after projectcompletion; and 
(17)Any other information required by the Town of Bel Air. 
F. 	If a stormwater management plan involves direction of some or allrunoff off of the site, it is the responsibility of the developer to obtain from adjacent property owners any easements or other necessary property interests concerning flowage of water. Approval of a stormwater management plan does not create or affect any right to direct runoff onto adjacent property without that property owner'spermission. 
§ 405-14. Preparation of stormwater management plans. 
A. 	The design of stormwater management plans shall be prepared byany individual whose qualifications are acceptable to the Town of BelAir. The Town of Bel Air may require that the design be prepared by either a professional engineer, professional land surveyor, or landscapearchitect licensed in the state, as necessary to protect the public or theenvironment. 
B. 	If a stormwater BMP requires either a dam safety permit from MDE orsmall pond approval from the Harford County Soil Conservation District(SCD), the Town of Bel Air shall require that the design be prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the state. 
1:684 

ARTICLE IV 
Permits 
§ 405-15. Permit requirement. 
A grading or building permit may not be issued for any parcel or lot unless final erosion and sediment control and stormwater management plans havebeen approved by the Town of Bel Air as meeting all the requirements of theDesign Manual and this chapter. Where appropriate, a building permit may not be issued without: 
A. 	Recorded easements for the stormwater management facility andeasements to provide adequate access for inspection and maintenance from a public right-of-way; 
B. 	A recorded stormwater management maintenance agreement as described in § 405-23 of this chapter; and 
C. 	A performance bond as described in § 405-19 of this chapter. 
§ 405-16. Permit fee. 
Nonrefundable permit fees will be collected at each phase of stormwater management plan submittal. Permit fees will provide for the cost of planreview, administration, and management of the permitting process, andinspection of all projects subject to this chapter. A permit fee schedule shall be established by the Town of Bel Air based upon the relative complexity ofthe project and may be amended from time to time. 
§ 405-17. Permit suspension and revocation. 
Any grading or building permit issued by the Town of Bel Air may besuspended or revoked after written notice is given to the permittee for anyof the following reasons: 
A. 	Any violation(s) of the conditions of the stormwater management planapproval; 
B. 	Changes in site runoff characteristics upon which an approval or waiver was granted; 
C. 	Construction is not in accordance with the approved plan; 
D. 	Noncompliance with correction notice(s) or stop-work order(s) issued for the construction of any stormwater management practice; and 
E. 	An immediate danger exists in a downstream area in the opinion of theTown of Bel Air. 
§ 405-18. Permit conditions. 
In granting an approval for any phase of site development, the Town of BelAir may impose such conditions that may be deemed necessary to ensure 
1:685 

compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the preservation ofpublic health and safety. 
§ 405-19. Performance bond. 
The Town of Bel Air shall require from the developer a surety or cash bond,irrevocable letter of credit, or other means of security acceptable to the Town of Bel Air prior to the issuance of any building and/or grading permitfor the construction of a development requiring stormwater management.The amount of the security shall not be less than the total estimated construction cost of all stormwater management facilities. The bond required in this section shall include provisions relative to forfeiture forfailure to complete work specified in the approved stormwater management plan, compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter, and other applicable laws and regulations, and any time limitations. The bond shallnot be fully released without a final inspection of the completed work by the Town of Bel Air, submission of as-built plans, and certification of completionby the Town of Bel Air that all stormwater management facilities complywith the approved plan and the provisions of this chapter. A procedure may be used to release parts of the bond held by the Town of Bel Air after variousstages of construction have been completed and accepted by the Townof Bel Air. The procedures used for partially releasing performance bonds must be specified by the Town of Bel Air in writing prior to stormwatermanagement plan approval. 
1:686 

ARTICLE V 
Inspection 
§ 405-20. Inspection schedule and reports. 
A. 	The developer shall notify the Town of Bel Air at least 48 hours before commencing any work in conjunction with site development, the stormwater management plan, and upon completion of the project. 
B. 	Regular inspections shall be made and documented for each ESD planning technique and practice at the stages of construction specifiedin the Design Manual by the Town of Bel Air, its authorized representative, or certified by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Maryland. At a minimum, all ESD and other nonstructuralpractices shall be inspected upon completion of final grading, theestablishment of permanent stabilization, and before issuance of use and occupancy approval. 
C. 	Written inspection reports shall include: 
(1) 	
The date and location of the inspection; 

(2) 	
Whether construction was in compliance with the approvedstormwater management plan; 

(3) 	
Any variations from the approved construction specifications; and 

(4) 	
Any violations that exist. 


D. 	The owner/developer and on-site personnel shall be notified in writingwhen violations are observed. Written notification shall describe the nature of the violation and the required corrective action. 
E. 	No work shall proceed on the next phase of development until the Townof Bel Air inspects and approves the work previously completed and furnishes the developer with the results of the inspection reports assoon as possible after completion of each required inspection. 
§ 405-21. Inspection requirements during construction. 
A. 	At a minimum, regular inspections shall be made and documented atthe following specified stages of construction: 
(1) 	
For ponds: 

(a) 	Upon completion of excavation to subfoundation and, whenrequired, installation of structural supports or reinforcementfor structures, including but not limited to: 
[1] 	Core trenches for structural embankments; 
[2] 	Inlet and outlet structures, anti-seep collars or diaphragms, and watertight connectors on pipes; and 
1:687 

[3] Trenches for enclosed storm drainage facilities. 

(b) 	
During placement of structural fill, concrete, and installation of piping and catch basins; 

(c) 	
During backfill of foundations and trenches; 

(d) 	
During embankment construction; and 

(e) 	
Upon completion of final grading and establishment of permanent stabilization. 


(2) 	
Wetlands: at the stages specified for pond construction in subsection A(1) of this section, during and after wetland reservoirarea planting, and during the second growing season to verify avegetation survival rate of at least 50%. 

(3) 	
For infiltration trenches: 

(a) 	
During excavation to subgrade; 

(b) 	
During placement and backfill of underdrain systems and observation wells; 

(c) 	
During placement of geotextiles and all filter media; 

(d) 	
During construction of appurtenant conveyance systems such as diversion structures, pre-filters and filters, inlets, outlets,and flow distribution structures; and 

(e) 	
Upon completion of final grading and establishment of permanent stabilization. 



(4) 	
For infiltration basins: at the stages specified for pond constructionin Subsection A(1) of this section and during placement and backfill of underdrain systems. 

(5) 	
For filtering systems: 

(a) 	
During excavation to subgrade; 

(b) 	
During placement and backfill of underdrain systems; 

(c) 	
During placement of geotextiles and all filter media; 

(d) 	
During construction of appurtenant conveyance systems such as flow diversion structures, pre-filters and filters, inlets,outlets, orifices, and flow distribution structures; and 

(e) 	
Upon completion of final grading and establishment of permanent stabilization. 



(6) 	
For open channel systems: 

(a) 	During excavation to subgrade; 
1:688 

B. 

C. 

D. 

E. 

(b) 	
During placement and backfill of underdrain systems for dryswales; 

(c) 	
During installation of diaphragms, check dams, or weirs; and 

(d) 	
Upon completion of final grading and establishment of permanent stabilization. 




The Town of Bel Air may, for enforcement purposes, use any one or acombination of the following actions: 
(1) 	
A notice of violation shall be issued specifying the need for corrective action if stormwater management plan noncompliance isidentified; 

(2) 	
A stop-work order shall be issued for the site by the Town of Bel Air if a violation persists; 

(3) 	
Bonds or securities shall be withheld or the case may be referredfor legal action if reasonable efforts to correct the violation have not been undertaken; or 

(4) 	
In addition to any other sanctions, a civil action or criminal prosecution may be brought against any person in violation of the Stormwater Management Subtitle,128 the Design Manual, or this chapter. 


Any step in the enforcement process may be taken at any time, depending on the severity of the violation. 
Once construction is complete, as-built plan certification shall besubmitted by either a professional engineer or professional land surveyor licensed in the State of Maryland to ensure that ESD planningtechniques, treatment practices, and structural stormwater management measures and conveyance systems comply with the specifications contained in the approved plans. At a minimum, as-builtcertification shall include a set of drawings comparing the approvedstormwater management plan with what was constructed. The Town of Bel Air may require additional information. 
The Town of Bel Air shall submit notice of construction completionto the Administration on a form supplied by the Administration for each structural stormwater management practice within 45 days ofconstruction completion. The type, number, total drainage area, andtotal impervious area treated by all ESD techniques and practices shall be reported to the Administration on a site-by-site basis. If BMPsrequiring SCD approval are constructed, notice of construction completion shall also be submitted to the appropriate SCD. 
128.Editor's Note: See the Environment Article, Title 4, Subtitle 2, of the Annotated Code ofMaryland. 
1:689 
ARTICLE VI 
Maintenance § 405-22. Maintenance inspection. 
A. 	The Town of Bel Air shall ensure that preventative maintenance is performed by inspecting all ESD treatment systems and structuralstormwater management measures. Inspection shall occur during thefirst year of operation and at least once every three years thereafter. In addition, a maintenance agreement between the owner and the Town ofBel Air shall be executed for privately owned ESD treatment practicesand structural stormwater management measures as described in § 405-23 of this chapter. 
B. 	Inspection reports shall be maintained by the Town of Bel Air for all ESD treatment systems and structural stormwater management measures. 
C. 	Inspection reports for ESD treatment systems and structural stormwater management measures shall include the following: 
(1) 	
The date of inspection; 

(2) 	
Name of inspector; 

(3) 	
An assessment of the quality of the stormwater management system related to ESD treatment practice efficiency and the controlof runoff to the MEP; 

(4) 	
The condition of: 

(a) 	
Vegetation or filter media; 

(b) 	
Fences or other safety devices; 

(c) 	
Spillways, valves, or other control structures; 

(d) 	
Embankments, slopes, and safety benches; 

(e) 	
Reservoir or treatment areas; 

(f) 	
Inlet and outlet channels or structures; 

(g) 	
Underground drainage; 

(h) 	
Sediment and debris accumulation in storage and forebay areas; 

(i) 	
Any nonstructural practices to the extent practicable; and 

(j) 	
Any other item that could affect the proper function of the stormwater management system. 



(5) 	
Description of needed maintenance. 


1:691 

D. 	Upon notifying an owner of the inspection results, the owner shall have30 days, or other time frame mutually agreed to between the Town of Bel Air and the owner, to correct the deficiencies discovered. The Town of Bel Air shall conduct a subsequent inspection to ensure completionof the repairs. 
E. 	If repairs are not properly undertaken and completed, enforcementprocedures following § 405-23 of this chapter shall be followed by theTown of Bel Air. 
F. 	If, after an inspection by the Town of Bel Air, the condition of a stormwater management facility is determined to present an immediatedanger to public health or safety because of an unsafe condition, improper construction, or poor maintenance, the Town of Bel Air shalltake such action as may be necessary to protect the public and makethe facility safe. Any cost incurred by the county/municipality shall be assessed against the owner(s), as provided in § 405-23 of this chapter. 
§ 405-23. Maintenance agreement. 
A. 	Prior to the issuance of any building permit for which stormwater management is required, the Town of Bel Air shall require the applicantor owner to execute an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by a private stormwater management facility. Such agreement shall provide for access to thefacility at reasonable times for regular inspections by the Town ofBel Air or its authorized representative to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper working condition to meet design standards. 
B. 	The agreement shall be recorded by the applicant or owner in the landrecords of Harford County. 
C. 	The agreement shall also provide that if, after notice by the Town ofBel Air to correct a violation requiring maintenance work, satisfactorycorrections are not made by the owner(s) within a reasonable period of time (30 days maximum), the Town of Bel Air may perform all necessarywork to place the facility in proper working condition. The owner(s) ofthe facility shall be assessed the cost of the work and any penalties. This may be accomplished by placing a lien on the property, which maybe placed on the tax bill and collected as ordinary taxes by the Town ofBel Air. 
§ 405-24. Maintenance responsibility. 
A. 	The owner of a property that contains private stormwater managementfacilities installed pursuant to this chapter, or any other person or agent in control of such property, shall maintain in good condition andpromptly repair and restore all ESD practices, grade surfaces, walls,drains, dams and structures, vegetation, erosion and sediment control measures, and other protective devices in perpetuity. Such repairs or 
1:692 

restoration and maintenance shall be in accordance with previouslyapproved or newly submitted plans. 
B. 	A maintenance schedule shall be developed for the life of any structuralstormwater management facility or system of ESD practices and shallstate the maintenance to be completed, the time period for completion, and the responsible party what will perform the maintenance. Thismaintenance schedule shall be printed on the approved stormwatermanagement plan. 
1:693 

ARTICLE VII 
Appeals; Enforcement 
§ 405-25. Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by the action of any official charged with the enforcement of this chapter, as the result of the disapproval of a properlyfiled application for a permit, issuance of a written notice of violation,or an alleged failure to properly enforce the Ordinance in regard to a specific application, shall have the right to appeal the action to the TownAdministrator. The appeal shall be filed in writing within 10 days of the dateof official transmittal of the final decision or determination to the applicant, state clearly the grounds on which the appeal is based, and be processed inthe manner prescribed for hearing administrative appeals under the TownCode. 
§ 405-26. Severability. 
If any portion of this chapter is held invalid or unconstitutional by a courtof competent jurisdiction, such portion shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. It is the intent of the Board of TownCommissioners that this chapter shall stand, even if a section, subsection,sentence, clause, phrase, or portion may be found invalid. 
§ 405-27. Violations and penalties. 
Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter shall beguilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $5,000 or imprisonment not exceeding one year, orboth, for each violation with costs imposed in the discretion of the courtand not to exceed $50,000. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense. In addition, the Board of Town Commissioners mayinstitute injunctive, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceedingsof law to correct violations of this chapter. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue temporary or permanent restrainingorders, injunctions or mandamus, or other appropriate forms of relief. 
§ 405-28. When effective. 
Be it further enacted that this chapter shall take effect 21 days from thedate it becomes adopted. 
1:695 

Chapter 407 
STORM SEWERS 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Floodplain management — See Ch. 210. Stormwater management — See Ch. 405. Sewers — See Ch. 397. 
1:696 

ARTICLE I 
Illicit Discharges and Connections[Adopted 6-2-2014 by Ord. No. 767-14] 
§ 407-1. Purpose; intent. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the Town of Bel Air through the regulation ofnonstormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into themunicipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply withrequirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are: 
A. 	To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by stormwaterdischarges by any user. 
B. 	To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4. 
C. 	To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance,monitoring, and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
§ 407-2. Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following shall mean: 
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY — Employees or designees of theDirector of the Department of Public Works duly designated to enforce thisarticle. 
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollutionprevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutantsdirectly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge orwater disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
CLEAN WATER ACT — The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activities subject to NPDES constructionpermits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearingand grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, orphysical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantlycontribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, 
1:697 

safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge tothe storm drain system, except as exempted in § 407-7 of this article. 
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS — An illicit connection is defined as either of the following: 
A. 	Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, thatallows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system, including but not limited to any conveyances that allow any nonstormwaterdischarge, including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water toenter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drainor connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved byan authorized enforcement agency; or 
B. 	Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrialland use to the storm drain system that has not been documentedin plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities subject to NPDES industrial stormwater permits as defined in 40 CFR, § 122.26(b)(14). 
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — The system ofconveyances (including sidewalks, roads with drainage systems, municipalstreets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains) owned and operated by the Town of Bel Air and designed or usedfor collecting or conveying stormwater, and that is not used for collecting orconveying sewage. 
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by EPA [or by a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b)] that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States,whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area­wide basis. 
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owneror as the owner's agent. 
POLLUTANT — Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, andsolvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solidwastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers;hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; 
1:698 

dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues thatresult from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whetherimproved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Publicly owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to anyroads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural andhuman-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures. 
STORMWATER — Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirelyof water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from suchprecipitation. 
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A document which describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a personor business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater,stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximumextent practicable. 
WATERCOURSE — Any waters of the state and any conveyance that woulddrain to waters of the state. 
WASTEWATER — Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility. 
§ 407-3. Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all flows entering the storm drain system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitlyexempted by the Department of Public Works. 
§ 407-4. Responsibility for administration. 
The Department of Public Works shall administer, implement, and enforcethe provisions of this article. Any powers granted or duties imposed uponthe Department of Public Works may be delegated in writing by the Director of the Department of Public Works to persons or entities acting in thebeneficial interest of or in the employ of the agency. 
§ 407-5. Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule,regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article arein addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposesrestrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule,regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive 
1:699 

or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
§ 407-6. Scope. 
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this articleare minimum standards; therefore this article does not intend or imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants. 
§ 407-7. Illicit discharges and connections prohibited; exceptions. 
A. 	Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw,drain, or otherwise discharge into the MS4 any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. The commencement,conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drainsystem is prohibited except as described as follows: 
(1) 	
The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitionsestablished by this article: water-line flushing, landscape irrigation,diverted stream flows, rising ground waters, uncontaminated groundwater infiltration, uncontaminated pumped groundwater,discharges from potable water sources, foundation drains, air conditioning condensation, irrigation water, springs, water from crawl space pumps, footing drains, lawn watering, individual residential car washing, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands,dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, and street wash water. 

(2) 	
Discharges or flow from firefighting, and other discharges specifiedin writing by the Department of Public Works as being necessary toprotect public health and safety. 

(3) 	
Discharges associated with dye testing; however, this activityrequires a verbal notification to the Department of Public Worksprior to the time of the test. 

(4) 	
The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater dischargepermitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste dischargeorder issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the United States Environmental Protection Agency(EPA), provided that the discharger is in full compliance with allrequirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has beengranted for any discharge to the storm drain system. 


B. 	Prohibition of illicit connections. 
(1) 	The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. 
1:700 

(2) 	
This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing atthe time of connection. 

(3) 	
A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such aconnection to continue. 

(4) 	
Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsitewastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system uponapproval of the Department of Public Works. 

(5) 	
Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans,maps or the equivalent, and which may be connected to the stormsewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from theDepartment of Public Works requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be determined,that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitarysewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are tobe documented and provided to the Department of Public Works. 


§ 407-8. Watercourse protection. 
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or suchperson's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstaclesthat would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of waterthrough the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse,so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. 
§ 407-9. Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
A. 	Submission of notice of intent to the Town of Bel Air. 
(1) 	
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions ofsuch permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be requiredin a form acceptable to the Department of Public Works prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. 

(2) 	
The operator of a facility, including construction sites, required tohave an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity shall submit a copy of the notice of intent (NOI) 


1:701 

to the Department of Public Works at the same time the operatorsubmits the original notice of intent to the EPA as applicable. 
(3) 	
The copy of the notice of intent may be delivered to the Departmentof Public Works either in person or by mailing it to: 

Notice of Intent to Discharge Stormwater 
Department of Public Works 
705 E. Churchville Road 
Bel Air, Maryland 21014 


(4) 	
A person commits an offense if the person operates a facility that isdischarging stormwater associated with industrial activity withouthaving submitted a copy of the notice of intent to do so to the Department of Public Works. 


§ 407-10. Compliance monitoring. 
A. 	Right of entry: inspection and sampling. The Department of Public Works shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject toregulation under this article as often as may be necessary to determinecompliance with this article. 
(1) 	
If a discharger has security measures in force which require properidentification and clearance before entry into its premises, thedischarger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the Department of Public Works. 

(2) 	
Facility operators shall allow the Department of Public Works readyaccess to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be keptunder the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater,and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. 

(3) 	
The Department of Public Works shall have the right to set up onany permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the Department of Public Works to conduct monitoring and/orsampling of the facility's stormwater discharge. 

(4) 	
The Department of Public Works has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 

(5) 	
Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy accessto the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptlyremoved by the operator at the written or oral request of the 


1:702 

Department of Public Works and shall not be replaced. The costs ofclearing such access shall be borne by the operator. 
(6) 	Unreasonable delays in allowing the Department of Public Works access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this article. A person who is the operator of a facility with an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the persondenies the Department of Public Works reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activityauthorized or required by this article. 
B. 	Search warrants. If the Department of Public Works has been refused access to any part of the premises from which a flow is discharged,and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that theremay be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling programdesigned to verify compliance with this article or any order issuedhereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the Department of Public Works may seek issuanceof a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
§ 407-11. Use of best management practices. 
A. 	Department of Public Works will adopt requirements identifying BestManagement Practices for any activity, operation, or facility whichmay cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the United States. The owner or operator of such activity, operation, or facility shall provide, attheir own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and nonstructural BMPs. 
B. 	Further, any person responsible for a property or premise that is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants tothe MS4. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDESpermit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be partof a stormwater management plan (SWMP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit. 
§ 407-12. Notification of spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergencyresponse for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal 
1:703 

discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release.In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shallimmediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardousmaterials, said person shall notify the Department of Public Works in personor by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressedand mailed to the Department of Public Works within 10 business days ofthe phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of suchestablishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the dischargeand the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Failure to provide notification of a releaseas provided above is a violation of this article. 
§ 407-13. Enforcement; violations and penalties. 
A. 	Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision orfail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any personwho has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this sectionor may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a mannerprovided by law. In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the Department of PublicWorks is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, withoutgiving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The Department of Public Worksis authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in § 407-17. 
B. 	Warning notice. When the Department of Public Works finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article,or any order issued hereunder, the Department of Public Works may serve upon that person a written warning notice, specifying the particular violation believed to have occurred and requesting the discharger to immediately investigate the matter and to seek a resolution whereby any offending discharge will cease. Investigation and/or resolution of the matter in response to the warning notice in noway relieves the alleged violator of liability for any violations occurringbefore or after receipt of the warning notice. Nothing in this subsection shall limit the authority of the Department of Public Works to take anyaction, including emergency action or any other enforcement action,without first issuing a warning notice. 
C. 	Notice of violation. Whenever the Department of Public Works findsthat a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirementof this article, the Department of Public Works may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. The notice ofviolation shall contain: 
1:704 

(1) 	
The name and address of the alleged violator; 

(2) 	
The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or hasoccurred; 

(3) 	
A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 

(4) 	
A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completionof such remedial action; 

(5) 	
A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may beassessed against the person to whom the notice of violation isdirected; 

(6) 	
A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed tothe Department of Public Works by filing a written notice of appealwithin 10 business days of service of notice of violation; and 

(7) 	
A statement specifying that, should the violator fail to restorecompliance within the established time schedule, the work will bedone by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. Such notice mayrequire without limitation: 

(a) 	
The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 

(b) 	
The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 

(c) 	
That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall ceaseand desist; 

(d) 	
The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 

(e) 	
Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and 

(f) 	
The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 




D. 	Compensatory action. In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties,and remedies authorized by this article, the Department of PublicWorks may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops,creek cleanup, etc. 
E. 	Suspension of MS4 access. 
(1) 	Emergency cease and desist orders. When the Department ofPublic Works finds that any person has violated, or continues toviolate, any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, or that the person's past violations are likely to recur, and that the 
1:705 

person's violation(s) has (have) caused or contributed to an actualor threatened discharge to the MS4 or waters of the United States which reasonably appears to present an imminent or substantialendangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment, the Department of Public Works may issue an order to the violator directing it immediately to cease and desist all suchviolations and directing the violator to: 
(a) 	
Immediately comply with all article requirements; and 

(b) 	
Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including immediately halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. Any person notified of an emergency orderdirected to it under this subsection shall immediately complyand stop or eliminate its endangering discharge. In the event of a discharger's failure to immediately comply voluntarily withthe emergency order, the Department of Public Works maytake such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize harm to the MS4 or waters of the United States, and/or endangerment to persons or to the environment, including immediate termination of a facility's water supply, sewer connection, or other municipal utility services. The Department of Public Works may allow the person to recommence its discharge when it has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Department of Public Works that the periodof endangerment has passed, unless further termination proceedings are initiated against the discharger under this article. A person that is responsible, in whole or in part, for anydischarge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit adetailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent anyfuture occurrence, to the Department of Public Works within30 days of receipt of the emergency order. Issuance of an emergency cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, ora prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator. 


(2) 	
Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The Department of Public Works may, without prior notice, suspendMS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the Department of PublicWorks may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent orminimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons. 

(3) 
Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any persondischarging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have their 


1:706 

MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The Department of Public Works will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violatormay petition the Department of Public Works for a reconsiderationand hearing. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the Department of Public Works. 
F. 	Municipal infraction. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within 10 business days, orsuch greater period as the Department of Public Works shall deem appropriate, the violation shall constitute a municipal infraction andthe violator shall be fined as provided in Chapter I, Article II, of thisCode for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
G. 	Criminal prosecution. Any person who is found guilty of violating thisarticle shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a criminal fine not exceeding $1,000 per violation per day and/or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months. Each act ofviolation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
§ 407-14. Appeal of notice of violation. 
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the Department of Public Works. The notice of appeal must be receivedwithin 10 business days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearingon the appeal before the Town Administrator or his/her designee shall take place within 30 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. Thedecision of the Town Administrator or his designee shall be final. 
§ 407-15. Enforcement measures after appeal. 
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements setforth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 30days of the decision of the Town Administrator upholding the decision of the Department of Public Works, then representatives of the Departmentof Public Works shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow thegovernment agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
§ 407-16. Cost of abatement of violation. 
A. 	Within 60 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, includingadministrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest 
1:707 

objecting to the amount of the assessment within 10 business days. Ifthe amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the municipal authority or by the expiration of the time inwhich to file an appeal, the charges shall be assessed as a lien againstthe property to be collected pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 50, Finance and Taxation, § 50-3 of this Code. 
B. 	Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall becomeliable to the Town of Bel Air by reason of such violation. The liability shall become due and payable 30 days from the billing date and willincur interest at the rate of 1 1/2% per month until paid. 
§ 407-17. Violations deemed public nuisance. 
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, anycondition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions ofthis article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwisecompel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. 
§ 407-18. Remedies not exclusive. 
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remediesavailable under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the Department of Public Works to seek cumulative remedies.The Department of Public Works may recover all attorney's fees, court costsand other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
1:708 

Chapter 410 
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
Address numbers — See Ch. 115.  Stormwater management — See Ch. 405.  
Itinerant  merchants,  vendors  and  Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 450.  
solicitors — See Ch. 272.  

1:709 

ARTICLE I 
General Provisions 
[Adopted 3-11-1980 by Ord. No. 310 as Ch. 13, Art. 1 of the 1980
Code] 

§ 410-1. Duty to keep gutters and streets clean. 
It shall be the duty of the property holders or tenants residing within theTown to clean the pavements, gutters and streets, to the middle of thestreets, from all the street fronts of the property, and to remove the dirt therefrom. 
§ 410-2. Removal of snow and ice from sidewalks. [Amended11-17-2008 by Ord. No. 715-08] 
All tenants and property owners are required to remove all snow and icefrom pavements and sidewalks abutting their property within 24 hours afterthe snow ceases to fall. When ice is formed on the pavement or sidewalk so that it cannot be removed, it shall be kept sprinkled with ashes, sand orother deicing material that is not harmful to concrete (i.e., salt). 
§ 410-3. Obstructions. 
A. 	Every owner/occupant of any premises within the Town and the ownerof premises within the Town that may be vacant shall be requiredto keep the sidewalk bounding upon such premises and the gutter belonging thereto open and free from obstructions, to include trash,grass clippings, leaves, debris, refuse or motor vehicles of any type. 
B. 	It shall be unlawful for any person to make, build or erect any house, fence or structure of any kind within the lines of or upon any street,alley or sidewalk of the Town or in any way to interfere with the bedof such streets and alleys or to change the grade thereof or to change or fill up the gutters along the street or in any manner to obstructthe streets, alleys or gutters, provided that proper driveways may bemade over the gutters of the Town, at the expense of the owner of the property, under supervision of the Director of Public Works. 
C. 	It shall be unlawful for any person, company or corporation to obstructthe gutters, streets, alleys, pavements or sidewalks of said Town with boxes, barrel, lumber, wood, filth or in any other manner without theconsent in writing of the Town Commissioners. 
§ 410-4. Removal of barricades from closed streets. 
When any of the streets, lanes, alleys or sidewalks of the Town, or partsthereof, are closed to public travel by order of the Commissioners, it shall beunlawful for anyone to remove or displace any rope, board, barricade, light, lantern or any other thing placed in any street, lane, alley or sidewalk of theTown to designate that such street, lane, alley or sidewalk has been closedto public travel, or that such parts of the street, lane, alley or sidewalk are in 
1:711 

an unsafe and dangerous condition, unless permission shall first be obtainedfrom the Commissioners, who may temporarily allow such obstruction to be removed on conditions prescribed by them. 
§ 410-5. Placing materials harmful to tires. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed in or upon any avenue, street or alley of the Town any tack, nail, piece of iron, or tin,glass or other substance which may injure, cut or puncture any pneumatictire. 
§ 410-6. Violations and penalties.129 
A violation of any of the provisions of this article and sections thereof shallbe a municipal infraction and a violator shall be fined as provided in Chapter 1, Article II of this Code for each separate offense. 
129.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:712 ARTICLE II 
Sidewalk Construction 
[Adopted 3-11-1980 by Ord. No. 310 as Ch. 13, Art. 2 of the 1980
Code] 

§ 410-7. Service of notice. 
The word "owner" as used in this article shall denote the person appearing as owner in the tax assessment records of the county, and any noticerequired herein shall be deemed sufficient notice if mailed to the owner at the address given therein. If the owner's name or the owner's address asshown by the records is believed by the Board of Town Commissioners to bein error, the Commissioners, may, in addition to the notice above provided, publish a letter in one of the newspapers printed and published in the Town"to the owner of (the property concerned, describing it)," which letter shallcontain the information required by this article. 
§ 410-8. New sidewalk construction. 
A. 	Owners of residential and commercial use property shall be responsiblefor the initial construction of new sidewalk abutting their property. 
B. 	Wherever curbs and gutters have been constructed along any streetwithin the Town, or wherever such curbs and gutters shall be constructed along any such street, or wherever there is an existing sidewalk along any such street, the Board of Town Commissioners mayorder and direct the property owner of the abutting property on suchstreet to construct new sidewalk. Such sidewalk shall be constructed in accordance with Town standards and specifications and existing Townpolicy. 
C. 	Should an owner fail to comply with such an order, the Board of Town Commissioners is empowered to cause the work to be completed andassess the cost thereof to the owner, placing a lien upon the land whichabuts the sidewalk so constructed and which may be recovered either as a debt or in such manner as the taxes of the Town are recoverable. 
§ 410-9. Procedure for ordering construction of new sidewalk. 
Where the Board of Town Commissioners desires a new sidewalk to be constructed, a written notice shall be given by the Town to the owner ofthe property along which the sidewalk is to be constructed of the intentionof the Commissioners to compel the construction of the new sidewalk. This notice shall set forth in simple terms the specifications therefor. 
§ 410-10. Maintenance and replacement of existing sidewalks. 
A. 	The maintenance and replacement of existing sidewalks abutting commercial use property shall be the responsibility of the propertyowner. The maintenance and replacement of existing sidewalk abutting 
1:713 

residential use property shall be the responsibility of the Town of BelAir. 
B. 	Wherever such maintenance or replacement is the responsibility ofthe property owner abutting such sidewalk, a notice shall be sent bythe Town to such property owner setting forth in simple terms the reasons why the maintenance or replacement is considered necessaryand shall set forth in simple terms the specifications or the nature ofthe improvements. 
§ 410-11. Hearing. 
Where the Commissioners seek to compel the repaving or improvement ofan existing sidewalk, opportunity for hearing as to the reasonableness of the specifications or as to the reasonableness of the repaving or improvementshall be given to the owner at a regular meeting of the Board of TownCommissioners next following the fifth day after the receipt of such notice by the owner. The Commissioners, after such hearing, may require theDirector of Public Works to make any changes in the specifications whichthey shall deem reasonable and proper. The Commissioners shall enter their findings and the changes required, if any, upon their minute book within fivedays from the date of such hearing and shall make the same known to theowner upon his request at the Town office. 
§ 410-12. Construction standards. 
Sidewalks in the Town of Bel Air shall be constructed in accordance with Town of Bel Air standards and specifications. 
§ 410-13. Notice of work to be done by private contract. 
It shall become the duty of the owner, within 15 days from the receiptof the original notice to the owner or within 20 days from the hearing provided under § 410-12, to notify the Commissioners in writing if theowner undertakes and agrees to pave, repave or improve the sidewalk byprivate contract according to the Town's standard specifications. 
§ 410-14. Time frame for commencement of work. 
If the owner, after giving to the Commissioners the notice as providedin § 410-14, shall not begin the paving, repaving or improvement of the sidewalk within 30 days from the date of such notice, he shall be presumedto have waived his right to do so, unless, within the thirty-day period, heshall have made written request to the Commissioners to extend the time for beginning work. 
§ 410-15. Time frame for completion of work. 
If the owner shall begin the paving, repaving or improvement of the sidewalk and shall not complete the same within 15 days from the date ofsuch beginning, he shall be presumed to have waived his right to do so, 
1:714 

unless, within the fifteen-day period, he shall have made written request tothe Commissioners to extend the time for completing the work. 
§ 410-16. Granting of time extension. 
Upon receipt of a request for an extension of time for either beginning or completing the work, the Commissioners shall give to the owner opportunity for hearing upon such request not later than their regularmeeting next following the receipt of such request. Their decision uponsuch request and the extension of time allowed, if any, shall be entered upon their minute book and shall be made known to the owner upon hisrequest at the Town office. Further extensions of time may be granted bythe Commissioners upon like request and in like manner. 
§ 410-17. Completion of work by Town; recovery of costs; hearing. 
A. 	Upon any failure of the owner to comply with the provisions of thisarticle, it shall be lawful for the Director of Public Works to pave, repave, or improve the sidewalk according to the specificationsestablished. Upon completion of the work, the Town shall mail to theowner an itemized bill for the cost of the work so completed. 
B. 	Opportunity for a hearing as to the reasonableness and propriety ofthe bill mentioned in Subsection A, or as to any item thereof, shall begiven to the owner at the regular meeting of the Commissioners next following the 10th day after the mailing of such bill. The Commissionersmay require the Director of Public Works to make any changes in thebill which they shall deem reasonable and proper. They shall enter their findings as to the final cost of the work upon their minute book withinfive days from the date of such hearing and shall make the same knownto the owner upon his request at the Town office. 
1:715 

ARTICLE III 
Stands, Carts or Displays on Sidewalks
[Adopted 3-11-1980 by Ord. No. 310 as Ch. 6, Art. 10 of the 1980
Code] 

§ 410-18. Permission and insurance required. 
A. 	Any person, company or corporation that wishes to place a temporaryor permanent stand, cart or display for more than 24 hours upon asidewalk of the Town must receive permission from the Town Clerk's office and provide the Town with a certificate of insurance. 
B. 	Limiting the number of temporary or permanent stands, carts or displays shall be by public convenience and necessity. The Town Clerk shall act to protect the public health, safety and welfare and shallconsider the number of temporary or permanent stands, carts or displays, the demands of the public and provided services. Pedestrian traffic conditions and their relationship to the proposed business shallalso be used to determine any prospective hazard to the public. 
§ 410-19. Violations and penalties.130 
A violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be a municipalinfraction and a violator shall be fined as provided in Chapter 1, Article II ofthis Code for each separate offense. 
130.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III). 
1:717 
ARTICLE IV 
Newsracks 
[Adopted 3-11-1980 by Ord. No. 310 as Ch. 6, Art. 12 of the 1980
Code] 

§ 410-20. Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
NEWSRACK — Any self-service or coin-operated box, container storage unit or other dispenser installed, used, or maintained for the display and sale ordistribution of newspapers, new periodicals, or advertising materials. 
PARKWAY — That area between the sidewalks and the curb of any street, and where there is no sidewalk, that area between the edge of the roadwayand the property line adjacent thereto. "Parkway" shall also include anyarea within a roadway which is not open to vehicular travel. 
ROADWAY — That portion of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily usedfor vehicular travel. 
SIDEWALK — Any surface provided for the primary use of pedestrians. 
STREET — All that area dedicated to public use for public street purposesand shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys andsidewalks. 
TOWN CENTER OVERLAY DISTRICT — The area generally bounded byBaltimore Pike, Hickory Avenue, Broadway and Hays Street, as shown morespecifically on the Official Town Zoning Map. 
§ 410-21. Registration and permit required; location restricted. 
No person or entity shall install, use or maintain any unregisterednewsracks on any parkway, roadway, sidewalk or street in the Town Center Overlay District. No newsracks shall be located in any parkway, roadway,sidewalk or street in the Town Center Overlay District without a Townpermit. All registered/permitted newsracks in the Town Center Overlay District shall be attached as provided herein to the Town's newsrack support bar. Unattached newsracks are prohibited. 
§ 410-22. Registration procedure; maintenance of newsracks. 
All newspapers and advertisers selling or distributing via vending machinesor via newsracks on any parkway, roadway, sidewalk or street in the TownCenter Overlay District must register with the Town Clerk on prescribed forms containing the name, address, and telephone number of thoseresponsible for installation, use and maintenance of the newsrack(s). 
A. 	Upon the filing of any application by a newspaper or advertiser with the Town Clerk and upon payment of an annual administration fee as setby resolution of the Board of Town Commissioners, payable September 
1:719 

B. 
C. 
D. 
1 of each year, the Town shall issue a permit for attachment of theproposed vending machine to one of the Town's newsrack support bars, depending on space availability. Vending machines provided by theregistrant shall conform to the following specifications:131 
(1) 	
The dimensions shall not exceed: 

(a) 	
Fifty inches in height. 

(b) 	
Twenty-four inches in width. 

(c) 	
Eighteen inches in depth. 



(2) 	
The base shall be enclosed and shall not be a wire-type design. 

(3) 	
The lettering on the unit shall not exceed 144 square inches in area. 

(4) 	
Except for lettering, the color of the unit shall be dark green. 


The newsrack owner shall attach to the Town's registration form acertificate of insurance showing that such person/entity has then in force public liability and property damage insurance, endorsing theTown as an additional insured, in an amount not less than $1,000,000. The newsrack owner shall provide and keep in force that policy of public liability insurance during such time as it continues to locate anynewsrack under the terms of this article. The evidence of insurance filed with the Town Clerk shall include a statement by the insurance carrier that 30 days' unconditional notice will be given to the Townbefore any cancellation. 
If the number of applications exceeds the available space permitted by the Town, applications will be accepted and placed on a waiting list forthe next available space. 
Each newsrack shall be maintained in good repair at all times. Each newsrack shall be serviced regularly so that it is reasonably free of: 
(1) 	
General dirt and grease; 

(2) 	
Chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint or graffiti on all visible permitted areas; 

(3) 	
Rust and corrosion on all visible unpainted metal areas; 

(4) 	
Cracks, dents, blemishes and discoloration in the clear plastic and glass parts, if any, through which publications are viewed; 

(5) 	
Tears, peeling or fading in the paper or cardboard parts and inserts; and 

(6) 	
Broken or misshapen structural parts. 


131.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:720 
E. 	Damaged or defective newsracks shall be replaced or repaired as soonas practical. 
F. 	When use of a newsrack is permanently discontinued, it shall beremoved within 45 days. A newsrack which is unused for one monthshall be presumed permanently discontinued. 
G. 	Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit or interfere withalternative methods of distribution available to newspapers and advertisers throughout the Town. 
§ 410-23. Implementation. 
Within 30 days after this article becomes effective, every person or otherentity who or which places or maintains a newsrack in the Town Center Overlay District of the Town of Bel Air shall submit an application as required in § 410-22 of this article. Current newsrack owners shall be given priority for space allocation at designated Town newsrack locations. Prior to the allocation of a location, the applicant shall present evidence ofcompliance with this article. 
§ 410-24. Enforcement. 
A. 	Any newsrack installed, used or maintained in violation of the provisions of this article shall be tagged with a notice of violationstating the violation, date of tagging, notice of intention to remove the newsrack if the violation is not corrected within 10 days and procedurefor obtaining a hearing before the Director of Public Works or hisdesignated representative. 
B. 	If a newsrack has been tagged and remains in violation of the provisionsstated on the tag after the ten-day correction period, and if no hearinghas been requested, said newsrack shall be removed and stored by the Director of Public Works or his/her designated representative and thespace allocation shall be forfeited. The Director of Public Works or hisdesignated representative shall notify the owner by mailing a notice of removal to the last known address of the owner. Such notice shall state the date the newsrack was removed, the reasons therefor, the locations and procedure for claiming the newsrack, and the procedure for obtaining a post-removal hearing before the Director of Public Works or his/her designated representative. Any such newsrack removed and stored pursuant to these provisions shall be released to the owner if claimed within 45 days after such removal and upon thepayment of reasonable charges for removal and storage. Upon failureof the owner to claim such newsrack and to pay the reasonable charges within 45 days after the mailing of written notice of removal, suchnewsrack shall be deemed to be unclaimed property in possession ofthe Department of Public Works and may be disposed of pursuant to the provisions of this Code.132 
132.Editor's Note: See Ch. 360, Property, Lost, Stolen or Abandoned. 
1:721 
C. 	If a newsrack is in violation of the provisions of this article and theviolation creates an immediate danger to the public health, safety or welfare and the violation cannot be corrected by moving or otherwiserepositioning of the newsrack, said newsrack may be summarilyremoved and stored so as to eliminate the danger to public health, safety and welfare. The Director of Public Works or his/her designatedrepresentative shall notify the owner thereof by mailing a notice ofremoval to the last known address of the owner. Such notice shall state the date the newsrack was removed, the reasons therefor, the location and procedure for claiming the newsrack, and the procedurefor obtaining a post-removal hearing before the Director of Public Works or his/her designated representative. Any such newsrack removed and stored pursuant to this subsection shall be released tothe owner thereof if claimed within 45 days after the mailing of written notice of removal and upon the payment of reasonable charges ofremoval and storage. The newsrack space allocation shall be forfeitedwithin 10 days of the notice of removal. 
§ 410-25. Applicability; effect on existing newsracks. 
A. 	The provisions of this article shall apply to all newsracks, whetherinstalled and maintained prior to or after the effective date of any of the provisions herein. Those newsracks installed prior to the effective dateof any provision enacted hereunder shall be brought into compliancewith said provisions within 30 days of the effective date thereof. 
B. 	Any newsrack not brought into compliance within the aforementionedtime period shall be deemed to be in violation of this article. 
§ 410-26. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-17-2008 by Ord.No. 715-08] 
A violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be a municipalinfraction and a violator shall be fined as provided in Chapter 1, Article II of this Code, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each dayduring or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
1:722 

ARTICLE V 
Public Utilities 
[Adopted 3-11-1980 by Ord. No. 310 as Ch. 13, Art. 3 of the 1980
Code] 

§ 410-27. Mains, conduits, pipes or other structures in public ways.[Amended 11-17-2008 by Ord. No. 715-08] 
Any public service corporation, company, or individual, before beginningany construction of or placing of or changing the location of any main, conduit, pipe, or other structure in the public ways of the Town, shall submitplans to the Town and obtain written approval upon such conditions andsubject to such limitations as may be imposed by the Town. Any public service corporation, company or individual violating the provisions of thissection is guilty of a municipal infraction and a violator shall be fined asprovided in Chapter 1, Article II of this Code for each separate violation. 
§ 410-28. Water use restrictions. [Amended 11-17-2008 by Ord. No.715-08] 
Restrictions on outdoor water use may be implemented during water supply emergencies as deemed necessary by the Board of Town Commissioners.No customer shall use water outside of any dwelling, building or otherstructure in violation of restrictions promulgated by the Board of Town Commissioners, except as may be necessary to sustain human lives andthe lives of domestic pets and livestock, or for agricultural purposes, or inthe case of an emergency. "Customer" as used in this section shall mean any person, firm or corporation using water for any purpose from anywater distribution system supplying potable water within the geographicalboundaries of the Town and for which either a regular charge is made or, in the case of bulk sales, a charge is made at the site of delivery. 
§ 410-29. Unauthorized use of fire hydrants. 
A. 	No person shall open or cause to be opened any fire hydrant within the geographical limits of the Town of Bel Air except for the purposesspecifically excepted and delineated herein unless specificallyauthorized by the person supplying potable water to the fire hydrant. 
B. 	Fire hydrants may be opened for the following purposes: 
(1) 	
Firefighting by fire departments recognized by the Town of Bel Air. 

(2) 	
Hydrant testing and drills by the Bel Air Volunteer Fire Company or its agents or successors when specifically authorized by the personsupplying potable water to the hydrant or hydrants being used. 

(3) 	
Other public purposes to further public health, safety or welfare when specifically authorized by the person supplying potable waterto the hydrant or hydrants being used.133 


1:723 

§ 410-30. Violations and penalties. [Added 11-17-2008 by Ord. No.715-08] 
A violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be a municipalinfraction and a violator shall be fined as provided in Chapter 1, Article II,of this Code, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
133.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, which pertained to a penalty for violating this section,which immediately followed, was repealed 11-17-2008 by Ord. No. 715-08. See now§ 410-30. 
1:724 ARTICLE VI 
Street and Road Construction 
[Added 11-1-2010 by Ord. No. 735-10] 

§ 410-31. Adoption of Harford County Road Construction Code. 
The Board of Commissioners does hereby adopt the Harford County Road Construction Code, as now exists on the date of adoption. 
1:725 

Chapter 420 
TATTOOING 
§ 420-1. Definitions.134 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
COMMUNICABLE DISEASE — A disease capable of being transmitted tothe general public as determined by a licensed physician in the State ofMaryland. 
EROGENOUS AREA — The pubic area, penis, scrotum, vulva, perineum or anus. 
PATRON — Any person who receives a tattoo. 
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,association, joint-stock association or legal entity of whatsoever kind or nature. 
TATTOO — A permanent design or mark made on the skin by pricking,or penetrating the skin or the mucous membrane of an individual for thepurpose of inserting pigmented patterns, or by raising scars, or other forms of body decoration. 
§ 420-2. Permits required. 
A. 	No person shall engage in or carry on the business of tattooing unless he or she has a valid business permit issued by the Town pursuant tothe provisions of this chapter for each and every separate office or placeof business conducted by such person. 
B. 	No person shall practice tattooing as an employee or otherwise unlesshe or she has a current permit issued to him or her by the Townpursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
§ 420-3. Application for tattoo business permit. 
Any person desiring a tattoo business permit shall file a written applicationwith the Bel Air Police Department on a form furnished by that Department. The applicant shall accompany the application with a tender of the correctpermit fee, as hereinafter provided, and shall, in addition, furnish the following: 
A. 	The type of ownership of the business, i.e., individual, partnership,corporation or otherwise. 
134.Editor's Note: The definition of "body piercing" which appeared in this section and allreferences to "body piercing" which appeared in this chapter were deleted at time ofadoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III). 
1:726 B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
The name, address and telephone numbers under which the business isto be conducted. 
A complete list of names, residence addresses and telephone numbersof all persons who will be performing tattooing. 
A complete list of names, residence addresses and telephone numbers of the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation ofthe business or establishment. 
The following personal information concerning the applicant, if an individual; and concerning each stockholder holding more than 10%of the stock of the corporation, each officer, and each director, if theapplicant is a corporation; and concerning the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership and concerning themanager or other person principally in charge of the operation of thebusiness; and if one or more of the stockholders owning more than 10% of the applicant corporation is itself a corporation, the namesand residence addresses of each of the officers and directors of the corporation and of each stockholder owning more than 10% of the stock of the corporation: 
(1) 	
Name, complete residence address and residence telephonenumbers. 

(2) 	
The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant. 

(3) 	
Official written proof of age (i.e., driver's license or birth certificate). 

(4) 	
Height, weight, color of hair and eyes, and sex. 

(5) 	
Two front-face portrait photographs taken within 30 days of the date of the application and at least two inches by two inches in size. 

(6) 	
A history of such person's involvement in and experience withtattooing or similar businesses, including but not limited to whether or not such person in previously operating in this or another city or state under license or permit has had such licenseor permit denied, revoked, or suspended and the reason therefor, and the business activities or occupations subsequent to suchaction of denial, suspension, or revocation. 

(7) 	
All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations, fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which convicted, the offense forwhich convicted, and the circumstances thereof. 

(8) 	
A complete set of fingerprints taken by the Bel Air Police Department and processed through the Maryland State Police for acriminal history record check and disclosure statement. 


1:727 

F. 	Authorization for the Town, its agents, and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of theapplicant for the permit. 
G. 	Written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, that the foregoing information contained in the application is true and correct. 
§ 420-4. Application for permit to perform tattooing. 
Any person desiring a permit to perform tattooing shall file a written application with the Police Chief or his designee on a form to be furnishedby the Police Department. The application shall contain: 
A. 	The business address and all telephone numbers where the person is to be practicing. 
B. 	The following personal information concerning the applicant: 
(1) 	
Name, complete residence address, and residence telephone numbers. 

(2) 	
The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant. 

(3) 	
Official written proof of age (i.e., driver's license or birth certificate). 

(4) 	
Height, weight, color of hair and eyes, and sex. 

(5) 	
Two front-face portrait photographs taken within 30 days of thedate of application and at least two inches by two inches in size. 

(6) 	
A history of such person's involvement in and experience with tattoo businesses, including but not limited to whether or not suchperson in previously operating in this or another city or state underlicense or permit has had such license or permit denied, revoked, or suspended and the reason therefor, and the business activitiesor occupations subsequent to such action of denial, suspension orrevocation. 

(7) 	
All criminal convictions other than minor traffic violations, fullydisclosing the jurisdiction in which convicted, the offense for whichconvicted, and the circumstances thereof. 

(8) 	
A complete set of fingerprints taken by the Bel Air Police Department and processed through the Maryland State Police for acriminal history record check and disclosure statement. 

(9) 	
A statement in writing, from a licensed physician in the state, thathe/she has examined the applicant and believes the applicant to befree of all communicable diseases. 

1:728 


C. 	
Such other information, identification, and physical examination of theperson deemed necessary by the Chief of Police in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore to be set forth in the application. 

D. 	
Authorization for the Town, its agents, and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of theapplicant for the permit. 

E. 	
Written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, that the foregoing information contained in the application is true and correct. 


§ 420-5. Investigation of premises. 
In the case of applications for a tattoo business permit, the Town of Bel Air, or its designee, shall cause to be conducted an investigation of thepremises where the tattoo business is to be carried on for the purposes ofassuring that such premises comply with all the sanitation requirements as set forth in this chapter and with all the other applicable laws, including butnot limited to all federal, state, county, and Town building, fire, safety, andhealth regulations. 
§ 420-6. Issuance or denial of permit. 
The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, must comply withall applicable laws, including but not limited to the Town's building, zoning and health regulations. All fees must be paid prior to the issuance of thepermit. The permit will be denied if: 
A. 	The applicant, if an individual; or any of the stockholders holding more than 10% of the stock of the corporation, any of the officersand directors, if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners,including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of thebusiness has been convicted of any crime, other than minor trafficviolations, unless such conviction occurred at least five years prior to the date of the application. 
B. 	The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulentstatement of fact in the permit application or in any document required by the Town in conjunction therewith. 
C. 	Any individual performing tattooing has a communicable disease thatposes a threat to public health or safety. 
D. 	The applicant, if an individual; or any of the officers and directors, ifthe applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners, including limitedpartners, if the applicant is a partnership; and the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business is not overthe age of 18 years. 
1:729 

§ 420-7. Applicability. 
This chapter shall be construed to be applicable to all persons as defined herein, whether profit or nonprofit in nature. 
§ 420-8. Permit display, transfer and renewal; fees. 
A. 	Display of permits. The tattoo business permittee shall display his/her permit, and that of each and every person performing tattooing in thebusiness, in an open and conspicuous place on the premises of thebusiness. 
B. 	Permit fees. 
(1) 	
Fees for tattoo businesses and the persons performing tattoo areset by resolution of the Board of Town Commissioners.135 

(2) 	
The permits and fees required herein shall not be in lieu of, butshall be in addition to, any licenses, taxes or permits now requiredby the State of Maryland, county, Town or any administrative agency thereof. 


C. 	Term of permits. All permits are for a period of one year from the dateof issuance. 
D. 	Renewals. Applications for renewal of the permits must be made nolater than 45 days prior to the expiration of the permit. 
E. 	Transfer of permits. No permits are transferable, separate or divisible and such authority as a permit confers shall be conferred only on thepermittee named therein. No business permit shall be applicable to anyother location other than that location set forth in the initial application under the terms of this chapter. 
§ 420-9. Sanitation and safety requirements. 
A. 	Inspections. 
(1) 	
All premises used by the permittee hereunder may be periodicallyinspected by the Town's Building Official or his authorized representatives for safety of the structure, including but not limited to adequacy of plumbing, ventilation, hearing and illumination.Floors shall be free from any accumulation of dust, dirt or refuse.The use of equipment specifically designed for body tattooing shall be required. 

(2) 	
All equipment specified and used in the tattoo operation shall bemaintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Towels, linen and items for personal use of operators and patrons shall be clean andfreshly laundered. Towels, cloths and sheets shall not be used for 


135.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:730 
more than one patron. No tattooing service or practice shall becarried on within any cubicle, room, booth or any area within the establishment which is fitted with a door capable of being locked. 
B. 	Other governmental regulations. Nothing contained herein shall beconstrued to eliminate other minimum requirements of federal, state, county or Town ordinances or regulations pertaining or applicable tothe maintenance, control and operation of the premises nor to precludeany authorized inspections thereof by either the Bel Air Building Official or his authorized representative, the Health Department or the FireDepartment or any other authorized inspections. 
C. 	Right of entry. The premises used by the permittee hereunder shall be subject to the right of entry and examination by the Chief of Police,the Bel Air Building Official or their duly authorized agents or representatives or any other persons authorized to inspect premises of this nature as hereinabove set forth during business hours. Thissubsection shall not restrict or limit the right of entry vested in any lawenforcement agency other than herein set forth. 
§ 420-10. Supervision. 
A permittee shall have the premises supervised at all times when open forbusiness. The business permittee shall personally supervise the business and shall not violate or permit others to violate any applicable provisionof this chapter or any other applicable laws. The violation of any suchprovision by any agent or employee of the business permittee shall constitute a violation by the permittee and by the person violating theprovisions of this chapter or any other law. 
§ 420-11. Unlawful acts. 
A. 	Alcoholic beverages are prohibited on the premises. No person shallsell, give, dispense, provide, or keep, or cause to be sold, given,dispensed, provided, or kept, any alcoholic beverage on the premises of any tattoo business. 
B. 	It shall be unlawful to remain open or to provide services between thehours of 8:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
C. 	It shall be unlawful for any person in the establishment to place his orher hands upon, to touch with any part of his or her body, or to fondlein any manner an erogenous area of any other person. 
D. 	It shall be unlawful for any employee and/or person in the establishment to expose the erogenous area, or any portion thereof, toany other person. 
E. 	It shall be unlawful for any person, while in the presence of any otherperson in the establishment, to fail to conceal with a fully opaquecovering the erogenous area of his or her body. 
1:731 

F. It shall be unlawful for any person to perform tattooing in any placeother than a licensed tattoo establishment. 
G. 	It shall be unlawful for any person to perform or administer tattooingof or to any person under 18 years of age without the prior writtenand notarized consent of the parent or court-appointed guardian of the person. In addition, the parent or court-appointed guardian of the individual must be present during the tattooing. The writtenpermission, and a copy of the court order of guardianship when such permission is given by a guardian, shall be retained by the personadministering the tattooing for a period of five years. The parent mustprovide a birth certificate or other legal identification establishing the parent/child relationship for the minor. Also, the parent must show proof of his or her identify. Guardians must provide proof of court-appointed guardianship of the minor. Also, the guardian must show proof of his or her identity. 
§ 420-12. Refusal, revocation or suspension of permit. 
A. 	Refusal of permit. 
(1) 	
In the event that any applicant is refused a permit under theprovisions of this chapter, the applicant shall have 10 days from thereceipt of written refusal to appeal to the Commissioners of Bel Air for a review of the application. 

(2) 	
The applicant shall then be entitled to a hearing on the application,either before the Commissioners of Bel Air or before some duly authorized or appointed administrative agency of the Town designated by the Commissioners of Bel Air. 

(3) 	
A record of the hearing shall be kept. In the event that the hearing results in further refusal, the applicant shall have all applicableremedies as set forth in the Maryland Rules of Practice andProcedure and the Annotated Code of Maryland for appeals from administrative agencies. 


B. 	Revocation or suspension of permit. 
(1) 	
Any business or employee permit issued under this chapter shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the Police Chief for violationof any provision of this chapter or for any grounds that wouldwarrant denial of issuance of such permit in the first place. The Chief, upon such revocation or suspension, shall state his reasonsin writing, specifying the particular grounds for such revocation orsuspension. 

(2) 	
The permittee shall then be entitled to a hearing on the revocationor suspension, either before the Commissioners of Bel Air or beforesome duly authorized or appointed administrative agency of the Town or a hearing board consisting of at least three personsdesignated by the Commissioners. 


1:732 

(3) 	A record of the hearing shall be kept. In the event that the hearingresults in further refusal, the applicant shall have all applicable remedies as set forth in the Maryland Rules of Practice andProcedure and the Annotated Code of Maryland for appeals fromadministrative agencies. 
§ 420-13. Violations and penalties. 
A. 	Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chaptershall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II of this Code.136 
B. 	The penalties as set forth herein are in addition to, and not in derogation of, any other penalties provided in this chapter or under the applicable laws of the State of Maryland. 
C. 	The penalties as set forth herein are also in addition to all civil remediesthat may be applicable. 
Chapter 424 
TAXICABS 
§ 424-1. Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall havethe meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
OPERATOR — The driver of any taxicab. 
OWNER — Any person who owns and hires out any taxicab within the Townof Bel Air. 
TAXICAB — Any motor vehicle for hire designated to carry seven persons or fewer, including the driver, operated upon any public street or highwayin the Town of Bel Air, provided that nothing in this definition shall beconstrued so as to include as a taxicab a motor vehicle operated under a licensed firm of the Public Service Commission of Maryland, over fixedroutes and on regular schedules. 
§ 424-2. Vehicle identification. 
The owner of a taxicab shall attach to the vehicle proper identificationthat the vehicle is a taxicab. Such identification shall include the name of the owner, the company telephone number and the vehicle number. The identification shall be displayed on the side of both front doors of thevehicle. 
136.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:733 
§ 424-3. Rates charged by owner. 
Every taxicab owner shall post in each of his or her vehicles designated as a taxicab a schedule of fares in a manner that passengers may readilydetermine the exact fare payable by them. 
§ 424-4. Inspection of vehicles. 
The owner of every vehicle that has been designated as a taxicab shall havethe vehicle inspected every six months with such inspections conductedby an inspection station licensed by the Automotive Safety Enforcement Division of the Maryland State Police. The owner shall pay the prescribedfee for said inspections. No vehicle may be operated within the Town of BelAir without a certification that it is safe to operate. 
§ 424-5. Taxicab operator's permit required. 
No person shall operate a taxicab within the Town of Bel Air without first obtaining a taxicab operator's permit issued from the Harford County Department of Inspections, Licenses and Permits. 
§ 424-6. Compliance by taxicab owner and driver. 
Every taxicab owner and operator shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and all laws and regulations applicable to the operation of a taxicabbusiness in Harford County. 
§ 424-7. Violations and penalties.137 
Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a municipal infractionand a violator shall be fined as provided in Chapter 1, Article II of this Code. 
Chapter 435 
TREES 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Tree Committee — See Ch. 10, Art. VI. Parks and recreation — See Ch. 334. 
Forest conservation — See Ch. 216. Property maintenance — See Ch. 364. 
§ 435-1. Purpose. 
A. 	This chapter is provided to educate citizens of the requirements forsuccessful public tree planting sites and to encourage individuals andgroups to evaluate the need for roadside trees in and around the Town 
137.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:734 
of Bel Air. Proper tree planting and maintenance helps to stabilizethe urban tree canopy and promotes improved water quality through sediment and erosion control, energy savings through ground surfacecooling and a diminished urban heat island effect, wildlife habitat,enhanced property values and the aesthetic benefits of park, street, and landscape trees. With the guidance of the Town Tree Committee,this chapter is intended to solicit the cooperation and assistance ofthe residents of the Town in the planting and maintenance of trees on public and private grounds for the purpose of increasing the urbantree canopy. It is, therefore, the purpose of this chapter to promoteand protect the beauty, public health, safety and general welfare of the Town by providing for the regulation of the planting, maintenance andremoval of public trees within parks and rights-of-way in the Town ofBel Air, Maryland. 
B. 	The Town does not regulate the planting, maintenance or removal oftrees on private property unless subject to § 435-5G of this chapter orprotection under forest conservation as defined in Chapter 216 of the Town Code. However, any pruning, treating, or removing of trees onprivate property for compensation must be performed by a licensedtree expert as required in § 435-4A of this chapter. 
§ 435-2. Definitions and word usage. 
For the purpose of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words, andtheir derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include thefuture, words in the plural include the singular, and words in the singularinclude the plural. The word "shall" is mandatory and not merely directory. 
CRITICAL ROOT ZONE (CRZ) — A circular region measured outward froma tree trunk representing the area of the roots that must be maintained orprotected for the tree's survival. CRZ radius (feet) = trunk diameter (inch). 
LICENSED TREE EXPERT — A person who has received from the Department of Natural Resources a license displaying the person'squalifications to practice as a tree expert. 
PARK — Includes all public parks located in the Town of Bel Air, Maryland. 
PARK TREES — Herein defined as trees in public parks and lands to whichthe public has free access as a park, plus all facilities, parking lots, open spaces and other areas owned by the Town, county or state. 
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,company, or organization of any kind. 
PROPERTY LINE — The outer edge of the right-of-way associated with anystreet, lane or highway. 
PUBLIC AREAS — Includes all grounds owned by the Town of Bel Air, Harford County and/or the State of Maryland. 
1:735 

PUBLIC TREES — Include all trees now or hereafter growing within any street right-of-way (street tree) or any public areas where otherwise indicated. 
STREET — The entire width of every public way or right-of-way when anypart thereof is open to use by the public, as a matter of right, and for purposes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
STREET TREE — Any part of the main stem of a tree on land lying betweenproperty lines on either side of all streets, avenues, lanes, easements or ways within the Town. 
TREE CARE — 
A. 	Removal or planting of a tree; 
B. 	Maintenance to trim, shape, or sever the stem, branches or roots of a tree; 
C. 	Treatment to protect a tree from insects or disease or to improve the growth of a tree with direct application of fertilizers; or 
D. Any other treatment that may affect the health or growth of a tree. TREE SIZE — 
A. 	Large trees — Those attaining a height of more than 40 feet. 
B. 	Medium trees — Those attaining a height of 30 feet to 40 feet. 
C. 	Small trees — Those attaining a height of 10 feet to 30 feet. 
URBAN TREE CANOPY (UTC) — The layer of woody material from trees(leaves, branches, stems) that cover the ground when viewed from above. 
§ 435-3. Applicability. 
A. 	This chapter provides full power and authority to the Town over alltrees and shrubs located within street rights-of-way, parks and publicplaces of the Town. 
B. 	It shall be the responsibility of the Departments of Public Works andPlanning and Community Development and the Town Tree Committee to implement, administrate, and execute the requirements of this chapter in a consistent manner with the Natural Resources RoadsideTrees Article, §§ 5-401 through 5-406 of the Annotated Code of Maryland and its accompanying Tree Experts Article §§ 5-415 through 5-422 regulations under Title 8, Subtitle 7, Chapter 2, Sections 1 to 10. 
C. 	The Director of Planning and Community Development and the Directorof Public Works may use appropriate Planning and Community Development or Public Works Department personnel or their designated agents in the implementation of this chapter. 
1:736 

D. 	Authority to implement § 435-5B of this chapter is granted through theissuance of an annual blanket roadside tree permit issued to public agencies by the Maryland Department of Natural Resources ForestService. Tree care permitted includes tree removal, tree pruning andtree planting under supervision by the Maryland Department of Natural Resources for the purpose of eliminating hazard to property, publicsafety or health. 
§ 435-4. Licensing and insurance. 
A. 	Tree experts. No person or firm shall engage in the business or occupation of pruning, treating, or removing street or park trees ortrees on private property within the Town without having a valid tree expert license issued by the Maryland Department of Natural Resources as well as proof of liability and property damage insuranceconsistent with State of Maryland requirements. A license shall not be required of any Town employee performing such work, providedthat the employee is supervised by a Department of Natural ResourcesForestry Division Forester or a certified tree care expert on the Town's staff. However, all permits required by the Maryland Department ofNatural Resources shall be obtained prior to performing such work. 
B. 	Insurance. As stated in § 5-418(b) of the Annotated Code, every licensee shall carry and show proof of liability insurance and property damageinsurance, in the form and amount required by the Department ofNatural Resources at the time it issues the license. The licensee shall maintain the insurance protection for the period the license is in effect. 
§ 435-5. Tree planting and maintenance. 
The Town shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees within the right-of-way of all streets and in parks and other public places asnecessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetryand beauty of such public grounds. The Town, upon recommendation by the Tree Committee, may remove or cause or order to be removed anytree or part thereof on public property which is in an unsafe conditionor which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, waterlines, or other public improvements or is infectedwith any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. Tree removal, plantingand maintenance associated with approved development plans is subject to Chapter 165, Article VIII of the Bel Air Town Code. The Town of BelAir Landscape Manual includes information on forest conservation, treedelineation, landscape plan standards, and general landscape practices. 
A. 	Tree planting and maintenance shall follow ANSI A-300 standards. 
B. 	Street tree planting location standards. 
(1) To ensure compliance with Maryland Roadside Tree Regulations, Section .09, the Tree Committee will utilize the DNR Forest Service 
1:737 

Recommended Tree List, as revised, as the official list of permissible street tree species for the Town of Bel Air. 
(2) 	
Street trees shall be spaced so that they are no closer than 20 feetto any other street tree, unless otherwise approved by the TownTree Committee. The minimum distance trees may be planted from any curb or sidewalk is two feet in order to allow a minimum four-foot-wide growing space. Any proposed planting areas that do notmeet the minimum four-foot-wide requirement may be utilized for the purpose of planting trees upon review and approval of proposedspacing and species selection by the Committee. 

(3) 	
No trees shall be planted along streets that do not have curbing without prior approval and guidance of the Director of PublicWorks. 

(4) 	
No street tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet to any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs orcurb lines. No street tree shall be planted closer than 20 feet to anyfire hydrant or 10 feet to any streetlight. 

(5) 	
No street tree will be planted in a planting strip less than four feetin width and four feet in length. 

(6) 	
No street trees shall be planted that may intrude upon or interfere with any overhead utility wire or any underground waterline, sewerline, transmission line or other utility. 


C. 	Roadside tree removal and replacement of healthy trees. 
(1) 	
To address requests for tree removal when the tree is not diseased,dying or otherwise injured, the Town and the Maryland Departmentof Natural Resources, Forest Service, developed a policy document that permits affected residents the opportunity to enter into a contract to have a tree removed and replaced. 

(2) 	
The following conditions apply for any property owner requesting removal of an otherwise healthy roadside tree: 

(a) 	
All costs associated with removal and replacement of trees willbe paid by the individual. Replacement costs are paid directly to the Town. 

(b) 	
All requests are subject to review by the Town Tree Committeeand the Forest Service. Any decisions made by either reviewing agency are final. Any appeal is subject to the appeal process asdefined in the State Roadside Tree Law. 

(c) 	
For each tree removed, one tree will be replaced in the same or similar location. 


1:738 


D. 

E. 

F. 

G. 

H. 



(d) 	The roadside tree permit will be issued by the Forest Servicedirectly to the resident after the Town has received the following: 
[1] 	Tree replacement funds. 
[2] 	Contractor information. 
(3) 	Should a tree be found to be hazardous as determined by theForest Service, tree removal and replacement costs will be theresponsibility of the Town of Bel Air. 
Cost. The cost of planting and maintaining trees within public rights-of­way and/or acquired easements shall be financed by the Town of Bel Airexcept as indicated in § 435-5B of this chapter. 
Easements. The Town Tree Committee shall have the right to receive,from property owners, rights to plant and maintain trees on the privateproperty of such property owners within 10 feet of the boundary of a public area. Such easements shall be in writing, executed andacknowledged by such property owners, and shall be recorded andregistered. Such easements, when obtained, shall then thereafter be public areas insofar as the trees situated thereon are concerned andshall be replaced and maintained by the Town in the same manner asother trees in public areas. The Commission shall have no power to take or condemn any such easement. Such easements shall be, insofar aspossible, uniform. 
Removal of stumps. All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stumpshall not project above the surface of the ground. 
Diseased, dying or nuisance trees on private property. The Town may require the removal of any hazardous trees or branches on privateproperty within the Town when such trees or branches constitute asafety hazard to vehicle and/or pedestrian traffic in the Town right-of­way, hazard of life and/or property, or harbor insects or disease whichconstitutes a potential threat to other trees within the Town. The Townwill notify the owners of such trees in writing. Removal or pruning shall be done by said owners at their own expense within 45 days of the dateof notice. The removal or pruning should be supervised by a certifiedtree care expert on the Town's staff or performed by a licensed tree expert. In the event of failure of the owners to comply with such notice,the Town will remove or prune the subject trees and charge the cost ofservice to the property owner. Said cost may be a lien on the property upon which tree is located and may be collected in the same manner asthe collection of delinquent taxes. 
Topping. The practice of topping trees is discouraged. No person or firm engaged in the business or occupation of pruning, treating orremoving trees should engage in the practice of tree topping within theTown except as provided for in cases where a tree has been severely 
1:739 

damaged by storms or other causes or when a tree creates a dangerouscondition relating to utility wires or other obstructions. 
§ 435-6. Tree protection. 
No land disturbance within the critical root zone of a public tree is permitted unless adequate tree protection measures as noted in ANSI A300 Part 5: Tree, Shrub, and Other Woody Plant Maintenance – StandardPractices (Management of Trees and Shrubs During Site Planning, SiteDevelopment, and Construction) are installed. Construction other than public road and sidewalk repair within the critical root zone shall be subjectto approved construction practices that promote and sustain root growth. 
§ 435-7. Enforcement. 
A. 	Prohibited acts. In the case of trees located in the public right-of-way, itshall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1) 	
Prevent, delay, or interfere with the Tree Committee, Department of Public Works and/or Department of Planning and CommunityDevelopment, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about theplanting, replanting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any street tree, park tree or tree on private property,as authorized in this chapter. 

(2) 	
Cut, break, climb with spikes, disturb the roots, or otherwise injure or destroy trees, or to authorize such actions. 

(3) 	
Cause or authorize a privately owned wire or other conductor charged with electricity to come into contact with any tree in a manner that may injure or kill it. 

(4) 	
Cause or authorize any oil, gasoline, herbicide, paint, brine, hotwater, steam or other gas, liquid, or solid substances deleterious to the tree to contact any tree or to enter the soil about the base orroot systems of a tree in any manner that may injure or kill it. 

(5) 	
Supervise or authorize construction, alterations, repair or demolition activities in the vicinity of any tree without first placingsufficient guards or protectors as shall prevent injury or destruction of said tree arising out of such activities. 

(6) 	
Fasten any rope, wire, electric attachment, sign or other devices toa tree or to any guard about such tree, with the exception of holidayor ornamental lighting. 

(7) 	
Remove or tamper with any object or device set for the protectionor treatment of any tree. 

(8) 	
Pile any building material or make any mortar or cement within six feet of a tree. 

(9) 	
Have a fire within 10 feet of a tree. 

1:740 

(10)Hitch or fasten any animal or vehicle to any tree. 

B. 	
Violations and penalties. Any violation of this chapter is declared to be a municipal infraction. The penalty for violations shall be as provided inChapter 1, Article II of this Code. 

C. 	
Appeals. Any aggrieved party may appeal an unfavorable decision to the Board of Town Commissioners within 10 working days after receiptof the Committee's or any Department's decision. After its review,the Board of Town Commissioners may affirm, reverse or modify the decision by resolution within a sixty-day period from the date of theappeal. The decision of the Board of Town Commissioners shall be final. 


Chapter 450 
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
GENERAL REFERENCES 
Taxicabs — See Ch. 424. 
1:741 

ARTICLE I 
General Provisions 
§ 450-1. Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate parking, transportation, skateboarding and roller-blading within the Town and to authorize Townrepresentatives to issue orders compelling compliance with, and to establish penalties for violation of, these regulations. 
§ 450-2. Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
BUSINESS DISTRICT — Any parcel or area of land designated as a commercial or industrial district on the Official Zoning Maps of the Town ofBel Air. 
COMMERCIAL EQUIPMENT OR TRAILER — Any vehicle without motor power, trailer, semitrailer or trailered equipment designed to be towed by amotor vehicle or used primarily to carry or haul freight or merchandise or to render services in the furtherance of any commercial enterprise.[Amended7-8-2016 by Ord. No. 777-16] 
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any stake body, dump or panel truck, tractoror similar motor vehicle designed or used primarily to carry or haul freight, passengers for a fee, or merchandise or to render services in the furtherance of any commercial enterprise. This description shall not pertain to standard family-sized vehicles, including pickup trucks and/or vans.[Amended 4-20-2009 by Ord. No. 720-09] 
CROSSWALK — A lane marked off for pedestrians to use in crossing a street. 
DOUBLE PARKING — The standing of a vehicle upon a street outside of another vehicle which is parked at the curb. 
FIRE LANE — A lane required to be permanently open for the ingress oregress of fire and other emergency vehicles. 
FIRE OFFICIAL — The State Fire Marshal, Deputy State Fire Marshal, or aChief of a Harford County Volunteer Fire Company. 
HIGHWAY — The entire width between boundary lines of any way or thoroughfare of which any part is used by the public for vehicular traffic,whether or not the way or thoroughfare has been dedicated to the public oraccepted by any proper authority. 
LEGAL HOLIDAY — Designated Town holiday as noted in the Town of BelAir Administrative Policy Manual. 
LIMITED TIME PARKING — Parking areas or spaces designated by signage which regulates the time a vehicle may park on a street or parking lot. 
1:743 

LIMIT LINES — Chalk, paint, whitewash or similar lines marked upon thepavement or sidewalk to indicate direction and regulations to be observed by pedestrians and others. 
MOTOR VEHICLE — All vehicles propelled on public highways of this stateby mechanical power, except traction engines. 
ONE-WAY STREET — A street where one-way traffic is required. 
ONE-WAY TRAFFIC — Vehicular traffic restricted to move in one direction only. 
OPERATOR — Any person driving or operating a vehicle. 
OWNER — Person(s) legally responsible for real property either by virtueof simple fee ownership or by virtue of a lease or other rental agreement. In the case of public property, the public official normally in charge of theproperty by virtue of his position with the governmental body owning the property. 
PARKING — The standing of a vehicle upon a street whether accompaniedor unaccompanied by an operator. 
PUBLICLY USED PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any privately owned real property and improvements held open by its owners to access or use by the public,including but not limited to retail and department stores, shopping centersand shopping malls, professional and administrative offices, banks and other financial institutions, hotels and motels, churches, hospitals andrestaurants, and privately owned parking lots, roadways, and sidewalksincluded on or associated with such real property and improvements. 
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any street, road, alley, sidewalk or other public right­of-way, park, parking lot, or any other property owned by the Town of BelAir or any other governmental authority consenting to subject its property to the enforcement of this chapter. 
PUSHCART — A footboard mounted upon or between two or more wheelsand controlled by means of any upright steering handle. 
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAILER — A vehicular-type portable structure or trailer designed for recreational, camping, livingaccommodations or other travel use which either has its own motor power and/or is mounted on or towed by another vehicle. These could includemotor homes, truck campers, camping trailers, or trailers to carry boats, cars, animals, motorcycles or other off-road vehicles.[Amended 7-8-2016 by Ord. No. 777-16] 
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT — Any parcel or area of land designated as aresidential district on the Official Zoning Maps of the Town of Bel Air. 
ROADWAY — That part of the highway that is improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel other than the shoulder. 
ROLLER BLADES — A skate-like device having two or more wheels which is utilized by a person to propel himself in an upright position. 
1:744 

SIGN — Any device bearing printed instructions which advises the public ofany traffic regulations. 
SIGNAL — A visible sign given by hand or by mechanical device or by anautomatic signal. 
SKATEBOARD — A footboard mounted upon four or more wheels. 
VEHICLE — Any device in, on or by which any individual or property is ormight be transported or towed on a highway. 
1:745 

ARTICLE II 
Authority
[Amended 9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 701-07] 

§ 450-3. General authority of Commissioners. 
The Board of Town Commissioners shall exercise its authority to designate the following by resolution: 
A. 	Certain parking spaces on certain public streets as parking districts. 
B. 	Certain streets or parts thereof as one-way streets. 
C. 	Certain on-street areas as bus and/or taxicab pickup zones. 
D. 	Certain on-street areas as loading zones. 
E. 	Certain streets, lot, municipal buildings or segments thereof as parking meter spaces during certain hours of the day and days of the week. 
F. 	Certain lots and municipal buildings or segments thereof as "permitonly" parking zones during certain hours of the day and days of the week. 
G. 	Certain streets or segments thereof as preferential residential parkingzones during certain hours of the day and days of the week. 
H. 	Certain streets, alleys or segments thereof as no-parking zones or limited time parking zones. 
I. 	Certain segments of streets or parking lots as handicap parking zones. 
J. 	Certain parking areas or spaces on certain public streets and Townparking lots as limited time parking. 
K. 	Certain lots, alleys or segments thereof as lease spaces during certain hours of the day and days of the week. 
§ 450-4. Authority to establish fees; contracts for lease parking spaces. 
The Board of Town Commissioners shall exercise its authority to designate,by ordinance, fees for all parking meters and lease lot zones. Contracts forlease parking spaces may be signed by the Town Administrator or his/her designee. All funds collected from meters and lease space areas shall beplaced in the Parking Enterprise Fund. 
§ 450-5. Authority to lease or purchase parking meters andequipment. 
The Board of Town Commissioners may exercise its authority to enter intocontracts for the installation, leasing or purchasing of parking meters and 
1:747 

other required parking regulatory equipment. Said meters/equipment shallbe funded through the Parking Enterprise Fund. 
§ 450-6. Authority to limit truck traffic on certain streets. 
The Board of Town Commissioners shall exercise its authority to designateby resolution streets on which through truck traffic shall be prohibited. Only trucks in excess of 10,000 pounds shall be regulated as through trucktraffic. 
§ 450-7. Authority to enforce regulations and issue traffic citations. 
Sworn police officers of the Town of Bel Air or nonsworn members ofthe Bel Air Police Department, as designated by the Chief of Police, shallenforce the provisions of this chapter. Persons so designated shall have the authority to issue traffic citations to persons violating the regulations citedin this chapter. 
§ 450-8. Authority to close streets or divert traffic. 
The Director of Public Works and/or the Chief of Police or his designatedrepresentative may exercise authority, in the interest of public safety orconvenience, to close temporarily any street, alley, or portion of the same to vehicular or foot traffic or to divert such traffic therefrom. 
§ 450-9. Authority to remove and impound vehicles. 
A. 	The Chief of Police or his designated representative may exercise the authority to take possession of, remove, immobilize, and impound anymotor vehicle, whether licensed or registered in this state or any otherstate, which is parked, stored or left in violation of this chapter. 
B. 	In the exercise of the authority set forth above, for the purpose ofperforming the duties imposed by this section, the Chief of Policemay seize and remove motor vehicles by means of Town equipment or by contract. He may cause such motor vehicles to be stored eitherupon Town property or upon private property by suitable contract,provided that any contract for the removal or storage of impounded motor vehicles shall be executed in accordance with the requirementsof this Code and shall be approved by the Board of Town Commissioners. 
C. 	Towing companies/businesses operating within the corporate limits ofthe Town of Bel Air are hereby regulated under the provisions of theCode of Harford County, Chapter 237, Towing Businesses, as amended from time to time, which shall be enforced within the Town of Bel Air in the same manner, by the same officials and with the same effect asin the unincorporated areas of Harford County. All towing companies/ businesses operating within the Town shall be required to abide by saidprovisions and to pay required fees to Harford County in the mannerprovided in said chapter. 
1:748 

ARTICLE III 
Regulations[Amended 9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 701-07] 
§ 450-10. Vendors. 
A. 	Hand-and foot-propelled conveyances, pushcarts, and other similar wagons and conveyances shall comply with all regulations containedin this chapter. Any such cart, fruit-vending cart, or other licensedwagon or stand used for selling nuts, candy, fruit, or other articles shall, when standing in a place where parking of vehicles is allowed orprohibited, move from such space upon the request of a police officeror representative designated by the Chief of Police. 
B. 	A vendor permit is required to operate such conveyances within theTown of Bel Air.138 
§ 450-11. Traffic control. 
Traffic shall be directed by police officers, pedestrian crossing guards,police cadets, parking enforcement monitors, police explorers, or auxiliarypolice officers by voice, hand, or mechanical signal or shall be directed by automatic signal, but such officers or signal shall not prevent anyonefrom proceeding or standing in the manner required or permitted by law,provided that in case of fire or other emergency, or in case of a parade or other concourse of people, traffic may be directed as conditions mayrequire, notwithstanding the provisions of this Code or other ordinances.It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to disobey or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of a police officer,pedestrian crossing guard, police cadet, parking enforcement monitor,police explorer or auxiliary police officer or any signal from an automatic signaling device pertaining to the control of traffic. 
§ 450-12. Parades or processions. 
A. 	Permission for all parades shall be obtained from the Board of Town Commissioners or its designee, which may designate the routes of theparades. Applications for parade permits shall be submitted at least 60days prior to the event. 
B. 	No vehicle, other than an emergency response vehicle, shall be driventhrough a parade or other procession except with the permission of apolice officer. 
§ 450-13. Blocking crosswalks. [Amended 11-17-2008 by Ord. No.715-08] 
No vehicle shall park on any crosswalk in any such manner so as to obstruct free passage upon all parts of such crosswalk. 
138.Editor's Note: See Ch. 272, Itinerant merchants, Vendors and Solicitors. 
1:749 
§ 450-14. Vehicles to stop only at curbs; exceptions. 
A vehicle shall not double park except in an emergency, or to allow another vehicle or pedestrian to cross in front of it, or upon the signal of a trafficofficer or signal. 
§ 450-15. Loading or unloading at curb. 
A. 	Nothing contained in this chapter nor any rule of the Commissionersshall be deemed to prohibit a vehicle from parking at the curb of any street while taking on or discharging passengers, freight or merchandise. 
B. 	When practical, merchandise and freight shall be discharged andloaded from the side of the vehicle nearest the curb. When such handling is impractical because of the size or weight of the packagesof merchandise or freight, the vehicle may back to the curb, but itshall not stand at an angle which will interfere with the operation of other vehicles. If there is a situation that requires a vehicle taking onor discharging freight or merchandise to park at the curb of any streetfor an extended period of time (one hour or more), notification must be made to the Chief of Police at least four hours prior to the delivery/loading. 
§ 450-16. Parking near fire hydrant. 
The driver of any vehicle, however propelled, is hereby prohibited fromparking closer than 15 feet to a fire hydrant within the Town. 
§ 450-17. Parking near intersection. 
The driver of any vehicle, however propelled, is hereby prohibited fromparking closer than 25 feet to the edge of an intersecting street. 
§ 450-18. Parking near driveway. 
The driver of any vehicle, however propelled, is hereby prohibited fromparking closer than eight feet to the edge of a driveway entrance. 
§ 450-19. Parking in no-parking zone. 
The driver of any vehicle, however propelled, is hereby prohibited fromparking beside a curb or in an area which has been painted yellow orproperly signed under the direction of the Commissioners by resolution. 
§ 450-20. Parking of recreational vehicles or trailers. [Amended7-8-2016 by Ord. No. 777-16] 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a recreational vehicle or trailer, or other non-motor vehicle on any street, public property, right-of-way, oralley in the Town of Bel Air. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a 
1:750 

recreational vehicle or trailer on any street, public property, right-of-way, oralley in the Town of Bel Air for more than three consecutive days within any ninety-day period. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a recreationalvehicle for use as a sleeping facility on any public property, right-of-way,street, or alley in the Town of Bel Air for a period greater than 12 hours. 
§ 450-21. Parking or storage of vehicles on public or privateproperty. [Amended 7-8-2016 by Ord. No. 777-16] 
A. 	It shall be unlawful to park, store, or leave any vehicle of any kind, whether attended or not, or for the owner of any vehicle of any kind toallow, permit, or suffer the same to be parked, stored, or left, whetherattended or not, upon any public or private property in the Town, other than public highways, without the consent of the owner of such publicor private property. 
B. 	Vehicles parked, stored or left in violation of this section are subject to impoundment until the owner thereof, or other duly authorized person,has satisfied all fines and related towing expenses. In any prosecutionunder this section, proof that a vehicle was parked, stored, or left on public or private property shall be prima facie evidence that thevehicle was parked, stored, or left without the consent of the ownerof such public property. Notice to the owner of any vehicle impounded hereunder shall be presented by any duly authorized police officer ofthe Town within 48 hours of the presentment of such notice, exclusiveof Sundays and holidays. 
C. 	It is unlawful for any person to perform service or repair a vehicleparked on a public street, highway or road within the Town, except foremergency service or repairs, or to store or park on any public street, highway or road any motor vehicle left in the custody of the garage,repair shop or service facility, except for the time necessary to permitthe removal of another car from the garage, repair shop or service facility. 
§ 450-22. Snow emergency restrictions. 
A. 	Whenever a substantial snowfall causes hazardous conditions on the streets of the Town, the Director of Public Works, in his discretion, may,by public announcement, invoke snow emergency parking restrictionsfor so long a period as may be necessary. Such parking restrictions will normally be imposed on the main thoroughfares throughout theTown. Restrictions on streets designated as state routes or highwayswill be imposed separately by the State Highway Administration or state police. Immediately upon declaration of such an emergency andafter public announcement identifying those streets in the Town whereparking restrictions are in effect, it shall be unlawful to park or leave any vehicle on those streets until the Director of Public Works, by publicannouncement, declares the snow emergency terminated. 
1:751 

B. 	If parking areas adjacent to a state route or highway need to be closedto remove snow after a storm, the Director of Public Works will notify the State Highway Administration and issue a public announcementidentifying the state route or highway where parking is to be closed. 
C. 	The Director of Public Works is authorized to remove and cause to be impounded any vehicle parked, stored or left in violation of this section. 
§ 450-23. Parking for persons with disabilities. 
A. 	Designated parking space or zones. No person shall park a vehicle, unless for the use of a disabled individual, in any space or zone, publicor private, which has been marked as restricted for the use of disabledindividuals by either a government agency or the property owner. Any space or zone reserved for vehicles operated for use of the disabledshall be so designated by a sign erected on a post or on the side of abuilding which is clearly visible from the space or zone so designated. 
B. 	Parking permit for a person with a disability. Any vehicle operated forthe use of an individual with a disability shall be designated as sucheither by an appropriate sign or official symbol on its license plate or Maryland Department of Transportation Motor Vehicle Administrationpermit or other approved method, visible to the public and acceptableto the Town. 
C. 	Parking at a space equipped with a parking meter. In accordance withTitle 13, § 13-616(f)(ii) of the Transportation Article of the AnnotatedCode of Maryland, a person with a special disability registration plate or a removable windshield placard is not required to pay parking meterfees and may park in a parking space equipped with a parking meterfor: 
(1) 	
Twice the maximum time period permitted on the parking meterbut not to exceed a maximum of four hours; and 

(2) 	
If the parking meter permits parking for more than four hours, the period permitted on the parking meter. 


D. 	Violation. Any law enforcement officer, police cadet, or parkingenforcement monitor who discovers a vehicle, however propelled, parked in violation of this section shall deliver a citation to the driveror, if the vehicle is unattended, attach a citation to the vehicle in a conspicuous place and keep a copy of the citation, bearing Certification A that states "under penalty of perjury that the facts stated therein aretrue." Where a citation is attached to a vehicle in the absence of its driver, the registered owner of the vehicle shall be presumed to be the person wrongly parking such vehicle and thus violating this section. 
1:752 

§ 450-24. Commercial vehicles in residential districts. [Amended7-8-2016 by Ord. No. 777-16] 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any commercial vehicle, traileror equipment, as defined herein, on any public road, right-of-way or privateroad right-of-way, as designated for public use on a recorded subdivision plat, in any residential district, except when such vehicle is actuallyengaged in loading or unloading passengers, merchandise or materials. Atauthorized terminal stands or bus routes operating under a permit from the State Public Service Commission, stops may be made for sufficient periodof time, not to exceed 30 minutes, for the purpose of maintaining schedules.This section shall not apply to a vehicle involuntarily parked because of mechanical failure or other emergency, provided that such vehicle isremoved within a twenty-four-hour period of time. This section shall notapply to a public utility truck engaged in repairs or to a truck parked or being used during the construction or renovation process of a residentialbuilding, provided that such vehicle is removed between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 
a.m. 
§ 450-25. Manner of parking. 
A. 	Except as otherwise provided in this section, a vehicle that is stopped oris parking on a two-way roadway shall be stopped or parked parallel to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, with its right-hand wheelswithin 12 inches of that curb or edge of the roadway. 
B. 	Except as otherwise provided, a vehicle that is stopped or parked on a one-way roadway shall be stopped or parked parallel to the curb oredge of the roadway, in the direction of authorized traffic movement,with its right- or left-hand wheels within 12 inches of curb. 
C. 	It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle, however propelled, across anyline or marking designating a parking space or to park the vehicle inany way that the same shall not be wholly within a parking space as designated by such lines or markings. 
D. 	In accordance with Title 21, § 21-1003(c) of the Transportation Articleof the Annotated Code of Maryland, a person may not stop, stand, or park a vehicle on a sidewalk. 
§ 450-26. Time of parking restrictions. 
A. 	After installation of parking meters, it shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle, however propelled, to park such vehicleor to allow such vehicle to be parked at the locations described anddesignated by resolution as parking meter zones for more than the maximum period of time provided on the meters, except as stated in§ 450-23, in each such location between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m. on any day, except Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays. 
1:753 

B. 	Restrictions on lease spaces and municipal garage parking zones areeffective between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday only, except for legal holidays. Parking in violation of any of theposted times restrictions, except as stated in § 450-23, shall be unlawful and constitute a violation of this article. [Amended 11-17-2008 by Ord. No. 715-08] 
§ 450-27. Marking of parking space; function of meter. 
On streets designated as parking meter zones, or limited parking meter zones, the Director of Public Works or his designated representative shallcause parking spaces to be marked on the curb or pavements, or by otherappropriate means, and in each space so marked shall erect or cause to be erected a parking meter. Upon the deposit of a coin or combination of coinsof the United States, or the use of a smartcard, as indicated on the parkingmeter, the party shall be entitled to park his/her vehicle for a limited time as is indicated on the parking meter. The time when such a period has elapsedshall be indicated on the meter. 
§ 450-28. Operation of meter in parking meter zones. 
In order that the police officers, police cadets, and other meter enforcementpersonnel may properly compute the time during which a vehicle is parked,the owner or operator of the vehicle shall, upon entering such parking space, during the time of limited parking, immediately deposit a coin orcombination of coins of the United States or a smartcard in the parkingmeter situated at the side or front of the parking space and operate the same according to instructions thereon. Except as stated in § 450-23, failureto do so shall constitute a violation of this article. If such vehicle shall remain parked in any such parking space for such length of time that the meter shall indicate by a proper signal that the lawful parking period hasexpired, such vehicle shall be considered as parking overtime, and theparking of a vehicle overtime shall be a violation of this article. 
§ 450-29. Use of slugs. 
It shall be unlawful to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking metera slug, device, or metallic substitute for a coin of the United States. 
§ 450-30. Tampering with meter. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, tamper with, damage, openor willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the terms of this article. 
§ 450-31. Designated parking zones. 
A. 	"Permit only" parking zones. Certain parking spaces in certain public parking areas shall, by resolution, be designated "parking by permitonly," subject to the following regulations: 
1:754 

(1) 	
A parking permit shall be obtained to park in spaces designated"parking by permit only." 

(2) 	
Vehicles, however propelled, found to be parked in areas designated "parking by permit only" and not displaying a validparking permit shall be deemed to be parked illegally and shall be subject to fines, immobilization and/or towing and towing charges. 


B. 	Residential permit parking. Preferential residential parking areas in theTown of Bel Air shall be designated by resolution as "parking by permit only" during certain hours of the day and days of the week, subject tothe following regulations: 
(1) 	
Upon petition to the Town from 2/3 of the residents of a street or portion thereof in a residential zone, or on any street where thereare a sufficient number of residential dwellings in the opinion ofthe Board of Town Commissioners to warrant the establishment of permit parking, the Board of Town Commissioners shall causea resolution to be introduced which shall designate the street orportion thereof "parking by permit only." 

(2) 	
Said resolution shall be subject to a duly advertised public hearingand shall include the following information: 

(a) 	
An accurate description of the area to be designated "parking by permit only"; 

(b) 	
The reasons for designating the street or portion thereof "parking by permit only"; 

(c) 	
The hours of the day and days of the week in which "parkingby permit only" shall be in effect; and 

(d) 	
Other restrictions which the Board of Town Commissioners may impose. 



(3) 	
Upon adoption of a resolution designating a street or portionthereof "parking by permit only," a parking permit shall be obtained by residents of said street and shall be displayed on the rear bumper or in the rear window of all vehicles parked on said streetor portion thereof which has been designated "parking by permit only." 

(4) 	
Vehicles found to be parking on the streets designated "parking bypermit only" and not displaying a valid residential parking permit shall be deemed to be parked illegally and the owner shall beguilty of a municipal infraction and subject to a fine as indicated in§ 450-38. 


§ 450-32. Parking districts. 
A parking violation within a designated parking district shall be a municipalinfraction and the violator shall be fined as indicated in § 450-38. 
1:755 

§ 450-33. Riding bicycles and similar devices on sidewalks ormunicipal structures.139 
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a law enforcement officer onofficial duty, to ride a bicycle, skateboard or roller blades, or other similardevices upon any of the sidewalks in the business district of the Town or on/ in any municipal structure. 
§ 450-34. Required equipment for bicycles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle on the streets of the Town after 30 minutes after sunset without a bicycle light and bell. 
§ 450-35. Skateboards, in-line skates, roller skates and similardevices. 
A. 	Skateboards, in-line skates, roller skates, roller blades or other similar devices shall not be operated within the commercially or industriallyzoned districts or in any playground or parkland or recreation area unless that area has been specifically designated or unless the operators of such equipment have obtained the express permission ofthe specific property owner. 
B. 	If a property owner wishes to post a sign prohibiting skateboards,in-line skates, roller skates, or similar devices, a sign specificationspackage is available at the Bel Air Police Department. All signs posted pursuant to this section shall be a standard design and approved inwriting by the Chief of Police. 
C. 	All fines and penalties for violation of this section are pursuant to Article IV of this chapter. 
§ 450-36. School zones. 
The Board of Town Commissioners shall, pursuant to Title 21, § 21-803 of the Transportation Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, exercise itsauthority by resolution to designate school zones and maximum speed limitswithin such zones. For each designated school zone, fines for speeding during school hours as designated on the sign shall be double the amountthat would otherwise apply, and a sign shall be placed indicating that finesfor speeding within such zone shall be doubled during school hours. 
§ 450-37. Fire lanes and unobstructed areas for fire hydrants.[Amended 11-17-2008 by Ord. No. 715-08; 4-16-2018 by Ord. No.784-18] 
A. 	A fire lane shall be designated if a fire official determines that publicsafety requires designation of a fire lane to provide access to: 
139.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.III). 
1:756 
(1) 	
A building or place in which people work or assemble for any purpose; or 

(2) 	
A building containing more than two dwelling units. 


B. 	When a fire official determines a fire lane is required, the propertyowner shall: 
(1) 	
Clearly designate the fire lane by posting a sign approved bythe Director of Public Works in accordance with the provisions in§ 204-2. Signs shall adhere to the standards found in the Maryland Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 

(2) 	
Paint red any curb or roadway to designate the fire lane. The shadeof the red paint shall be approved by a fire official. 


C. 	A property owner shall maintain a clear space of at least 36 inchesaround any fire hydrant located on his/her property and shall maintainan unobstructed area (i.e., free of landscaping, dumpsters, or other obstructions) between the curb and the face of the hydrant. Theunobstructed area shall extend a minimum of 15 feet measured alongthe curb to either side of the center line of the hydrant. 
D. 	A property owner shall maintain an unobstructed path from the curb toany Fire Department connection located on a building. The path shallbe a minimum of four feet wide. 
E. 	A property owner, including owners of all nonprofit and governmentalbuildings, who fails after a ninety-day notice to properly designateand maintain a fire lane by appropriate signs and other appropriate marking or who fails to maintain unobstructed access or clear spaceto a hydrant or Fire Department connection as required by this sectionshall be liable for a municipal infraction penalty as provided in Chapter 1, Article II of this Code. Each day a violation continues is a separateoffense. 
F. 	A fine under this section shall be imposed if: 
(1) 	
A fire official who observes a violation reports the violation to a lawenforcement official; or 

(2) 	
A law enforcement or parking enforcement official observes a vehicle parked in a fire lane. 


1:757 

ARTICLE IV 
Enforcement 
§ 450-38. Municipal infraction. 
Violation of any of the regulations set forth herein shall constitute a municipal infraction and shall be subject to a citation to be issued by theChief of Police or his designated representative. 
§ 450-39. Adoption of fines. 
A. 	The Bel Air Board of Town Commissioners shall adopt by resolution anappropriate fine schedule based on the regulations set forth herein, orother penalties as provided by resolution. 
B. 	In the event that the person receiving a violation notice has failed to paythe appropriate fine for the violation by the date of payment set forthon the violation notice and has failed to file a notice of his intention to stand trial for such offense with the time allowed, a formal notice of the violation shall be sent to the owner's last known address. 
§ 450-40. Additional penalty; immobilization and/or impoundmentof vehicle. [Amended 9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 781-17] 
A. 	In the event that the State Motor Vehicle Administration is requestedto refuse registration or transfer of registration of the subject vehicle until all charges for unsatisfied parking violations have been satisfied,an additional penalty shall be imposed as provided for in a resolutionadopted by the Board of Commissioners. 
B. 	Whenever three unsatisfied parking violations have been issued to onevehicle, and where a period of 30 days or more shall have elapsedsince the third unsatisfied violation notice, such vehicle shall be subject to immobilization and/or impoundment by the Chief of Police or hisauthorized agents from any public road, highway, street, avenue, alley,off-street parking meter lot or private property used by the general public in further accordance with the provisions and penalties set forthin this section. 
C. 	Immobilization shall be accomplished by means of "booting" through the use of a device that is designed to be attached to the tire or wheeland which renders the vehicle inoperable. Other means or methodsof immobilizing the vehicle may be employed depending upon the situation. This is the primary method of handling this infraction. 
D. 	Impoundment shall be accomplished by taking possession of andremoving vehicles. This is the secondary method of handling this infraction. 
1:759 

ARTICLE V 
Meter and Lease Rates 
[Amended 3-19-2007 by Ord. No. 696-07; 7-9-2012 by Ord. No.
752-12; 10-2-2017 by Ord. No. 782-17] 

§ 450-41. Parking meter rates. 
A. 	The following hourly meter rates are established for the parking areasindicated: 
(1) 	
A rate of $0.50 per hour is established for the following parking meter zones: 

(a) 	
Alice Anne Street from Bond Street to Hays Street and on thesouth side from Hays Street to Williams Street. 

(b) 	
Bond Street/Thomas Street public parking lot. 

(c) 	
Burns Alley public parking lot. 

(d) 	
Courtland Street from Main Street to Bond Street. 

(e) 	
Harford County parking lot meters located on South Main Street between Churchville Road and Courtland Street. 

(f) 	
Hays Street, east and west side, between Alice Anne Street and Baltimore Pike. 

(g) 	
Hickory Avenue public parking lot. 

(h) 	
Lee Street, between Main Street and Bond Street. 

(m) 	
Parking garage located on the west side of Hickory Avenue. 

(n) 	
Main Street parking lot located opposite Office Street. 



(2) 	
A rate of $3 is established for an eight-hour parking voucher for theareas indicated: 

(a) 	
Metered section of the parking garage. 

(b) 	
Metered parking on Lee Street between Main Street and BondStreet. 


1:761 


(c) 	
Metered parking on Alice Anne Street between Bond Streetand Williams Street. 

(d) 	
Metered parking within the Hickory Avenue public lot. 


(i)  Main Street, east side, from a point 38 feet north of FulfordAvenue to a point 30 feet south of Gordon Street.  
(j)  Main Street, west side, 180 feet north Churchville Road to Lee Street.  
(k)  Pennsylvania Avenue, south side from a point 100 feet west ofBond Street to a point 240 feet west of Bond Street.  
(l)  Thomas Street from Bond Street to Hays Street.  

§ 450-42. Annual parking lease rates. 
A. 	The following annual parking lease rates are established for the parking areas indicated: 
(1) 	
Rate of $420 per year ($35 per month) for the public parking lotlocated west of Bond Street at Thomas Street; the public parking garage located on the west side of Hickory Avenue; the publicparking lot located on the south side of Lee Street along with theon-street parking along Lee Street between Main Street and Bond Street. 

(2) 	
Rate of $300 per year ($25 per month) for the public parking lotlocated east of Hickory Avenue at Pennsylvania Avenue. 


§ 450-43. Fee-in-lieu rates. 
A fee of $2,000 per space is established for each parking space requiredto satisfy parking fee-in-lieu requirements, as set forth in Article VII, § 165-51C(2) of the Bel Air Development Regulations. 
1:762 

Appendix 
Chapter A500 
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES 

1:763 

ARTICLE I 
Comcast Franchise Agreement
[Adopted 3-11-1980 by Ord. No. 310 as Ch. 6, Art. 4 of the 1980
Code] 

§ A500-1. Renewal of franchise. 
A. 	Comcast Cablevision of Harford County is granted a renewal of itscurrent nonexclusive franchise to construct, operate, maintain and reconstruct a cable television system within the Town of Bel Air, Maryland, for a period of 15 years from the effective date of this Act. 
B. 	The Board of Town Commissioners expressly reserves the right at alltimes to exercise in the interest of the public full superintendence, regulation, and control in respect to all matters connected to thisgrant, consistent with the provisions of the attached renewal franchise agreement140 and to the full extent permitted by federal law. 
140.Editor's Note: The franchise agreement is included at the end of this chapter. 
1:765 
ARTICLE II 
Verizon Franchise Agreement
[Adopted 10-6-2008 by Ord. No. 714-08] 

§ A500-2. Franchise granted. 
Verizon Maryland, Inc., is granted a nonexclusive franchise to construct, install, maintain, extend and operate a cable communications system withinthe Town of Bel Air, Maryland, for a period of 15 years from the effectivedate of this ordinance. 
§ A500-3. Rights reserved. 
The Board of Town Commissioners expressly reserves the right at all timesto exercise, in the interest of the public, full superintendence, regulation, and control in respect to all matters connected to this grant, consistent withthe provisions of the attached franchise agreement, and to the full extentpermitted by federal law. 
§ A500-4. Incorporation of franchise agreement. 
The franchise agreement is incorporated and made a part of this ordinance.141 
141.Editor's Note: The franchise agreement is included at the end of this chapter. 
1:767 
Chapter A501 
EASEMENTS 
§ A501-1. Easements granted by Town. 
A. 	Part of the bed of Main Street from the corner of the intersection with Baltimore Pike to its southern limits to the State of Maryland. 
B. 	The bed of Bond Street throughout its entire length within the boundaries of the Town of Bel Air to the State of Maryland. 
Derivation Table 
Chapter DT 
DERIVATION TABLE 
Disposition Lists 
Chapter DL 
DISPOSITION LIST 
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation. 
Ord. AdoptionNo. Date Subject Disposition 
715-08 11-17-2008Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. III 716-09 2-2-2009 Development regulationsSuperseded by Ord. No.amendment 730-10 717-09 2-17-2009 Plumbing and gas fittingRepealed by Ord. No.standards 769-15 718-09 2-17-2009 Sewers amendment Repealed by Ord. No. 
763-13 719-09 3-2-2009 Elections amendment Ch. 37 720-09 4-20-2009 Vehicles and traffic Ch. 450 
amendment 721-09 5-18-2009 Admissions and amusement Ch. 50, Art. V tax amendment 722-09 Development regulationsSuperseded by Ord. No.amendment 730-10 723-09 9-8-2009 Peace and good orderCh. 346 amendment 724-09 9-21-2009 Elections amendment Ch. 37 
DT:768 

Ord. AdoptionNo. Date Subject 
725-09 10-5-2009 Elections amendment 726-09 727-09 11-2-2009 Forest conservation 728-09 11-16-2009Historic preservation 
amendment 729-09 730-10 7-12-2010 Development regulations 731-10 732-10 5-17-2010 Stormwater management 733-10 9-7-2010 Health and sanitation 
amendment 734-10 11-1-2010 Sewers amendment 
735-10 11-1-2010 Street and road construction 736-10 737-10 738-10 1-3-2011 Development regulations
amendment 739-11 2-22-2011 Building constructionamendment 740-11 2-22-2011 Sewers amendment 
741-11 5-2-2011 Development regulationsamendment 742-11 5-2-2011 Fortune-telling repealer 743-11 10-17-2011Development regulationsamendment 744-11 11-25-2011Development regulations amendment 745-11 12-19-2011Adequate public facilities 746-11 12-19-2011Development regulations amendment 747-11 1-3-2012 Floodplain management 
748-12 2-21-2012 Development regulationsamendment 
749-12 3-19-2012 Code of Ethics 
Disposition 
Ch. 37 Number not used Ch. 216 Ch. 246 
Not adopted See separate volume Not adopted Ch. 405 Ch. 240 
Repealed by Ord. No.763-13 Ch. 410, Art. VI Not adopted Number not used See separate volume 
Ch. 145 
Repealed by Ord. No.763-13 
See separate volume 
See Ch. 223 See separate volume 
See separate volume 
Ch. 265 See separate volume 
Repealed by Ord. No. 776-16 
See separate volume 
Ch. 43 
DT:769 

Ord. AdoptionNo. Date Subject 
750-12 5-21-2012 Development regulationsamendment 
751-12 6-18-2012 Building constructionamendment 
752-12 	Vehicles and traffic amendment 
753-12 7-16-2012 Development regulations amendment 
754-12 10-1-2012 Development regulations amendment 
755-12 11-5-2012 Code of Ethics amendment 
756-12 12-3-2012 Peace and good order amendment 
757-12 1-7-2013 	Itinerant dealers, peddlersand solicitors 
758-12 1-7-2013 	Development regulationsamendment 
759-13 4-1-2013 	Development regulationsamendment 
760-13 5-20-2013 Fire prevention: generalregulations amendment; residential sprinkler systemsrepealer 
761-13 7-15-2013 Itinerant dealers, peddlersand solicitors amendment 
762-13 9-3-2013 	Sediment control 
763-13 11-4-2013 Sewers 
764-13 1-6-2014 	Boards, commissions and committees amendment 
765-14 1-27-2014 Sewers amendment 
766-14 
767-14 6-2-2014 	Storm sewers: illicit dischargeand connection 
768-14 9-2-2014 	Forest conservation amendment 
769-15 10-5-2015 Plumbing and gas fittingstandards 
770-15 10-5-2015 Electrical standards 
771-15 6-15-2015 Sewers amendment 
Disposition 
See separate volume Ch. 145 Ch. 450 See separate volume See separate volume Ch. 43 
Ch. 345 Ch. 272 See separate volume See separate volume Ch. 204, Art. I; Art. II, 
reference only 
Ch. 272 
Ch. 390 Ch. 397 Ch. 10 
Ch. 397 Withdrawn Ch. 407, Art. I 
Ch. 216 
Ch. 353 
Ch. 180 Ch. 397 
DT:770 

Ord. AdoptionNo. Date Subject Disposition 
772-15 10-5-2015 Building constructionCh. 145 amendment 773-15 12-21-2015Boards, commissions and Ch. 10 committees amendment 774-16 Withdrawn 775-16 Withdrawn 776-16 4-4-2016 Floodplain management Ch. 210 777-16 7-18-2016 Vehicles and traffic Ch. 450 amendment 
780-17 4-3-2017 	Development regulationsSee separate volumeamendment 
781-17 9-5-2017 	Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 450 Amendment 
782-17 10-2-2017 Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 450 Amendment 
783-18 4-2-2018 	Comprehensive Plan and See separate volume Development RegulationsAmendment 
784-18 4-16-2018 Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 450 Amendment 
785-18 4-16-2018 Trees Amendment 	Ch. 435 
Chapter LDL 
DISPOSITION LIST 
§ LDL-1. Disposition of legislation. 
Adoption
Ord. No.  Date  Subject  Disposition  
738-10  1-3-2011  Off-street parkingamendment  § 165-51  
741-11  5-2-2011  Performance standards and development guidelines amendment; definitions  §§ 165-53,165-104  
amendment  
743-11  10-17-2011  Codification revisions  Chapter historyonly  

DT:771 

AdoptionOrd. No. Date 
744-11 11-25-2011 
746-11  12-19-2011  
748-11  2-21-2012  
750-12  5-21-2012  
753-12  7-16-2012  
754-12  10-1-2012  

758-12 1-7-2013 

BEL AIR CODE § LDL-1 
Subject Disposition 
Special development§§ 165-13, 165-24,
amendment; parking setback165-51, 165-53, 
exception amendment; 165-68, 165-76, 
Elderly Housing Code165-78, 165-88, 
reference amendment; solar 165-106, 165-119, 
and wind energy systems and Table 165-33 
satellite dish requirement
amendments; subdivision and 
site plan approval letter 
amendments; Department of
Legislative Services
reference amendment; sign 
amendments; height of other
permitted uses in B-3A
District amendment; and Bel 
Air Volunteer Fire Company
name amendment 

Design standards amendment § 165-118 

Height and yard§§ 165-30, 165-33,
requirements in B-2 District165-51, 165-53, 
amendment; parking 165-61, 165-85, 
requirements in B-2 and B-3ATable 3-5, Table 
Districts amendment; off-165-30 
street parking amendment; 
home occupation amendment;
inspection and maintenance
amendment; permitted 
residential uses amendment; 
and lot requirements in the
B-2 District amendment 

Lot requirements for specific Table 165-26 
uses in R-2 Districts 
amendment 

Definitions amendment § 165-104 

Smoking lounge use; setback§§ 165-53, 165-68,
from group parking areas165-73, 165-82, 
amendment; setback for 165-104, Table 3-1 
domestic and farm animal 
pens amendment; zoning plan
approval amendment; 
building permit amendment;
definitions amendment; 
principal permitted uses 
amendment 

Temporary uses amendment § 165-71 

DT:772 
§ LDL-1  DERIVATION TABLE  
Ord. No.  AdoptionDate  Subject  
759-13  4-1-2013  Performance standards  
amendment  
780-17  4-7-2017  Comprehensive Plan anddevelopment regulations amendment  
783-18  4-2-2018  Parking and loading amendment; Open space andrecreation amendment;  
Performance standards and  
development guidelines byuse amendment; Minimum  
planting requirements amendment; Lot area  
requirements amendment;Accessory uses amendment; Fences and walls amendment;  
Temporary uses amendment;Preliminary plan review amendment; Terms defined  
amendment; Purpose; intentamendment; Standards by zoning district amendment;Signs permitted in all zoningdistricts amendment ;  
Exemptions amendment;Prohibited signs amendment;Illumination amendment;  
Design standardsamendment; Permitted Use  
Tables amendment, Table of  
Lot Requirementsamendment  

Disposition 
§ 165-53 
Ch. 165, Parts 1 through 4 
§§ 165-51, 165-52, 165-53, 165-59, 165-63, 165-68, 165-69, 165-71, 165-76, 167-104, 165-105, 165-106, 165-107, 165-109, 165-110, 165-111, 165-118, Table 3-5, Table 3-7, Table 165-34 
DT:773 

RESOLUTION NO. 1110-18 
AMENDING RESOLUTION NO. 1090-17 
TOWN OF BEL !IR’S FEE SCHEDULE 

WHEREAS, Chapter 192-1 of the Bel Air Town Code authorizes the Board of Town Commissioners to establish fees from time to time for certain Town services and documents; and 
WHEREAS, the Board of Town Commissioners desires to amend the fees for the following categories: Site Plan/Subdivision Revision, or Administrative Review, Board of Appeals, Permits, and System Development Fee; 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED by the Bel Air Board of Town Commissioners that the Town’s Fee Schedule be amended as follows: 
GENERAL PLANNING REVIEW FEES 
Preliminary Site Plan Review  
Single Family/Institutional  $300 + $50.00/unit or lot  
Multi-Family  $300 + $25.00/unit  
Industrial/Commercial  $450 + $50.00/acre or fraction thereof  
Subdivision Review  
Residential/Institutional  $500.00 + $10.00/unit or lot  
Industrial/Commercial  $500.00 + $25.00/acre or fraction thereof  
Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA)  
TIA Review  $750.00  
Site Plan/Subdivision Revision, or Administrative Review (prior to Mylar Signature)  
Residential/Institutional  $150 + $25.00/unit or lot  
Industrial/Commercial  $250 + $25.00/acre or fraction thereof  
Concept Plan Review  $250.00  
Plat Recordation  $30.00/Plat  
Rezoning Petitions  
Comprehensive Zoning – Rezoning Request  $200.00/Recorded Property  
0-4 acres  $500.00 + hearing and advertising costs  
5 acres or more  $500.00 + $10.00 per acre + hearing and advertising costs  
Development Regulation Amendment Petition other than rezoning  $250.00  
Annexation Petition  
less than one acre  $250.00 + hearing and advertising costs  
one acre or more  $500.00 + $10.00 per acre + hearing and advertising costs  
Special Development Application/Special Development Revision  
Residential/Institutional  $200.00 + hearing and advertising costs  

2018.06.18.RES.1110-18.FeeSchedule  Page 1 of 7 
Industrial/Commercial  $400.00 + hearing and advertising costs  
Extension of Approval for Special Development, Preliminary Plan, Non-conforming Use, Special Exception or Variance  $150.00 + hearing and advertising costs  
BOARD OF APPEALS  
Variance Application  $300.00 + advertising costs  
Special Exception Application  $300.00 + advertising costs  
Interpretation Application  $200.00+ advertising costs  
Minor Variance, Special Exception (SE) or Interpretations (to include SE or Administrative Variance for Signs, Sheds, Fences, outdoor or tent displays and deck setback, variances 5 feet and under)  $150.00+ advertising costs  
Expansion of Non-Conforming Use  $200.00+ advertising costs  
PERMITS  
SIGNS Temporary Signs Exceeding 6 sf. Signs under 25 square feet All others  $25.00 $35.00 $75.00  
FENCES  $35.00 + $0.04 per ft. over 250 ft.  
SHEDS 120 sq. ft. & under Over 120 sq. ft., but not over 200 sq. ft. Over 200 sq. ft.  $35.00 $50.00 See Building Permit Fees  
Public Utility & Floodplain Verification  $25.00  
Temporary Use Permits (Christmas tree sales, tents for special events and modular classroom facilities)  $25.00  
Home Occupation Permits  $25.00  
Untagged Vehicle Permit  $25.00  
Forest Stand Delineation Application plus Plans Review  $200.00 + 10.00/acre  
Forest Conservation Plan Application plus Plans Review  $150.00  
Simplified or revised Forest Stand Delineation/Forest Conservation Plan Application and Plans Review  $150.00  

MISCELLANEOUS 

Candidate for Election Fee  $25.00  
Tattooing  
Business License Person  $250.00/ annually $75.00 /annually  
News Rack Permit  $50.00/ annually  
Itinerant Dealer, Peddler and Solicitor Permits  
Solicitor  $20.00 (30 days or less) $8.00 per additional person $40.00 (31 – 90 days) $15 per additional person  
Peddlers  $60.00 up to 90 days $120.00 for one year  
Itinerant Dealers  $60.00 up to 90 days $230.00 for one year  
Other Miscellaneous Fees  
Non-Sufficient Funds NSF Fee (Including Physical Check, E-Check, and Credit Card)  $25.00/transaction  
Delinquent Collection Fees (The Administrative Expense of Collecting Real Estate Taxes, Sewer User Charge, Bay Restoration Fees, User Benefit Assessments, and any other charges)  $15.00/advertisement for the first two advertisements. $20.00 /property/advertisement for each subsequent advertisement.  

2018.06.18.RES.1110-18.FeeSchedule  Page 2 of 7 
Lien Release Administrative Fee  $20.00/Property Search  
Tax Sale Redemption Certificate Fee  $12.00/Property Search  
Personal Property Tax Clearance Fee  $12.00/Account Search  
Memo (duplicate) Real Estate Tax Bill Charge  $1.00/memo (duplicate) bill  
Tree Replacement Fee  $350.00  
Memorial Grove Tree  $100.00 (plus cost of tree)  
Parking Meter Smartcard  $2.30/new or replacement card  
Open Space Fee-In-Lieu  $50,000/ACRE  
Active Open Space Fee-in-Lieu  $50,000/ACRE  

SPECIAL EVENTS 
TOWN SPONSORED EVENTS 
With the exception of events in the Bel Air Reckord Armory, Town sponsored events are not charged for associated costs and include but are not limited to the following: 
Summer Concert Series, Lunchtime Concert Series, Independence Day celebration, Bel Air Farmers Market, Bel Air Downtown Alliance events, Flag Day Ceremony, Memorial Day Ceremony, Christmas Parade and Christmas Tree Lighting Ceremonies.  Other events approved by the Board of Town Commissioners and designated Town sponsored shall not be charged associated costs. 
A separate fee schedule applies to events held in the Bel Air Reckord Armory. 
COUNTY SPONSORED/NON-PROFIT SPONSORED 
With the exception of events in the Bel Air Reckord Armory, the Town of Bel Air will provide basic services  up to a maximum of $300.00 per year (EXCLUDES POLICE AUXILIARY PERSONNEL). County sponsored events or non-profit events are responsible for: 
1. 	
Actual costs of Police and Public Works personnel that is greater than the maximum amount provided by the Town; and 

2. 	
Actual costs for damages resulting from the event. 

3. 	
Police auxiliary personnel -$20.00/hr. per person (By contract only) 


The Town of Bel Air does not provide or pay for costs related to the rental of specialized equipment, advertising, portable toilets, entertainment, transportation costs or other non-basic services associated with County or non-profit events. 
A separate fee schedule applies to events held in the Bel Air Reckord Armory. 
FOR PROFIT EVENTS 
Actual costs of Police Personnel  TBD*  
Actual costs of Public Works Personnel  TBD*  
Janitorial service (Rockfield Park/ Shamrock Amphitheater only) for restroom use  $75.00  
Police Auxiliary Personnel  $20.00/hr. per person  
Actual cost for temporary signage specific to event  TBD*  
Administrative Fee  $20.00/hr. of event  
Actual costs for damages as result of event  TBD*  
Hourly charges for facility  
Town Hall (limited availability)  $100.00/hr.  
Band Shell (limited availability)  $100.00/hr.  
Parking Garage (limited availability)  $75.00/hr.  

+* Costs to be assessed based on actual costs to Town, including, but not limited to salaries, benefits, materials, supplies, signage, etc. 
FINES AND PENALTIES 
Re-inspection Fee or Unnecessary Trips  $60.00  

2018.06.18.RES.1110-18.FeeSchedule  Page 3 of 7 
Investigating fee, violating a Stop Work Order, working without a valid permit or license (fee in addition to regular permit and licensing fee)  $200.00  
Penalty for proceeding without prior inspection  $50.00  
Penalty for proceeding with work without a Utility Permit  $50.00  
Red Light Camera Violations First Late Notice/applies to citations issued prior to March 1,2012 Second Late Notice/applies to citations issued prior to March 1, 2012  $75.00 + $10.00 + $10.00  
Flagging Fee for each Unsatisfied Red Light Citation/applies to citations issued prior to March 1, 2012  $15.00  
Duplicate VR-119 Release Fee for Flagged Red Light Tickets  $10.00  

DOCUMENTS AND PUBLICATIONS 

Bel Air:  An Architectural and Cultural History 1782-1945  $15.00  
Erosion & Sediment Control Ordinance and Rules & Regulations  $15.00  
HPC Design Guidelines  $20.00  
Landscape Manual  $15.00  
Project Plans and Specifications  Up to $40.00  
Sign Manual  $10.00  
Stormwater Management Ordinance  $15.00  
Town Development Regulations (NO UPDATES)  $25.00  
Town Master Plan (Comprehensive Plan)  $30.00  
Town Zoning Map  $2.00  
Historic Preservation Commission (HPC) Recent Christmas Tree Ornaments Christmas Tree Ornament Series Over 2 Years Old Christmas Tree Ornament Series Over 5 Years Old Note Cards  Price set by HPC $10.00 $5.00 $4.00  

PHOTOCOPIES AND INFORMATION REQUESTS 

Black & White Color  
8.5 x 11  $0.15/ea. $0.25/ea.  
8.5 x 14  $0.15/ea. $0.25/ea.  
11 x 17  $0.35/ea. $0.45/ea.  
Pending legislation  No Charge  
Records for court appeals  $0.10/ea.  
Accident Reports  $5.00/ea.  
Other criminal and non-crime reports  $5.00/ea. + $0.25 per page over 5 pages  
Photographs (accidents or suspect lineups)  $5.00/ea.  
Maryland Public Information Act Requests -Under GP § 4­206, the Town may charge reasonable fees for the search and preparation of records for inspection and copying.  Document/record search and report preparation fees vary depending upon the personnel time and materials cost required to perform the task(s).  

CD ROM & DVDS 

CD and DVD copies of traffic stops, accidents, etc.  $10.00/ea.  

2018.06.18.RES.1110-18.FeeSchedule  Page 4 of 7 
MAPS AND PLAT PRINTS 

Copies up to 24 x 36  $1.00/ea.  
Larger than 24 x 36  $0.20/sq. ft.  
Aerial Topo Map (1990)  $15.00/sheet  
24 x 36 Title Bulk Sheets  $3.50/ea.  
Photogrammetric/aerials (2001)  $10.00 (11” X 17”) $5.00 (8” X 10”)  
Any other publication/document on CD, Floppy Disc or VCR tapes not listed above  $5.00  

BUILDING PERMITS 

Commercial/Industrial/Institutional  $0.09 per sq. ft., minimum $150.00 (DILP Review & Inspection Services); plus $0.01 per sq. ft., minimum $85.00 (Use & Occupancy Certificate).  Based on specific use, additional building permit review fee may apply.  
Group H: High Hazard Uses  $ 0.12 per sq. ft., minimum $225.00 plus $0.01 per sq. ft., minimum $85.00 U&O(Use & Occupancy Certificate)  
Utilities, public or private, each structure (tower, transformer, poles, etc.)  $50.00 minimum + Admin.  
Group R (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4): Residential Buildings  
1-and 2-Family Dwellings (R-3,R-4)  $ 0.06 per sq. ft., minimum $ 75.00 + Admin.  
Hotel Buildings (R-1)  $0.09 per sq. ft., minimum $150.00 plus $0.01 per sq. ft., minimum $85.00 (U& O)  
Dormitory Buildings and Assisted Living  $0.09 per sq. ft., minimum $150.00 plus $0.01 per sq. ft., minimum $85.00 (U& O)  

Multi-Family (apartments) and Condominiums (R-2)  $0.08 per sq. ft., $10.00 for shell U & O, $10.00 U & O for each dwelling unit and $20.00 Admin. for each dwelling unit.  
Additions/Alterations  
Decks, porches and balconies, club basement  $0.05 per sq. ft., minimum $30.00 +25.00Admin.  
Occupant Structures (Room Additions), Residential Accessory Buildings  $0.05 per sq. ft., minimum $65.00 +$25.00Admin.  
Sheds (Over 200 Sq. Ft.)  $0.05 per sq. ft., minimum $30.00 +$25.00Admin.  
Group U: Miscellaneous 


Commercial Retaining Walls  $60.00 + 25.00 Admin.  
Tanks, above-ground or underground  $40.00 each  
Utility Permits (INC DRIVEWAYS)  $50.00  

2018.06.18.RES.1110-18.FeeSchedule  Page 5 of 7 
Demolition without a separate permit  $75.00  
Swimming Pools  
Residential Above Ground In-Ground Public  $40.00 +$25.00 Admin. $75.00 +$25.00Admin. $125.00 +$25.00Admin.  
Commercial Tenant Use (without building modifications)  $85.00  
Temporary Use & Occupancy Certificates First Re-inspection Second and Subsequent Re-inspections  $30.00 $50.00 $100.00  
Building permit plan review fee after third submittal of a revised plan for the same permit (based on Harford County review time)  $ 65.00/hour ($60.00 County Fee + $5.00 Town Admin.)  

PUBLIC WORKS REVIEW FEES 
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION/SEDIMENTATION CONTROL FEES 
Stormwater Management Permit  4% of estimated construction cost not to exceed $4,000.00  
Stormwater Management Waiver for partial or complete relinquishment of requirements  $200.00  
Fee in Lieu  $ 1.00 per square foot of remaining untreated impervious area (for each of quantity and quality)  
Erosion and Sediment Control Agreement (less than or equal to 5,000 sq. ft. or less than or equal to 100 cubic yards of disturbed area)  $50.00  
Erosion and Sediment Grading Permit (greater than 5,000 sq. ft. or greater than 100 cubic yards of disturbed area)  4% of estimated construction cost, minimum $50.00  
Billing/Construction Management Fee  $30.00/Property Owner/Year Billed-Residential  
Billing/Construction Management Fee  $200.00/Property Owner/Year Billed-Commercial  

SEWER FEES 

Plan Review/Fixture Count Analysis (applicable to any building activity or tenant use change requiring a plumbing fixture count determination)  $50.00  
County Sewer Connection Charge (collected by the Town of Bel Air on behalf Harford County)  $650.00 per 30 fixture units  

County System Development Fee (collected by the Town of Bel Air on behalf Harford County)  $8,178 per 30 fixture units (effective  7/1/18). Increases 6% annually pending Town Board approval.  
User Benefit County Assessment Fee (25 payments will be billed to the property owner by the Town of Bel Air; collected by the Town of Bel Air on behalf Harford County)  $35.00 per year for 25 years per 30 fixture units  

DEVELOPMENT REVIEW 
Town of Bel Air development regulations require public notice in two publications of a local newspaper for pending development applications before the Board of Appeals and Planning Commission.  In addition, the nature of certain projects require a stenographer to record proceedings.  Because the cost of these services may vary significantly between applications, the expense incurred by the Town will be recorded and invoiced to the applicant as reimbursable. 
PLUMBING PERMITS 
Town of Bel Air Plumbing Permits are issued by the Harford County Division of Inspections, Licenses and Permits (Plumbing Services) in accordance with the current Harford County Fee Schedule. 
ELECTRICAL PERMITS 
Town of Bel Air Electrical Permits are issued by the Harford County Division of Inspections, Licenses and Permits (Electrical Services) in accordance with the current Harford County Fee Schedule. 
2018.06.18.RES.1110-18.FeeSchedule  Page 6 of 7 
AND BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that this Resolution shall take effect on July 1, 2018. Introduced: June 04, 2018 Public Hearing: June 18, 2018 Enactment: June 18, 2018 Effective: July 1, 2018 
AYES: Commissioners Chmielewski, Einhorn, Hopkins, Richards and Burdette NAYS: None Signature on file.
ABSENT: None 
Susan Burdette, Chair Signature on file.
Board of Town Commissioners 
Michael Krantz, Town Clerk 
2018.06.18.RES.1110-18.FeeSchedule  Page 7 of 7 


COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
165 Attachment 2
Town of Bel Air
Table of Lot Requirements for Specific Uses
Table 165-25: R-1 Low-Density Residential District
[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17]
Use Classification
Minimum
Lot Area
(square feet)
Maximum
Density
(dwelling/acre)
Minimum
Building or Use
Setback from
Adjacent
Residential Lot
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
at Building
Line
(feet)
Minimum
Front
Yard
Depth
(feet)
Minimum
Side Yard
Width
(each)
(feet)
Minimum
Rear Yard
Depth
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Residential uses
Single-family detached 10,000 4 70 35 10 40 30
Service uses 10,000 10 70 35 10 40 30
Parks and recreation areas 10 35 10 40 30
Accessory buildings 3 3 3 (lot line);
6 (alley)
20
Other permitted uses 15,000 10 100 35 25 40 30
NOTES:
General requirements shall apply to all permitted uses in this classification. Some uses may have additional requirements specifically cited in Articles VI through X of this
chapter. Structures shall not exceed 2 1/2 stories. Additionally, in no instance shall height exceed maximum number of feet cited in chart.
165 Attachment 2:1 Supp 7, Oct 2019
BEL AIR CODE
Table of Lot Requirements for Specific Uses
Table 165-26: R-2 Medium-Density Residential District
[Amended 5-21-2012 by Ord. No. 750-12; 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17]
Use Classification
Minimum
Lot Area
(square feet)
Maximum
Density
(dwelling/acre)
Minimum
Building or Use
Setback from
Adjacent
Residential Lot
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
at Building
Line
(feet)
Minimum
Front
Yard
Depth
(feet)
Minimum
Side Yard
Width
(each)
(feet)
Minimum
Rear Yard
Depth
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Residential uses
Single-family detached 8,750 5 70 30 10 35 35
Townhouse 1,800 10 § 165-63C(2) 18 30* 0 (10 end
unit)**
40 35
Semidetached dwelling 15,000 10 § 165-63C(2) 100 30 10 40 30
Two-family dwelling 15,000 8 70 30 10 35 30
Group day care 8,750 70 30 10 35 30
Parks and recreation areas 10 35 10 40 30
Service uses 8,750 10 70 30 10 35 30
Accessory buildings 3 3 3 (lot line);
6 (alley)
20
Other permitted uses 15,000 10 70 30 20 40 30
NOTES:
General requirements shall apply to all permitted uses in this classification. Some uses may have additional requirements specifically cited in Articles VI through X of this
chapter.
* Staggered townhouse units permitted with a minimum twenty-five-foot front yard depth.*
** 20-foot side yard setback required for overall parcel.
165 Attachment 2:2 Supp 7, Oct 2019
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Table of Lot Requirements for Specific Uses
Table 165-27: R-3 High-Density Residential District
[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17]
Use Classification
Minimum
Lot Area
(square feet)
Maximum
Density
(dwelling/acre)
Minimum
Building or Use
Setback from
Adjacent
Residential Lot
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
at Building
Line
(feet)
Minimum
Front
Yard
Depth
(feet)
Minimum
Side Yard
Width
(each)
(feet)
Minimum
Rear Yard
Depth
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Residential uses
Single-family detached 8,750 5 70 30 10 35 40
Townhouse 1,800 14 § 165-63C(2) 18 30* 0 (10 end
unit)**
40 40
Semidetached dwelling 10,000 14 § 165-63C(2) 100 30 10 40 40
Two-family dwelling 10,000 10 70 30 10 40 40
Multifamily dwelling
1 1/2 stories
2 1/2 stories
3 stories
60,000 20
30 (55 and over)
§ 165-63C(2)
100
100
100
30
33
36
16
20
24
42
42
42
30
40
40
Group home 8,750 70 30 10 35 40
Group day care 8,750 70 30 10 35 40
Parks and recreation areas 10 35 10 40 30
Service uses 8,750 10 70 30 10 35 40
Accessory buildings 3 3 3 (lot line);
6 (alley)
20
Other permitted uses 15,000 10 100 30 20 40 40
NOTES:
General requirements shall apply to all permitted uses in this classification. Some uses may have additional requirements specifically cited in Articles VI through X of this
chapter.
* Staggered townhouse units permitted with a minimum twenty-five-foot front yard depth.
** 20-foot side yard setback for overall parcel.
165 Attachment 2:3 Supp 7, Oct 2019
BEL AIR CODE
Table of Lot Requirements for Specific Uses
Table 165-28: R-O Residential Office District
[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17]
Use Classification
Minimum
Lot Area
(square feet)
Maximum
Density
(dwelling/acre)
Minimum
Building or Use
Setback from
Adjacent
Residential Lot
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
at Building
Line
(feet)
Minimum
Front
Yard
Depth
(feet)
Minimum
Side Yard
Width
(each)
(feet)
Minimum
Rear Yard
Depth
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Residential uses
Single-family detached 8,750 5 70 30 10 35 40
Townhouse 1,800 14 § 165-63C(2) 18 30* 0 (10 end
unit)**
40 40
Semidetached dwelling 10,000 14 § 165-63C(2) 100 30 10 40 40
Two-family dwelling 10,000 10 70 30 10 40 40
Multifamily dwelling
1 1/2 stories
2 1/2 stories
3 stories
60,000 20
30 (55 and over)
§ 165-63C(2)
100
100
100
30
33
36
16
20
24
42
42
42
30
40
40
Group day care 8,750 70 30 10 35 40
Group home 8,750 70 30 10 35 40
Parks and recreation areas 10 35 10 40 30
Other institutional uses 5,000 10 50 25 10 40 40
Service uses 8,750 10 70 20 10 35 40
Accessory buildings 3 3 3 (lot line);
6 (alley)
20
Other permitted uses 15,000 100 20 20 40 40
NOTES:
General requirements shall apply to all permitted uses in this classification. Some uses may have additional requirements specifically cited in Articles VI through X of this
chapter. A "unit" is defined as each individual apartment or condominium.
* Staggered townhouse units permitted with a minimum twenty-five-foot front yard depth.
** 20-foot side yard setback for overall parcel.
165 Attachment 2:4 Supp 7, Oct 2019
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Table of Lot Requirements for Specific Uses
Table 165-29: B-1 Limited Business District
[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17]
Use Classification
Minimum
Lot Area
(square feet)
Maximum
Density
(dwelling/acre)
Minimum
Building or Use
Setback from
Adjacent
Residential Lot
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
at Building
Line
(feet)
Minimum
Front
Yard
Depth
(feet)
Minimum
Side Yard
Width
(each)
(feet)
Minimum
Rear Yard
Depth
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Residential uses
Single-family detached 8,750 5 70 30 10 35 40
Townhouse 1,800 14 § 165-63C(2) 18 30* 0 (10 end
unit)**
40 40
Semidetached dwelling 10,000 14 § 165-63C(2) 100 30 10 40 40
Two-family dwelling 10,000 10 70 30 10 40 40
Multifamily dwelling
1 1/2 stories
2 1/2 stories
3 stories
20,000 20
30 (55 and over)
§ 165-63C(2)
100
100
100
30
33
36
16
20
24
42
42
42
30
40
40
Group day care 8,750 70 30 10 35 40
Group home 8,750 70 30 10 35 40
Parks and recreation areas 10 35 10 40 30
Other institutional uses 5,000 10 50 25 10 40 40
Accessory buildings 10 3 3 20
Other permitted uses 8,750 20 (side yard)
40 (rear yard)
15 10 25 40
NOTES:
General requirements shall apply to all permitted uses in this classification. Some uses may have additional requirements specifically cited in Articles VI through X of this
chapter. A "unit" is defined as each individual apartment or condominium.
* Staggered townhouse units permitted with a minimum twenty-five-foot front yard depth.
** 20-foot side yard setback for overall parcel
165 Attachment 2:5 Supp 7, Oct 2019
BEL AIR CODE
Table of Lot Requirements for Specific Uses
Table 165-30: B-2 Central Business District
[Amended 2-21-2012 by Ord. No. 748-12; 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17]
Type of Land Use
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Building or
Use Setback
From
Adjacent
Residential
Lot
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
at Building
Line
(feet)
Minimum
Front
Yard
Depth
(feet)
Maximum
Front Yard
Depth
(feet)
Minimum
Side Yard
Width
(feet)
Minimum
Rear Yard
Depth
(each)
(feet)
Minimum
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Residential uses
Single-family detached 8,750 70 30 10 35 20 40
Townhouse 1,800 18 5 15 0 (10 end
unit)**
40 20 45
Semidetached dwelling 10,000 100 30 10 40 20 45
Two-family dwelling 10,000 70 30 10 40 20 45
Group day care 8,750 70 30 10 35 40
Group home 8,750 70 30 10 35 40
Accessory buildings 3 0 0 20
Other permitted uses § 165-30C § 165-30C § 165-30C § 165-30C § 165-30C § 165-30C 20 55
NOTES:
General requirements shall apply to all permitted uses in this classification. Some uses may have additional requirements specifically cited in Articles VI through X of this
chapter.
** 20-foot side yard setback for overall parcel
165 Attachment 2:6 Supp 7, Oct 2019
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Table of Lot Requirements for Specific Uses
Table 165-31: B-2A Central Business Gateway District
[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17]
Type of Land Use
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Building or
Use Setback
From
Adjacent
Residential
Lot
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
at Building
Line
(feet)
Minimum
Front
Yard
Depth
(feet)
Maximum
Front Yard
Depth
(feet)
Minimum
Side Yard
Width
(feet)
Minimum
Rear Yard
Depth
(each)
(feet)
Minimum
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Residential uses
Single-family detached 8,750 70 30 10 35 20 40
Townhouse 1,800 18 15 25 0 (10 end
unit)**
40 20 45
Semidetached dwelling 10,000 100 30 10 40 20 45
Two-family dwelling 10,000 70 30 10 40 20 45
Group day care 8,750 70 30 10 35 40
Group home 8,750 70 30 10 35 40
Accessory buildings 3 0 0 20
Other permitted uses 10 15 25 0 0 20 45
NOTES:
General requirements shall apply to all permitted uses in this classification. Some uses may have additional requirements specifically cited in Articles VI through X of this
chapter.
** 20-foot side yard setback for overall parcel.
165 Attachment 2:7 Supp 7, Oct 2019
BEL AIR CODE
Table of Lot Requirements for Specific Uses
Table 165-32: B-3 General Business District
[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17]
Use Classification
Minimum
Lot Area
(square feet)
Maximum
Density
(dwelling/acre)
Minimum
Building or Use
Setback from
Adjacent
Residential Lot
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
at Building
Line
(feet)
Minimum
Front
Yard
Depth
(feet)
Minimum
Side Yard
Width
(each)
(feet)
Minimum
Rear Yard
Depth
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Residential uses
Single-family detached 8,750 5 70 30 10 35 40
Townhouse 1,800 14 18 30* 0 (10 end
unit)**
40 40
Semidetached dwelling 10,000 14 100 30 10 40 40
Two-family dwelling 8,750 10 70 30 10 40 40
Multifamily dwelling
1 1/2 stories
2 1/2 stories
3 stories
4 stories and above
60,000 20
30 (55 and over) 20
25
30
35
100
100
100
100
30
33
36
40
16
20
24
28
42
42
42
42
30
40
50
60
Group day care 8,750 70 30 10 35 40
Group home 8,750 70 30 10 35 40
Parks and recreation areas 10 35 10 40 30
Other institutional uses 5,000 10 50 35 10 40 40
Accessory buildings 10 3 3 20
Other permitted uses 10 (side yard)
30 (rear yard)
22 0 10 65
NOTES:
General requirements shall apply to all permitted uses in this classification. Some uses may have additional requirements cited in Articles VI through X of this chapter.
* Staggered townhouse units permitted with a minimum twenty-five-foot front yard depth.
** 20-foot side yard setback for overall parcel.
165 Attachment 2:8 Supp 7, Oct 2019
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Table of Lot Requirements for Specific Uses
Table 165-33: B-3A General Business Gateway District
[Amended 11-25-2011 by Ord. No. 744-11; 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17]
Type of Land Use
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Building or
Use Setback
From
Adjacent
Residential
Lot
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
at Building
Line
(feet)
Minimum
Front
Yard
Depth
(feet)
Maximum
Front Yard
Depth
(feet)
Minimum
Side Yard
Width
(feet)
Minimum
Rear Yard
Depth
(each)
(feet)
Minimum
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Residential uses
Single-family detached 8,750 70 30 10 35 20 40
Townhouse 1,800 18 10 20* 0 (10 end
unit)**
40 20 45
Semidetached dwelling 10,000 100 30 10 40 20 45
Two-family dwelling 10,000 70 30 10 40 20 45
Group day care 8,750 70 30 10 35 40
Group home 8,750 70 30 10 35 40
Accessory buildings 10 0 0 20
Other permitted uses § 165-
33C(4)
§ 165-
33C(4)
§ 165-
33C(4)
§ 165-
33C(4)
§ 165-
33C(4)
§ 165-
33C(4)
20 55
NOTES:
General requirements shall apply to all permitted uses in this classification. Some uses may have additional requirements specifically cited in Articles VI through X of this
chapter.
* See § 165-32C.
** 20-foot side yard setback for overall parcel.
165 Attachment 2:9 Supp 7, Oct 2019
BEL AIR CODE
Table of Lot Requirements for Specific Uses
Table 165-34: M-1 Industrial District
[Amended 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 783-18; 9-16-2019 by Ord. No. 792-19]
Use Classification
Minimum
Lot Area
(square feet)
Maximum
Density
(dwelling/acre)
Minimum
Building or Use
Setback from
Adjacent
Residential Lot
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
at Building
Line
(feet)
Minimum
Front
Yard
Depth
(feet)
Minimum
Side Yard
Width
(each)
(feet)
Minimum
Rear Yard
Depth
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
All permitted residential uses 15,000 20
30 (55 and over)
100 36 24 42 40
All permitted industrial and
natural resource uses
1 story
2 story
3 story
50
50
50
10 15
15
20
10
15
20
30
35
40
Other permitted uses
(amusement, retail, service
and institutional)
30 10 10 10 40
Accessory buildings 25 10 10 20
NOTES:
General requirements shall apply to all permitted uses in this classification. Some uses may have additional requirements specifically cited in Articles VI through X of this
chapter.
165 Attachment 2:10 Supp 7, Oct 2019

COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
165 Attachment 1
Town of Bel Air
Permitted Use Tables
Table 3-1, Amusement/Entertainment
Principal permitted uses for specific zoning districts
[Amended 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 754-12; 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17]
Use Classification
Zoning Districts
R-1 R-2 R-3 R-O B-1 B-2/B-2A B-3/B-3A M-1
Adult entertainment center SE
Arena/stadium P P
Bowling alley P P P
Amusement center SD SD SD
Country club, golf, tennis, swim
club
SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE
Fortune telling SE
Ice/roller rink P P P
Microbrewery/winery/distillery SD SD SD
Recreation, indoor SD SD SD
Recreation, outdoor P P P P P P P P
Smoking lounge SE SE
Tavern SD SD SD
Tavern with entertainment SE SE SE
Theater P P P P
KEY:
"P" indicates permitted subject to applicable code requirements
"SD" indicates permitted subject to special development regulations, pursuant to Article XII
"SE" indicates permitted subject to special exception regulations, pursuant to Article XII
A blank cell indicates that the use is not permitted
NOTE: These tables are provided for easy reference. However, the text of Chapter 165, Part 2, should be
consulted for further definition and all applicable requirements. In the case of any inconsistencies
between the text and the tables, the text shall control.
165 Attachment 1:1 Supp 9, May 2022
BEL AIR CODE
Table 3-2, Industrial
Principal permitted uses for specific zoning districts
[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17]
Use Classification
Zoning Districts
R-1 R-2 R-3 R-O B-1 B-2/B-2A B-3/B-3A M-1
Construction supply/service SD SD P
Electronics supply and service SD P
Electric substation P P P P P P P P
Feed and grain mill SD
Fuel storage facility SE SE
Manufacturing, primary SE
Manufacturing, secondary SD P
Medical, equipment and supply SD P P
Passenger transit P P
Printing and publishing SD P P
Vehicle/equipment storage SE SE
Warehousing SE SE
KEY:
"P" indicates permitted subject to applicable code requirements
"SD" indicates permitted subject to special development regulations, pursuant to Article XII
"SE" indicates permitted subject to special exception regulations, pursuant to Article XII
A blank cell indicates that the use is not permitted
NOTE: These tables are provided for easy reference. However, the text of Chapter 165, Part 2, should be
consulted for further definition and all applicable requirements. In the case of any inconsistencies
between the text and the tables, the text shall control.
165 Attachment 1:2 Supp 9, May 2022
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Table 3-3, Institutional
Principal permitted uses for specific zoning districts
[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17]
Use Classification
Zoning Districts
R-1 R-2 R-3 R-O B-1 B-2/B-2A B-3/B-3A M-1
Cemetery SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE
Civic, service club, fraternal
organization
SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE
Community center SE SE SE SE P P P P
Convent P P P P P P P P
Day care, group SE SE SE SE SE SE SE
Dormitory SE SE SD SD SD SD
Fire station SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE
Hospital SD SD SD SD SD SD SD SD
House of worship P P P P P P P P
Library P P P P P P
Nursing home, assisted living, SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE
Parks and recreation area P P P P P P P P
Post office P P P
Prison SD SD
Recycling and reuse center SE SE
School, college, university* SE SE SE SE SE SE SE SE
* Minor school expansions of less than 5,000 square feet permitted by right, special exception approval
not required.
KEY:
"P" indicates permitted subject to applicable code requirements
"SD" indicates permitted subject to special development regulations, pursuant to Article XII
"SE" indicates permitted subject to special exception regulations, pursuant to Article XII
A blank cell indicates that the use is not permitted
NOTE: These tables are provided for easy reference. However, the text of Chapter 165, Part 2, should be
consulted for further definition and all applicable requirements. In the case of any inconsistencies
between the text and the tables, the text shall control.
165 Attachment 1:3 Supp 9, May 2022
BEL AIR CODE
Table 3-4, Natural Resources
Principal permitted uses for specific zoning districts
[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17]
Use Classification
Zoning Districts
R-1 R-2 R-3 R-O B-1 B-2/B-2A B-3/B-3A M-1
Agricultural products —
processing
SE
Greenhouse and nursery —
commercial
SD P P
Mining/mineral extraction SE
KEY:
"P" indicates permitted subject to applicable code requirements
"SD" indicates permitted subject to special development regulations, pursuant to Article XII
"SE" indicates permitted subject to special exception regulations, pursuant to Article XII
A blank cell indicates that the use is not permitted
NOTE: These tables are provided for easy reference. However, the text of Chapter 165, Part 2, should be
consulted for further definition and all applicable requirements. In the case of any inconsistencies
between the text and the tables, the text shall control.
165 Attachment 1:4 Supp 9, May 2022
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Table 3-5, Residential
Principal permitted uses for specific zoning districts
[Amended 2-21-2012 by Ord. No. 748-12; 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17; 4-2-2018 by Ord.
No. 783-18; 9-16-2019 by Ord. No. 792-19]
Use Classification
Zoning Districts
R-1 R-2 R-3 R-O B-1 B-2/B-2A B-3/B-3A M-1
Dwellings
Cottage housing SE P P P P P P
Multifamily (apartment/condo) SD SD P P P P
Semidetached P P P P P P
Single-family detached P P P P P P P
Townhouse P P P P P P P
Two-family/duplex P P P P P P
Bed-and-breakfast SE** SE** SE SE P P P
Boardinghouse SE SE SE SE SE
Community shelter SE SE SE SD SD
Day care, family P P P P P P P
Group home, large SD SD P P P P
Group home, small P P P P P P P P
Halfway house SE SE SE SE
Home occupation* SE SE SE P P P P
55 and over housing SE SE SE SE SE P
Mixed-use center SD SD SD SD
* Home occupations occupying not more than 300 square feet and employing only persons residing
within the home are permitted as right. Home occupations occupying in excess of 300 square feet
and/or employing persons residing outside of the home require special exception approval.
** Permitted in R-1 and R-2 Transition Overlay District as special exception. Not permitted elsewhere in
these districts.
KEY:
"P" indicates permitted subject to applicable code requirements
"SD" indicates permitted subject to special development regulations, pursuant to Article XII
"SE" indicates permitted subject to special exception regulations, pursuant to Article XII
A blank cell indicates that the use is not permitted
NOTE: These tables are provided for easy reference. However, the text of Chapter 165, Part 2, should be
consulted for further definition and all applicable requirements. In the case of any inconsistencies
between the text and the tables, the text shall control.
165 Attachment 1:5 Supp 9, May 2022
BEL AIR CODE
Table 3-6, Retail Uses
Principal permitted uses for specific zoning districts
[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17]
Use Classification
Zoning Districts
R-1 R-2 R-3 R-O B-1 B-2/B-2A B-3/B-3A M-1
Antique shop/art gallery/museum SE P P P P
Auction house P P
Catalog showroom P P P
Convenience good P P P
Department store P P P
Discount store P P P
Farmers market P P P
General merchandise SE P P P
Liquor store SE SE SE
Medical equipment sale and
leasing
P P
Mixed-use center SD SD P P
Shoppers merchandise SE* P P P
Shopping center SD SD SD
Specialty food store P P P P
Specialty shop P P P P
Supermarket P P P
* See Article VII, Development and Performance Standards. Establishment shall not exceed 5,000
square feet.
KEY:
"P" indicates permitted subject to applicable code requirements
"SD" indicates permitted subject to special development regulations, pursuant to Article XII
"SE" indicates permitted subject to special exception regulations, pursuant to Article XII
A blank cell indicates that the use is not permitted
NOTE: These tables are provided for easy reference. However, the text of Chapter 165, Part 2, should be
consulted for further definition and all applicable requirements. In the case of any inconsistencies
between the text and the tables, the text shall control.
165 Attachment 1:6 Supp 9, May 2022
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Table 3-7, Service Uses
Principal permitted uses for specific zoning districts
[Amended 5-2-2011 by Ord. No. 741-11; 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17; 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 783-
18; 9-3-2019 by Ord. No. 791-19; 11-1-2021 by Ord. No. 806-21]
Use Classification
Zoning Districts
R-1 R-2 R-3 R-O B-1 B-2/B-2A B-3/B-3A M-1
Bank P P P P
Beauty shop/barbershop/spa SE SE P P P
Body-piercing service SE
Bulk mail service SE SE SE SE P P
Business incubator SE SE P P P
Business service (group) SE SE SE SE P P P
Business service (individual) SE SE SE P P P P P
Business support service SE SE P P P P P
Car wash/auto detailing service SD P
Cleaners/laundromat P P P
Communication towers and
platform
SE SE SE SE
Crematorium SE SE
Diaper service P P P
Disinfecting and exterminating
service
P P P
Drive-through facility SD SD SD
Fitness center SD SD SD
Hotel SD SD SD
Instructional service SE P P P
Kennel SE SE
Linen supply P P P
Medical laboratory SE SE P P P
Medical service SE SE SE P P P P P
Ministorage P P P
Motion-picture distribution P P P P
Motor vehicle sales and service SD P
Office or business equipment
rental or leasing
P P P P P
Outdoor dining/bar SD/SE SD/SE SD/SE
Parking lot, commercial SD SD SD
Parking lot, satellite P P P
Personal service SE SE SE P P P P P
Pharmacy P P P
Professional service SE SE SE P P P P P
Professional service (group) SE SE P P P P P
Restaurant P P P P
Tattoo service SE
Telecommunications P P P P P
Veterinarian SE SE P P P
Veterinarian clinic/hospital SE P P P
KEY:
"P" indicates permitted subject to applicable code requirements
"SD" indicates permitted subject to special development regulations, pursuant to Article XII
"SE" indicates permitted subject to special exception regulations, pursuant to Article XII
A blank cell indicates that the use is not permitted
165 Attachment 1:7 Supp 9, May 2022
BEL AIR CODE
NOTE: These tables are provided for easy reference. However, the text of Chapter 165, Part 2, should be consulted
for further definition and all applicable requirements. In the case of any inconsistencies between the text and the
tables, the text shall control.
165 Attachment 1:8 Supp 9, May 2022
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Table 3-8, Temporary Uses
Principal permitted uses for specific zoning districts
[Amended 4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 780-17]
Use Classification
Zoning Districts
R-1 R-2 R-3 R-O B-1 B-2/B-2A B-3/B-3A M-1
Christmas tree sales P P P P P P P P
Modular classroom P P P P P P P P
Outdoor promotional events P P P P P P P P
Outdoor sales events P P P P
Sidewalk cafe P P P P
Sales/construction trailers P P P P P P P P
Snowball stands P P P P
Yard sales P P P P P P P P
KEY:
"P" indicates permitted subject to applicable code requirements
"SD" indicates permitted subject to special development regulations, pursuant to Article XII
"SE" indicates permitted subject to special exception regulations, pursuant to Article XII
A blank cell indicates that the use is not permitted
NOTE: These tables are provided for easy reference. However, the text of Chapter 165, Part 2, should be
consulted for further definition and all applicable requirements. In the case of any inconsistencies
between the text and the tables, the text shall control.
165 Attachment 1:9 Supp 9, May 2022