THE CODE
CHAPTER 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-1. How Easton Town Code, designated and cited.
§ 1-2. Rules of construction and definitions.
§ 1-3. Reference to chapters, articles, divisions, or sections; conflicting ordinances.
§ 1-4. Catchlines of sections.
§ 1-5. Repeal of ordinances.
§ 1-6. Effect of repeal of ordinances.
§ 1-7. Severability of parts of Easton Town Code.
§ 1-8. General penalty; continuing violations; civil penalties for municipal infractions.
§ 1-9. Provisions as continuation of existing ordinances.
§ 1-10. Authority of Easton Town Code.
Sec. 1-1. How code designated and cited.
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of the
Town of Easton" and may be cited as so. Such ordinances may also be cited as "Easton Town Code" (Ordinance
519 aka E-34, effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 1-2. Rules of construction and definitions.
In the construction of this The Easton Town Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions of the town, the following
rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council or the
context clearly requires otherwise.
Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient.
Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and
including the last day; and if the last day be Sunday or a legal holiday, that shall be excluded.
Council. Whenever, the words "council" or "town council" or "governing body" are used, they shall be
construed to mean "the council of the Town of Easton."
County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall refer to Talbot County, Maryland.
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms,
partnerships and corporations as well as to males.
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any of the provisions of this Code, such provisions shall
be deemed to be the minimum requirement necessary for the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and
general welfare. Where any specific provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter
than the general provisions imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation
shall be deemed to be controlling.
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to several persons shall be construed as giving such
authority to a majority of such persons.
Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper," and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms,
associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or
employee.
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month.
Number. Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural includes the singular number.
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and
approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law,
an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be
equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed."
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and", and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it.
Owner. The word "owner", applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, tenant in partnership, or joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building
or land.
Person. The word "person" shall include a corporation, company, partnership, association or society as well as a
natural person.
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after,
respectively.
Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property.
Shall, may. The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive.
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean that portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent
property, intended for the use of pedestrians.
Signature or subscription. The words "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot
write.
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Maryland.
Street. The word "street" shall include any public ways, roads, highways, avenues, alleys and lanes within the
town.
Tenant, occupant. The words "tenant" and "occupant", applied to a building or land, shall include any person
who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
Time. Words used in the past, or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.
Town. The words "the town" or "this town" shall mean the Town of Easton, in the County of Talbot and State
of Maryland.
Writing. The word "writing" shall include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or
otherwise.
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year.
(Ordinance 519 aka E-34, effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 1-3. Reference to chapters, articles, divisions or sections; conflicting ordinances.
In addition to the rules of construction specified in section 1-2, the following rules shall be observed in the
construction of these ordinances:
All references to chapters, articles, divisions and sections are to the chapters, articles, divisions and sections of
these ordinances unless otherwise specified.
If the provisions of different chapters of these ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions
of each chapter shall prevail as to all matters and questions growing out of the subject matter of such chapter.
If conflicting provisions be found in different sections of the same chapter, the provisions of the section which
is last in numerical order shall prevail unless such construction be inconsistent with the meaning of such
chapter.
(Ordinance 519 aka E-34, effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 1-4. Catchlines of sections.
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to
indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of
the sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be deemed when any of such sections, including
catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. (Ordinance 519 aka E-34, effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 1-5. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances or portions of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this Code are hereby repealed. (Ordinance
519 aka E-34, effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 1-6. Effect of Repeal of ordinances.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took
effect.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty or liability incurred before the repeal took
effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or liability
incurred under the ordinance repealed.
(Ordinance 519 aka E-34, effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 1-7. Severability of parts of Code.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and words of
this Code are severable, and if any word, clause, sentence paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been
enacted by the council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional or otherwise invalid
word, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. (Ordinance 519 aka E-34, effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 1-8. General penalty; continuing violations; civil penalties for municipal infractions.
(A) Except as provided in subsection (B) hereof, whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the town any act is
prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code or
ordinance the doing of any act required or the failure to do such an act is declared to be unlawful, the violation of
any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars
($100.00) or by imprisonment in the County jail for not more than thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment in the discretion of the court. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue
shall constitute a separate offense. (Ordinance 139 effective 6/30/1987, historical reference 519 aka E-34, 137)
(B) Any violations of the chapters of the Easton Code, as specifically referred to herein, shall be considered as
municipal infractions which are civil obligations imposed for a violation or breach of the chapter referred to for
which the penalty for the first infraction will be a levy of up to one hundred dollars ($100.00) and a levy of up to
two hundred dollars ($200.00) for any subsequent infraction. Each day that any violation shall continue shall
constitute a separate offense. The chapters for which municipal infractions are imposed are as follows:
Chapter Three - Air Conditioning and Refrigeration.
Chapter Four - Animals and Fowl (applying to fierce animal).
Chapter Five - Bicycles and Similar Devices.
Chapter Six - Building Code.
Chapter Eight - Filling Stations.
Chapter Nine - Fire Prevention.
Chapter Eleven - Garbage, Refuse and Weeds
Chapter Thirteen - Housing.
Chapter Fourteen - Licenses and Permits.
Chapter Fifteen - Liquefied Petroleum Gas.
Chapter Sixteen – Litter Control.
Chapter Seventeen - Motor Vehicle Traffic.
Chapter Eighteen - Offenses and Miscellaneous (with the exception of Section 18-4 (A), and 18-15, violations
of which shall be a misdemeanors).
Chapter Nineteen - Peddlers.
Chapter Twenty - Plumbing.
Chapter Twenty-One - Rat Control.
Chapter Twenty-Two - Sewers and Drains.
Chapter Twenty-Four - Streets and Sidewalks.
Chapter Twenty-Five - Subdivisions.
Chapter Twenty-Seven - Water.
(Ordinance 363 effective 12/7/1997, historical reference 83, 137, 139)
(C) Any violation of chapter 22 of the Easton Town Code shall be a municipal infraction which is a civil obligation
imposed for the violation or breach of that chapter for which the penalty shall be a levy of Four Hundred Dollars
($400.00). Each day that any violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ordinance 139 effective
6/30/1987, historical reference 137)
Sec. 1-9. Provisions as continuation of existing ordinances.
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those ordinances existing at the effective date
of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. (Ordinance 519 aka E-34,
effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 1-10. Authority of Code.
This Code is a revision and codification of the general regulatory ordinances of the Town of Easton which have been
enacted and published in accordance with the provisions of the laws of Maryland and which have not been repealed,
and is done by virtue of authority granted in Article 21, Section 232 of the Code of Public Local Laws of Maryland
(1930). (Ordinance 519 aka E-34, effective 5/7/1967)
CHAPTER 2 ADMINISTRATION
Article I. Town Officials and Employees.
§ 2-1. Salaries of appointed officials and regular employees.
§ 2-1.1. Salaries of councilmen; president of council.
§ 2-1.2. Salary of mayor.
§ 2-2. Employment of extra labor.
Article II. Police Board.
§ 2-3. Police Board - Composition.
§ 2.4. Same - Meetings.
§ 2-5. Same - Powers and duties.
§ 2-6. Same - Records; regulations of procedure.
§ 2-7. Oath of office for police officer.
Article III. Fire Board.
§ 2-8. Fire Board - Composition.
§ 2-9. Same - Meetings.
§ 2-10. Same Duties.
§ 2-11. Same Custody of building and equipment.
Article IV. Park Board.
§ 2-12. Establishment; composition.
§ 2-13. Appointment and term of members; vacancies.
§ 2-14. Compensation.
§ 2-15. Powers and authority.
§ 2-15A. Duties and Functions
§ 2-15B. Annual Plan; Approval.
Article V. Purchasing, Contracting and Bidding.
§ 2-16. Bidding policy.
Article VI. Ethics Provisions.
§ 2-17. Applicability.
§ 2-18. Definitions
§ 2-19. Ethics Commission.
§ 2-20. Conflict of interest.
§ 2-21. Financial disclosure – local elected officials and candidates to be local elected officials.
§ 2-22. Ethics disclosure statement – employees and appointed officials
§ 2-23. Lobbying disclosure
§ 2-24. Exemptions and modifications.
§ 2-25. Enforcement.
Article VII. Codes Enforcement.
§ 2-26. Codes Enforcement.
Article VIII – Custody and Disposition of Abandoned, Lost or Seized Personal Property
§ 2-27. Purpose and Scope of Article
§ 2-28. Custody
§ 2-29. Return of Property Other than Contraband
§ 2-30. Notice Regarding Property Other than Contraband
§ 2-31. Disposition of Unclaimed Properly Other than Contraband
§ 2-32. Disposition of Contraband
§ 2-33. Disposition of Motor Vehicles
§ 2-34. No Additional duties Imposed Upon Department; Chief of Police Authorized to Issue Regulations
Article IX. Economic Development Program.
§ 2-35. Establishment.
§ 2-36. Administration.
Article X. Tree Board
§ 2-37. Establishment.
§ 2-38. Compensation.
§ 2-39. Powers and Duties.
§ 2-40. Residency.
Article X. Elections
§ 2-36. Voting Places.
§ 2-37. Notice of Elections.
§ 2-38. Ballots – Requirements Generally.
§ 2-39. Posting of Sample Ballot.
§ 2-40. Posting of Sample Ballots – Mistakes and Changes.
§ 2-41. Opening and Closing Hours of Polls.
§ 2-42. Voting Procedure.
§ 2-43. Electioneering and Loitering near Polls Prohibited.
§ 2-44. Bribery of Voters Prohibited.
§ 2-45. Poll Watchers - Selection.
§ 2-46. Duties of Poll Watchers.
§ 2-47. Absentee Ballot Provisions.
§ 2-48. Election Results – Continuing of Votes and Certification.
§ 2-49. Election Results –Issuance of Election Certificates.
§ 2-50. Preservation of Ballots after Election.
§ 2-51. Violations.
§ 2-52. Interpretation – Further Authority of Town Council.
Article I. Town Officials and Employees.
Sec. 2-1. Salaries of appointed officials and regular employees.
The salaries of all appointed officials and regular employees shall be established each year prior to the adoption of
the annual tax levy and shall be itemized in the annual budget. (Ordinance 1, effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 2-1.1. Salaries of councilmen, president of council.
(A) On and after the third Monday in May, 1999, the salaries of all Council persons of the Town of Easton shall be
Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000) per year, and the salary of the President of the Council shall be Six Thousand
Dollars ($6,000) per year. (Ordinance 389 effective 5/10/1999, historical reference 62, 99, 246)
(B) Notwithstanding subsection (A) above, the salary specified at the time that any council person or President of
the Council takes office shall not be changed during the period for which that council person or President of
Council was elected, as required by Article II, Sections 2 and 15 of the Town Charter.
Sec. 2-1.2. Salary of mayor.
(A) On and after the third Monday in May 1999, the salary of the mayor of the Town of Easton shall be Eight
Thousand, Five Hundred Dollars ($8,500) per year. (Ordinance 388 effective 5/10/1999, historical reference 63, 98,
247)
(B) Notwithstanding subsection (A) above, no change shall be made in the salary for any mayor during the term for
which he or she was elected, as required by Article III, Section 3 of the Town Charter.
Sec. 2-2. Employment of extra labor.
Extra labor shall be employed by the town, if and as needed, in conformity to existing labor rates. (Ordinance 1,
effective 1/1/1941)
Article II. Police Board.
Sec. 2-3. Police Board - Composition.
The five members of the Town Council shall serve as the Town of Easton Police Board. (Ordinance 462 effective
1/26/2004, historical reference 2 & 358)
Sec. 2-4. Same -Meetings.
The Police Board shall meet regularly on the first Monday of February, May, August, and November at 6:00 p.m. or
at such other time or times as the majority of the police board shall designate. The meetings shall be held in the
Town Council meeting room or at such other location as the Police Board may designate. The meeting shall be open
to the public. Closed Sessions shall be permitted as necessary and in accordance with law. (Ordinance 462 effective
1/26/2004, historical reference 2)
Sec. 2-5. Same - Powers and duties.
The Police Board shall hear and consult with the Chief of Police regarding the police department’s building,
equipment, and other budgetary needs, as well as receive input from citizens regarding the police department. In
addition, the Police Board may consider such other matters as a Board member considers appropriate. (Ordinance
462 effective 1/26/2004, historical reference 2)
Sec. 2-6. Same - Records; regulations of procedure; reports.
The Police Board shall keep minutes of its meetings. The Police Board may adopt such regulations or rules for its
organization and procedure as it deems necessary for carrying out its duties, including designating a chair person
and establishing guidelines for public participation. (Ordinance 462 effective 1/26/2004, historical reference 2.)
Sec. 2-7. Oath of office for police officer.
Before any person appointed shall be vested with the power and authority of police officer, he shall take the oath of
office required by the Charter of Easton, and shall evidence his willingness to conform to all regulations of the
police department of the Town and to obey all lawful orders and instructions given him by the Police Board, the
Chief of Police, and any other properly constituted police authority of the Town. (Ordinance 462 effective
1/26/2004, historical reference 2.)
Article III. Fire Board
Sec. 2-8. Fire Board - Composition.
The five members of the Town Council shall serve as the Town of Easton Fire Board (Ordinance 463 effective
1/26/2004, historical reference 4 & 358)
Sec. 2-9. Same -Meetings.
The Fire Board shall meet regularly on the third Monday of February, May, August, and November at 6:00 p.m. or
at such other time or times as the majority of the police board shall designate. The meetings shall be held in the
Town Council meeting room or at such other location as the Police Board may designate. The meeting shall be open
to the public. Closed Sessions shall be permitted as necessary and in accordance with law. The Fire Board shall
keep minutes of its meetings and may adopt such regulations or rules for its organization and procedure as it deems
necessary for carrying out its duties including designating a chair person and establishing guidelines for public
participation (Ordinance 463 effective 1/26/2004, historical reference 4)
Sec. 2-10. Same - Duties.
The Fire Board shall consult with the Easton Volunteer Fire Department regarding the use, condition, care,
operation, repair, and replacement of the fire engine building and the firefighting equipment belonging to the Town.
(Ordinance 463 effective 1/26/2004, historical reference 4)
Sec. 2-11. Same - Custody of buildings and equipment.
All the firefighting equipment, and the buildings housing same belonging to the Town, are placed in the custody of
the Board of Trustees of the Easton Volunteer Fire Department, Inc., to be operated by the said Trustees, and, in the
case of the firefighting equipment, under the direction of the Fire Chief, as provided by the by-laws of the said
Easton Volunteer Fire Department, Inc. The custody of the firefighting equipment and the building belonging to the
Tow, shall be retained by the Trustees of the Easton Volunteer Fire Department, Inc., contingent upon the election
by the said Department annually of a Fire Chief subject to approval by the Town Council of the person elected fire
chief. (Ordinance 463 effective 1/26/2004, historical reference 4)
Article IV. Parks and Recreation
Sec. 2-12. Director of Parks and Recreation.
The Mayor may appoint, subject to approval by the Town Council, a duly qualified person to serve as Director of
Parks and Recreation of the Town, who shall be compensated as provided in the annual Town budgets. The Director
of Parks and Recreation shall perform such duties as the Mayor may direct. (Ordinance 496 effective 3/12/2006,
historical reference 296, 300)
Sec. 2-13. Establishment of Parks and Recreation Advisory Board.
There shall be a municipal Parks and Recreation Advisory Board which shall have the powers and duties as set forth
in this Article. (Ordinance 496 effective 3/12/2006, historical reference 296, 297, 300)
Sec. 2-14. Appointment and term of members; vacancies.
The members of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall consist of five adult residents of the Town who shall
be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the Council for the term of three years and until their
successors are appointed and qualified. In the event of a vacancy on the Board, the Mayor, subject to the approval of
the Council, shall appoint a qualified replacement to serve the remainder of the term. (Ordinance 496 effective
3/12/2006, historical reference 296)
Sec. 2-15. Compensation.
Member of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall serve without compensation. (Ordinance 496 effective
3/12/2006, historical reference 296, 300, 328)
Sec. 2-15A. Duties and Functions.
The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall have the following duties and functions:
(A) The Board shall assess the recreation needs and resources of the Town and may coordinate with community
organizations to promote recreational opportunities for the public. It shall make recommendations to the
Director and the Mayor and Town Council regarding the staffing, finance, maintenance, and operation of
recreational facilities and programs in or near the Town. The Board shall make recommendations to the Mayor
and Town Council relating to plans and policies for public recreation, the establishment of recreational
programs and plans for the acquisition of land for public recreation and open space prepared by the Planning
and Zoning Commission. The Board shall meet as needed, but not less than quarterly. All meetings shall be
open to the public unless applicable Maryland law permits an executive or closed session. The Board shall
report on its activities annually and at such other times as requested by the Mayor or Town Council.
(B) The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall adopt rules and regulations of the use of Town parks and
recreation facilities, which rules and regulations shall be subject to review and approval by the Mayor and Town
Council.
(C) The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall select one its members to serve as the Town’s
representative on the Talbot County Parks and Recreation Advisory Board, which selection shall be approved
by the Mayor and Council.
(D) The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall exercise such other duties as the Mayor and Town Council
may direct from time to time.
(Ordinance 496 effective 3/12/2006, historical reference 296, 300, 328)
Section 2-15B. Annual Plan; Approval.
In addition to the Board’s other duties, the Board shall submit to the Mayor and Town Council on or before
November 1 of each year, a written plan regarding proposed acquisitions of park land or major items of equipment
or other improvements, including recommendations for projects suitable for grant or loan applications from federal,
state or local agencies. The plan shall be subject to the review, amendment and approval of the Town Council.
Unless and until approved by the Town Council;
(A) no applications or pre-applications process with any government agency for any park project shall be
commenced by the Town, or its officers, agents or employees; and
(B) no report or recommendation regarding anticipated projects shall be submitted to the Talbot County Parks
and Recreation Advisory Board or similar agency.
(Ordinance 328, effective 11/15/1995)
Article V. Purchasing, Contracting and Bidding.
Sec. 2-16. Bidding policy.
(A) It shall be the duty of the Council to give opportunity for competition on all purchases and sales, and on all
contracts for construction, works, and nonprofessional services except when the nature of the purchase, sale,
contract or service is such that competition is impossible or impracticable under the existing circumstances.
Contracts in excess of five hundred dollars ($500) except for the purchase or sale of real estate, or rights or
easements therein, or for professional services, shall be by contract to the lowest (or highest) responsible bidder after
public notice and the receipt of sealed bids, unless the Council, by ordinance, determines that it is impossible or
impracticable to purchase or sell in such manner. All sealed bids received shall be opened in public and thereafter
shall be subject to public inspection. The town may reject all bids and re-advertise for new bids. The town may
accept the bid which represents the best value to the town and the acceptance of which is in the best interests of the
town. The town may require successful bidders to furnish security conditioned upon the faithful performance of their
contract and conditioned upon the payment of the wages and compensation of all laborers employed on work for
which a contract is made by the contractor, or subcontractor. This section does not apply to purchases and sales
made by the Easton Utilities Commission. (Ordinance 100 effective 5/10/1981, historical reference 519 aka E-34,
326)
(B) For the procurement of all materials and services pursuant to the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development Community Development Block Grant Programs, when bids are solicited, the town shall
incorporate into such solicitation a clear and accurate description of the technical requirements for the material,
product, or service to be procured. Such description shall not contain features which unduly restrict competition. The
description may include a statement of the qualitative nature of the material, product or service to be procured and
when necessary, shall set forth those minimum essential characteristics and standards to which the material to be
procured must conform if it is to satisfy its intended use. Detailed product specifications shall not be used if at all
possible. When it is impractical or uneconomical to make a clear and accurate description the technical
requirements, a “brand name or equal” description may be used as a means to define the performance or other
essential requirements of the material, product or service to be procured. The specific features of any named brand
which must be met by the material, product or service to be procured shall be clearly stated and any solicitation for
bid. The town, in making a solicitation for bid, shall clearly set forth all requirements an offer must fulfill and all
factors to be used in evaluating bids and proposals. (Ordinance 100 effective 5/10/1981, historical reference 519 aka
E-34, 326)
Article VI. Ethics Provisions.
Sec. 2-17. Applicability.
Other than as provided in Section 2-19, the provisions of this article apply to the following town officials and
employees: The Mayor, all members of the Town Council, all members of the EastonUtilities Commission, the
President and CEOof the EastonUtilities Commission, the head of each department of the Easton Utilities
Commission, the members of the Board ofAppeals, the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Historic District
Commission, the Town Manager, the Building Inspector, the Town Engineer, the Town Clerk, the Supervisor of
Elections, the Chief of Police, and all officials appointed to Town boards and commissions and all employees,
who, acting alone or as members or employees of a Town entity, have decision making authority or act as principal
advisors to a person with that authority in making Town policy or exercising quasi-judicial, regulatory,
licensing, inspecting, or auditingfunctions.
(Ordinance 590 effective 10/7/2013, historical reference 103 and 107)
Sec. 2-18. Definitions
(A) In this chapter, Business Entity or Entity shall mean a corporation, partnership, limited liability
partnership, limited liability company, or sole proprietorship, whether for profit or not for profit, as defined or
recognized under the Internal Revenue Code of the United States.
Sec. 2-19. Ethics Commission.
There shall be a Town of Easton Ethics Commission (hereinafter referred to as "Commission"), which shall be
composed of three members appointed by the Mayor. The Commission shall be advised by theTownAttorney and
shall have the following responsibilities:
(A) To devise, receive and maintain all forms required by thisArticle;
(B) To provide published advisory opinions to persons subject to this Article as to the applicability of the
provisions of this Article to them;
(C) To process and make determinations as to complaints filed by any person alleging violation of this Article
to them;
(D) To conduct a suitable public information program regarding the purposes and application of this Article.
(E) The Commission shall certify to the State Ethics Commission on or before October 1 of each year that the
Town is in compliance with the requirements of State Government Article, Title 15, Subtitle 8, Annotated Code
of Maryland for elected local officials.
(F) Commission members shall serve three year terms staggered so that only one term expires in any single
calendar year. The Commission shall annually elect a Chairman from its membership, and shall adopt
rules of procedure not inconsistent with the terms of this Chapter to govern its meetings.
(Ordinance 590 effective 10/7/2013, historical reference 103 and 107)
Sec. 2-20. Conflict of Interest.
All Easton elected officials, officials appointed to Town boards and commissions, and all employees, whether or not they
are otherwise subject to this Article, are subject to this Section.
(A) In this section, "qualified relative" means a spouse, parent, child, or sibling.
(B) Participation prohibitions. Except as permitted by Commission regulation or opinion, an official or
employee may not participate in:
(i) Except in the exercise of an administrative or ministerial duty that does not affect the disposition or
decision of the matter, any matter in which, to the knowledge of the official or employee, the official or
employee, or a qualified relative of the official or employee has an interest.
(ii) Except in the exercise of an administrative or ministerial duty that does not affect the disposition or
decision with respect to the matter, any matter, in which any of the following is a party:
(a) A business entity in which the official or employee has a direct financial interest of which the
official or employee may reasonably be expected to know;
(b) A business entity for which the official, employee, or a qualified relative of the official or
employee is an officer, director, trustee, partner, or employee;
(c) A business entity with which the official or employee or, to the knowledge of the official or
employee, a qualified relative is negotiating employment or has any arrangement concerning
prospective employment.
(d) If the contract reasonably could be expected to result in a conflict between the private interests of
the official or employee and the official duties of the official or employee, a business entity that is a
party to an existing contract with the official or employee, or which, to the knowledge of the official or
employee, is a party to a contract with a qualified relative;
(e) An entity, doing business with the Town of Easton, in which a direct financial interest is owned by
another entity in which the official or employee has a direct financial interest, if the official or
employee may be reasonably expected to know of both direct financial interests; or
(f) A business entity that the official or employee knows is a creditor or obligee of the official or
employee or a qualified relative of the official or employee with respect to a thing of economic value,
and as a creditor or obligee, is in a position to directly and substantially affect the interest of the
official or employee or a qualified relative of the official or employee.
(iii) A person who is disqualified from participating under paragraphs (i) or (ii) of this subsection shall
disclose the nature and circumstances of the conflict and may participate or act if the disqualification leaves
a body with less than a quorum capable of acting, the disqualified official or employee is required by law to
act, or the disqualified official or employee is the only person authorized to act.
(iv) The prohibitions of paragraphs (i) and (ii) of this subsection do not apply if participation is allowed by
regulation or opinion of the Commission.
(C) Employment and financial interest restrictions.
(i) Except as permitted by regulation of the Commission when the interest is disclosed or when the
employment does not create a conflict of interest or appearance of conflict, an official or employee may
not:
(a) Be employed by or have a financial interest in any entity subject to the authority of the official or
employee or a Town of Easton agency, board, or commission with which the official or employee is
affiliated or an entity that is negotiating or has entered a contract with the agency, board, or
commission with which the official or employee is affiliated; or
(b) Hold any other employment relationship that would impair the impartiality or independence of
judgment of the official or employee.
(ii) This prohibition does not apply to:
(a) An official or employee who is appointed to a regulatory or licensing authority pursuant to a
statutory requirement that persons subject to the jurisdiction of the authority be represented in
appointments to the authority;
(b) Subject to other provisions of law, a member of a board or commission in regard to a financial
interest or employment held at the time of appointment, provided the financial interest or employment
is publicly disclosed to the appointing authority and the Commission;
(c) An official or employee whose duties are ministerial, if the private employment or financial
interest does not create a conflict of interest or the appearance of a conflict of interest, as permitted and
in accordance with regulations adopted by the Commission; or
(d) Employment or financial interests allowed by regulation of the Commission if the employment
does not create a conflict of interest or the appearance of a conflict of interest or the financial interest is
disclosed.
(D) Post-employment limitations and restrictions.
(i) A former official or employee may not assist or represent any party other than the Town of Easton for
compensation in a case, contract, or other specific matter involving the Town of Easton if that matter is one
in which the former official or employee significantly participated as an official or employee.
(ii) For a period of one year that begins after the elected official leaves office, a former member of the
Town Council may not assist or represent another party for compensation in a matter that is the subject of
legislative action.
(E) Contingent compensation. Except in a judicial or quasi-judicial proceeding, an official or employee may
not assist or represent a party for contingent compensation in any matter before or involving the Town of
Easton.
(F) Use of prestige of office. An official or employee may not intentionally use the prestige of office or public
position for the private gain of that official or employee or the private gain of another. This subsection does not
prohibit the performance of usual and customary constituent services by an elected local official without
additional compensation.
(G) Solicitation and acceptance of gifts.
(i) An official or employee may not solicit any gift from any business entity or person other than a
qualifying relative.
(ii) An official or employee may not directly solicit or facilitate the solicitation of a gift, on behalf of
another person, from an individual regulated lobbyist.
(iii) An official or employee may not knowingly accept a gift, directly or indirectly, from a person that the
official or employee knows or has the reason to know:
(a) Is doing business with or seeking to do business with the Town of Easton office, agency, board or
commission with which the official or employee is affiliated;
(b) Has financial interests that may be substantially and materially affected, in a manner
distinguishable from the public generally, by the performance or nonperformance of the official duties
of the official or employee;
(c) Is engaged in an activity regulated or controlled by the official's or employee's governmental unit;
or
(d) Is a lobbyist with respect to matters within the jurisdiction of the official or employee.
(iv) Notwithstanding paragraph (iii) of this subsection, an official or employee may accept the following:
(a) Meals and beverages consumed in the presence of the donor or sponsoring entity;
(b) Ceremonial gifts or awards that have insignificant monetary value;
(c) Unsolicited gifts of nominal value that do not exceed $20 in cost or trivial items of informational
value;
(d) Reasonable expenses for food, travel, lodging, and scheduled entertainment of the official or the
employee at a meeting which is given in return for the participation of the official or employee in a
panel or speaking engagement at the meeting;
(e) Gifts of tickets or free admission extended to an elected local official to attend a charitable,
cultural, or political events, if the purpose of this gift or admission is a courtesy or ceremony extended
to the elected official's office;
(f) A specific gift or class of gifts that the Commission exempts from the operation of this subsection
upon a finding, in writing, that acceptance of the gift or class of gifts would not be detrimental to the
impartial conduct of the business of the *County, City, or Town* and that the gift is purely personal
and private in nature;
(g) Gifts from a person related to the official or employee by blood or marriage, or any other
individual who is a member of the household of the official or employee; or
(h) Honoraria for speaking to or participating in a meeting, provided that the offering of the
honorarium is in not related in any way to the official's or employee's official position.
(v) Paragraph (iv) does not apply to a gift:
(a) That would tend to impair the impartiality and the independence of judgment of the official or
employee receiving the gift;
(b) Of significant value that would give the appearance of impairing the impartiality and independence
of judgment of the official or employee; or
(c) Of significant value that the recipient official or employee believes or has reason to believe is
designed to impair the impartiality and independence of judgment of the official or employee.
(H) Disclosure of confidential information. Other than in the discharge of official duties, an official or
employee may not disclose or use confidential information, that the official or employee acquired by reason of
the official's or employee's public position and that is not available to the public, for the economic benefit of the
official or employee or that of another person.
(I) Participation in procurement.
(i) An individual or a person that employs an individual who assists a Town of Easton agency in the
drafting of specifications, an invitation for bids, or a request for proposals for a procurement, may not
submit a bid or proposal for that procurement, or assist or represent another person, directly or indirectly,
who is submitting a bid or proposal for the procurement.
(ii) The Commission may establish exemptions from the requirements of this section for providing
descriptive literature, sole source procurements, and written comments solicited by the procuring agency.
(Ordinance 590 effective 10/7/2013, historical reference 103, 107 and 453)
Sec. 2-21. Financial disclosure – local elected officials and candidates to be local elected officials.
(A) This Section shall apply to all local elected officials and candidates to be local elected officials.
(B) Except as provided in subsection (D) of this section, a local elected official or a candidate to be a local
elected official shall file the financial disclosure statement required under this section on a form provided by the
Commission, under oath or affirmation, and with the Commission.
(C) Deadlines for filing statements.
(i) An incumbent local elected official shall file a financial disclosure statement annually no later than
April 30th of each year for the preceding calendar year.
(ii) An individual who is appointed to fill a vacancy in an office for which a financial disclosure statement
is required and who has not already filed a financial disclosure statement, shall file a statement for the
preceding calendar year within 30 days after appointment.
(iii) An individual who, other than by reasons of death, leaves an office for which a statement is required
shall file a statement within 60 days after leaving the office. The statement shall cover the calendar year
immediately preceding the year in which the individual left office, unless a statement covering that year has
already been filed by the individual, and the portion of the current calendar year during which the
individual held the office.
(D) Candidates to be local elected officials.
(i) Except an official who has filed a financial disclosure statement under another provision of this section
for the reporting period, a candidate to be an elected local official shall file a financial disclosure statement
each year beginning with the year in which the certificate of candidacy is filed through the year of the
election.
(ii) A candidate to be an elected local official shall file a statement required under this section
(a) In the year the certificate of candidacy is filed, no later than the filing of the certificate of
candidacy;
(b) In the year of the election, on or before the earlier of April 30 or the last day for the withdrawal of
candidacy; and
(c) In all other years for which a statement is required, on or before April 30.
(iii) If a candidate fails to file a statement required by this section after written notice is provided by the
Town of Easton Clerk or Board of Election Supervisors at least 20 days before the last day for the
withdrawal of candidacy, the candidate is deemed to have withdrawn the candidacy.
(iv) The Town of Easton Clerk or Board of Election Supervisors may not accept any certificate of
candidacy unless a statement has been filed in proper form.
(v) Within 30 days of the receipt of a statement required under this section, the Town of Easton Clerk or
Board of Election Supervisors shall forward the statement to the Commission or the office designated by
the Commission.
(E) Public record.
(i) The Commission or office designated by the Commission shall maintain all financial disclosure
statements filed under this section.
(ii) Financial disclosure statements shall be made available during normal office hours for examination and
copying by the public subject to reasonable fees and administrative procedures established by the
Commission.
(iii) If an individual examines or copies a financial disclosure statement, the Commission or the office
designated by the Commission shall record the name and home address of the individual reviewing or
copying the statement, and the name of the person whose financial disclosure statement was examined or
copied.
(iv) Upon request by the official or employee whose financial disclosure statement was examined or
copied, the Commission or the office designated by the Commission shall provide the official with a copy
of the name and home address of the person who reviewed the official's financial disclosure statement.
(F) Retention requirements. The Commission or the office designated by the Commission shall retain financial
disclosure statements for four years from the date of receipt.
(G) Contents of statement.
(i) Interests in real property. A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of all interests in
real property wherever located, and for each interest in real property, the schedule shall include:
(a) The nature of the property and the location by street address, mailing address, or legal description
of the property;
(b) The nature and extent of the interest held, including any conditions and encumbrances on the
interest;
(c) The date when, the manner in which, and the identity of the person from whom the interest was
acquired;
(d) The nature and amount of the consideration given in exchange for the interest or, if acquired other
than by purchase, the fair market value of the interest at the time acquired;
(e) If any interest was transferred, in whole or in part, at any time during the reporting period, a
description of the interest transferred, the nature and amount of the consideration received for the
interest, and the identity of the person to whom the interest was transferred; and
(f) The identity of any other person with an interest in the property.
(ii) Interests in corporations and partnerships. A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule
of all interests in any corporation, partnership, limited liability partnership, or limited liability company,
regardless of whether the corporation or partnership does business with the Town of Easton, and for each
interest reported under this paragraph, the schedule shall include:
(a) The name and address of the principal office of the corporation, partnership, limited liability
partnership, or limited liability company;
(b) The nature and amount of the interest held, including any conditions and encumbrances on the
interest. An individual may satisfy the requirement to report the amount of the interest held by
reporting, instead of a dollar amount: for an equity interest in a corporation, the number of shares held
and, unless the corporation's stock is publicly traded, the percentage of equity interest held; or for an
equity interest in a partnership, the percentage of equity interest held.
(c) With respect to any interest transferred, in whole or in part, at any time during the reporting
period, a description of the interest transferred, the nature and amount of the consideration received for
the interest and, if known, the identity of the person to whom the interest was transferred; and
(d) With respect to any interest acquired during the reporting period, the date when, the manner in
which, and the identity of the person from whom the interest was acquired, and the nature and the
amount of the consideration given in exchange for the interest or, if acquired other than by purchase,
the fair market value of the interest at the time acquired.
(iii) Interests in business entities doing business with the Town of Easton. A statement filed under this
section shall include a schedule of all interests in any business entity that does business with the Town of
Easton, other than interests reported under paragraph (ii) of this subsection, and for each interest reported
under this paragraph, the schedule shall include:
(a) The name and address of the principal office of the business entity;
(b) The nature and amount of the interest held, including any conditions to and encumbrances in the
interest;
(c) With respect to any interest transferred, in whole or in part, at any time during the reporting period,
a description of the interest transferred, the nature and amount of the consideration received in
exchange for the interest and, if known, the identity of the person to whom the interest was transferred;
and
(d) With respect to any interest acquired during the reporting period, the date when, the manner in
which, and the identity of the person from whom the interest was acquired, and the nature and the
amount of the consideration given in exchange for the interest or, if acquired other than by purchase,
the fair market value of the interest at the time acquired.
(iv) Gifts. A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of each gift in excess of $20 in
value or a series of gifts totaling $100 or more received during the reporting period from or on behalf of,
directly or indirectly, any one person who does business with or is regulated by the Town of Easton, and for
each gift reported, the schedule shall include a description of the nature and value of the gift, and the
identity of the person from whom, or on behalf of whom, directly or indirectly, the gift was received.
(v) Employment with or interests in entities doing business with the Town of Easton. A statement filed
under this section shall include a schedule of all offices, directorships, and salaried employment by the
individual or member of the immediate family of the individual held at any time during the reporting period
with entities doing business with the Town of Easton, and for each position reported under this paragraph,
the schedule shall include:
(a) The name and address of the principal office of the business entity;
(b) The title and nature of the office, directorship, or salaried employment held and the date it
commenced; and
(c) The name of each Town of Easton agency with which the entity is involved.
(vi) Indebtedness to entities doing business with the Town of Easton. A statement filed under this section
shall include a schedule of all liabilities, excluding retail credit accounts, to persons doing business with the
Town of Easton owed at any time during the reporting period by the individual or by a member of the
immediate family of the individual if the individual was involved in the transaction giving rise to the
liability, and for each liability reported under this paragraph, the schedule shall include:
(a) The identity of the person to whom the liability was owed and the date the liability was incurred;
(b) The amount of the liability owed as of the end of the reporting period;
(c) The terms of payment of the liability and the extent to which the principal amount of the liability
was increased or reduced during the year; and
(d) The security given, if any, for the liability.
(vii) A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of the immediate family members of the
individual employed by the Town of Easton in any capacity at any time during the reporting period.
(viii) Sources of earned income. A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of the name
and address of each place of employment and of each business entity of which the individual or a member
of the individual's immediate family was a sole or partial owner and from which the individual or member
of the individual's immediate family received earned income, at any time during the reporting period. A
minor child's employment or business ownership need not be disclosed if the agency that employs the
individual does not regulate, exercise authority over, or contract with the place of employment or business
entity of the minor child.
(ix) A statement filed under this section may also include a schedule of additional interests or information
that the individual making the statement wishes to disclose.
(x) For the purposes of Paragraphs (i), (ii) and (iii) of this subsection, the following interests are
considered to be the interests of the individual making the statement:
(a) An interest held by a member of the individual's immediate family, if the interest was, at any time
during the reporting period, directly or indirectly controlled by the individual.
(b) An interest held by a business entity in which the individual held a 30% or greater interest at any
time during the reporting period.
(c) An interest held by a trust or an estate in which, at any time during the reporting period the
individual held a reversionary interest or was a beneficiary, or if a revocable trust, the individual was a
settlor.
(H) The Commission shall review the financial disclosure statements submitted under this section for
compliance with the provisions of this section and shall notify an individual submitting the statement of any
omissions or deficiencies. In addition, the Commission may take appropriate enforcement action to ensure
compliance with this section.
(Ordinance 590 effective 10/7/2013, historical reference 103, 107 and 453)
Sec. 2-22. Ethics disclosure statement – employees and appointed officials.
(A) All officials appointed to Town boards and commissions and all employees are subject to this Section.
(B) A statement filed under this section shall be filed with the Commission under oath or affirmation.
(C) On or before April 30 of each year during which an official or employee holds office, an official or
employee shall file a statement disclosing gifts received during the preceding calendar year from any person
that contracts with or is regulated by the Town of Easton including the name of the donor of the gift and the
approximate retail value at the time or receipt.
(D) The ethics disclosure statement required by (C) above shall also include a section for an official or
employee to disclose employment and interests that raise conflicts of interest or potential conflicts of interest in
connection with a specific proposed action by the employee or official. Inclusion of conflicts of interest on
the annual ethics disclosure shall not replace an employee's or appointed official's obligation to disclose
conflicts of interest orpotential conflicts of interest at other times sufficiently in advance of the action to
provide adequate disclosure to the public.
(E) The Commission shall maintain all disclosure statements filed under this section as public records available
for public inspection and copying as provided in Sec. 2-20 of this chapter.
(Ordinance 590 and 662 effective 10/7/2013 and 8/10/2015)
Sec. 2-23. Lobbying disclosure.
(A) Any person who personally appears before any Town official, Board or employee, with the intent to
influence that person in performance with his or her official duties, and in connection with such intent, expends
or reasonably expects to expend in a given calendar year, in excess of $250 on food, entertainment or other gifts
for such officials, shall file a registration statement with the Commission not later than January 15 of the
calendar year or within five days after making these appearances.
(B) The registration statement shall include complete identification of the registrant and of any other person on
whose behalf the registrant acts, and the subject matter on which the registrant proposes to make these
appearances.
(C) Registrants under this Section shall file a report within 30 days after the end of any calendar year during
which they were registered, disclosing the value, date and nature of any food, entertainment or other gift
provided to a Town official or Town employee. When a gift or series of gifts to a single official or employee
exceeds $50 in value, the official or employee shall also be identified.
(D) The registrations and reports filed pursuant to this Section shall be maintained by the Commission as public
records available for public inspection and copying.
(Ordinance 590 effective 10/7/2013, historical reference 103 and 107)
Sec. 2-24. Exemptions and modifications. The Commission may grant exemptions and modifications to the provisions
of Sec. 2-19 and Sec. 2-21 of this Article as they relate to employees and to appointed members of Town of Easton
Boards and Commissions, if it determines that the application of those provisions would:
(A) Constitute an unreasonable invasion of privacy;
(B) Significantly reduce the availability of qualified persons for public service; and
(C) Not be required to preserve the purposes of this Article.
(Ordinance 590 effective 10/7/2013, historical reference 103 and 107)
Sec. 2-25. Enforcement.
(A) The Commission may:
(i) Assess a late fee of $2 per day up to a maximum of $250 for a failure to timely file a financial
disclosure statement required under Sections 2-21 or 2-22 of this Article;
(ii) Assess a late fee of $10 per day up to a maximum of $250 for a failure to file a timely lobbyist
registration or lobbyist report required under Section 2-23 of this Article; and
(iii) Issue a cease and desist order against any person found to be in violation of this Article.
(B) Upon a finding of a violation of any provision of this article, the Commission may:
(i) Issue an order of compliance directing the respondent to cease and desist from the violation;
(ii) Issue a reprimand; or
(iii) Recommend to the appropriate authority other appropriate discipline of the respondent, including
censure or removal if that discipline is authorized by law.
(C) If the Commission finds that a respondent has violated Section 2-22 of this Article, the Commission
may:
(i) Require a respondent who is a registered lobbyist to file any additional reports or information that
reasonably related to the information that is required under Section 2-23 of this Article;
(ii) Impose a fine not exceeding $5,000 for each violation; and
(iii) Suspend the registration of an individual lobbyist if the Commission finds that the lobbyist
knowingly and willfully violated Section 2-22 of this Article or has been convicted of a criminal
offense arising fromlobbying activities.
(D) Upon request by the Commission, the Town Attorney may file a petition for injunctive relief in the
Circuit Court for Talbot County. The Court may:
(i) Issue an order to cease and desist fromthe violation;
(ii) Except as provided in (iv) of this paragraph, void an official action taken by an official or employee with a
conflict of interest prohibited by this chapter when the action arises fromor concerns the subject matter of
the conflict and if the legal action is brought within 90 days of the occurrence of the official action, if the
court deems voiding the action to be in the best interest of the public; or
(iii) Impose a fine of up to $5,000.00 for any violation of the provisions of this Article, with each day
upon which the violation occurs constituting a separate offense.
(iv) A court may not void any official action appropriating public funds, levying taxes, or providing for the
issuance of bonds, notes or other evidences of public obligations.
(E) In addition to any other enforcement provisions in this chapter, a person who the Commission or a
court finds has violated this Article:
(i) Is subject to termination or other disciplinary action; and
(ii) May be suspended from receiving payment of salary or other compensation pending full compliance
with the terms of an order of the Commission or a court.
(F) A Town official or employee found to have violated this Article may be subject to disciplinary or other
appropriate personnel action, including removal from office, disciplinary action, suspension of salary, or
other sanction.
(G) Violation of Sec. 2-23 of this Article shall be a misdemeanor subject to a fine of up to
$10,000.00 or imprisonment of up to one year.
(Ordinance 590 effective 10/7/2013, historical reference 103 and 107)
Article VII – Codes Enforcement
§ 2-26.1 Codes Enforcement Establishment. The office of Town of Easton Code Enforcement is hereby established
and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the Code Official. (Ordinance 559 effective 10/13/2009)
§ 2-26.1.1 Code Official. The Code Official is hereby authorized to act as the enforcement officer with
regard to all ordinances of the Town of Easton other than criminal ordinances. The Code Official may
designate; one or more assistants as Code Enforcement Officers, one such person as the Codes
Administrator and one such person as the Codes Assistant of the Town of Easton. Such persons shall have
duties and powers as delegated by the Code Official. (Ordinance 559 effective 10/13/2009, historical
reference 310)
§ 2-26.1.2 Law Enforcement Officers. The sworn law enforcement officers of the Easton Police
Department are hereby authorized to enforce any non-criminal ordinance of the Town of Easton when
requested to do so by the Code Official or any other assistant designated by the Code Official to act as an
enforcement officer or administrator. (Ordinance 559 effective 10/13/2009, historical reference 310 & 16)
§ 2-26.1.3 Other Powers not affected. The provisions of this section shall not affect the authority of
members of the Easton Police Department to enforce state or local criminal laws or ordinances. (Ordinance
559 effective 10/13/2009, historical reference 310)
§ 2-26.2 Code Enforcement Board of Appeals
§ 2-26.2.1 General. Any person directly affected by a decision of the Code Official or a notice or order issued by
the Code Official shall have the right to appeal to the Easton Board of Zoning Appeals under the provisions set forth
in Chapter 28 Zoning of the Code of the Town of Easton, provided that a written application for appeal is filed
within 20 days after the day the decision, notice or order was served (Ordinance 559 effective 10/13/2009, historical
reference 86, 115, 238, 325, 405 & 448)
§ 2-26.2.2 Application for appeal. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of the
codes or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted or do not fully apply. (Ordinance
627 effective October 7th 2012, historical reference 86, 448, and 559).
§ 2-26.2.2.1 Waiver authority. Except as set forth in § 11-6.4.3 of the Easton Town Code, the board shall have
no authority to waive requirements of the codes. (Ordinance 627 effective October 7th 2012, historical reference
86, 448, and 559).
§ 2-26.2.3 Board. All provisions governing the Board of Appeals with respect to members, provisions for alternates,
quorum, procedure, chairman, term of office, etc. shall be applicable to appeals of the Building Codes.. (Ordinance
559 effective 10/13/2009, historical reference 448)
§ 2-26.2.4 Administration. The Code Official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the
Easton Board of Zoning Appeals. (Ordinance 559 effective 10/13/2009, historical reference 448)
§ 2-26.3 Code Enforcement Division.
§ 2-26.3.1 Establishment. The division of Building Inspection is here by established under the office of Town of
Easton Code Enforcement and the official in charge thereof shall be the Code Official hereafter cited as official.
(Ordinance 559 effective 10/13/2009, historical reference 115, 238, 325, 405 & 448)
§ 2-26.3.2 Designation of Division Staff. The official shall have the authority to designate; one or more assistants as
Technical; Examiners or Inspectors and one such person as the Building Codes Administrator of the Town of
Easton. Such persons shall have duties and powers as delegated by the official. (Ordinance 559 effective
10/13/2009, historical reference 16, 115, 238, 325, 405 & 448)
§ 2-26.4 Duties and Powers of the Code Official.
§ 2-26.4.1 General. The official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the Town of Easton
Code exclusive of criminal codes, hereafter cited as codes. The official shall have the authority to render
interpretations of those codes and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of those
provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of those
codes. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirement specifically provided for in
those codes. (Ordinance 559 effective 10/13/2009, historical reference 115, 238, 325, 405 & 448)
§ 2-26.4.2 Applications and permits. The official shall receive applications, review construction documents and
issue permits; for the erection, alteration, demolition and moving of buildings and structures, inspect the premises
for which such permits have been issued and enforce compliance with the provisions of those codes. (Ordinance 559
effective 10/13/2009, historical reference 16, 115, 238, 325, 405 & 448)
§ 2-26.4.3 Notices and orders. The official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with
those codes. (Ordinance 559 effective 10/13/2009, historical reference 16, 115, 238, 325, 405 & 448)
§ 2-26.4.4 Inspections. The official shall make all of the required inspections, or the official shall have the authority
to accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. Reports of such inspections shall be in writing
and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The official is
authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise.
(Ordinance 559 effective 10/13/2009, historical reference 115, 238, 325, 405 & 448)
§ 2-26.4.5 Identification. The official shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or premises in the
performance of duties under those codes. (Ordinance 559 effective 10/13/2009, historical reference 115, 238, 325,
405 & 448)
§ 2-26.4.6 Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of those codes, or
where the official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or upon a premises a condition
which is contrary to or in violation of those codes which makes the structure or premises unsafe, dangerous, or
hazardous, the official is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the
duties imposed by those codes. The official may not enter any building or structure without the permission from the
owner or occupant except pursuant to a warrant issued by a Court of Maryland and accompanied by a police officer
who shall serve and execute the warrant. (Ordinance 559 effective 10/13/2009, historical reference 16 & 448)
§ 2-26.4.7 Department records. The official shall keep records of applications received, permits and certificates
issued, fees collected, reports of inspections, and notices and orders issued. Such records shall be retained in the
records for the period required for retention of public records. (Ordinance 559 effective 10/13/2009, historical
reference 16, 115, 238, 325, 405 & 448)
§ 2-26.4.8 Liability. The official charged with the enforcement of those codes or other pertinent law or codes, while
acting for the Town of Easton in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by those codes
or other pertinent law or codes, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally and is hereby relieved from personal
liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of an act or omission in
the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against an official because of an act performed by that official in
the lawful discharge of duties and under provisions of those codes or other pertinent law or codes shall be defended
by legal representative of the Town of Easton until the final termination of the proceedings. The official shall not be
liable for the cost in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of those codes or
other pertinent law or codes. (Ordinance 559 effective 10/13/2009, historical reference 115, 238 & 448)
§ 2-26.4.9 Approved materials and equipment. Materials, equipment, and devices approved by the official shall be
constructed and installed in accordance with such approval. (Ordinance 559 effective 10/13/2009, historical
reference 115, 238, 325, 405 & 448)
§ 2-26.4.1.9.1 Used materials and equipment. The use of used materials which meet the requirements of those
codes for new materials is permitted. Used equipment and devices shall not be reused unless approved by the
official. (Ordinance 559 effective 10/131/2009, historical reference 115, 238, 325, 405 & 448)
§ 2-26.4.10 Modifications. Wherever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of those
codes, the official shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, upon application of the owner
or owner’s representative, provided the official shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of
those codes impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of those codes and that
such modification does not lessen health, accessibility, life and fire safety, or structural requirements. The details of
action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the files of the division. (Ordinance 559 effective
10/13/2009, historical reference 16, 115, 238, 325, 405 & 448)
§ 2-26.4.11 Alternative materials, design and methods of construction and equipment. The provisions of those
codes are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any design or method of construction
not specifically prescribed by those codes, provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative
material, design or method of construction shall be approved where the official finds that the proposed design is
satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of those codes, and that the material, method or work
offered is for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed by those codes in quality, strength,
effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. Compliance with the specific performance-based provisions in
lieu of specific requirements of those codes shall also be permitted as an alternate. (Ordinance 559 effective
10/13/2009, historical reference 115, 238, 325, 405 & 448)
§ 2-26.4.11.1 Tests. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of those codes, or
evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of those codes, or in order to substantiate
claims for alternative materials or methods, the official shall have the authority to require tests as evidence of
compliance to be made at no expense to the Town of Easton. Test methods shall be as specified in those codes or by
other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the official shall approve
the testing procedures. Tests shall be performed by an approved agency. Reports of such tests shall be retained by
the official for the period required for retention of public records. (Ordinance 559 effective 10/13/2009, historical
reference 16, 115, 238, 325, 405 & 448)
Article VIII – Custody and Disposition of Abandoned, Lost or Seized Personal
Property
Section 2-27 Purpose and Scope of Article. The purpose of this Article is to set forth the authority and procedures by
which Easton Police Department shall maintain custody over, and dispose of, personal property in its position. It is not
intended to affect or modify the laws of the United States of the State of Maryland regarding the definition of contraband
or its forfeiture or disposition as those laws pertain to the Town. (Ordinance 375 effective 8/4/1998)
Section 2-28 Custody. Unless otherwise provided by law, the Easton Police Department shall maintain custody of any
abandoned, lost, or seized personal property that comes into the custody of the Department until the Department
determines that the custody is not necessary to any investigation or prosecution or otherwise necessary for the discharge
of the Department’s duties. (Ordinance 375 effective 8/4/1998)
Section 2-29 Return Of Property Other Than Contraband. Unless otherwise provided by law, after a determination
described under Section 2-28, the Department shall (1) return any item of personal property (other than contraband) over
which it has custody to the person who: (a) establishes his or her right to possession of said property and (b) gives a
written receipt for the item of personal property to the Department; or (2) dispose of such property in accordance with
the provisions of this Article. (Ordinance 375 effective 8/4/1998)
Section 2-30 Notice Regarding Property Other Than Contraband. Unless otherwise provided by law, the
Department shall give notice to the last known address of the person entitled to possession of any item of property (other
than contraband) in the custody of the Department (if the identity of such person is known to the Department) by
certified mail of the fact that the Department is in custody of such property and that such property is not necessary for
any investigation or prosecution or otherwise necessary for the discharge of the Department duties and advising such
person that such property may be recovered from the Department after compliance with the requirements of Section 2-29
and payment of any administrative fees or other expenses incurred by the Department in connection with the storage of
said property. The notice shall further state that, if the property is not claimed from the Department within 30 days of the
date of the notice, the Department shall dispose of the property and the proceeds of such disposition, if any shall be paid
to the Town. (Ordinance 375 effective 8/4/1998)
Section 2-31 Disposition of Unclaimed Property Other than Contraband. Unless otherwise provided by law, if the
person entitled to position of any item of personal property fails to respond to the notice described in the previous section
within 30 days from the date that the notice was mailed or if the property is otherwise unclaimed, the Department may
dispose of the property in accordance with the following: (Ordinance 375 effective 8/4/1998)
(a) Cash. All cash shall be delivered to the Town Clerk and deposited in the Town’s General Fund;
(Ordinance 375 effective 8/4/1998)
(b) Firearms and Other Weapons. Any firearm which can be used by the Department in the discharge of
its function shall be retained by the Department. The Chief of Police may, at his or her discretion,
transfer firearms to other law enforcement agencies if such firearms can be used by said agencies in the
discharge of their function. All other weapons (other than collectable weapons) shall be destroyed.
(Ordinance 375 effective 8/4/1998)
(c) Collectable Weapons. For the purpose of this section, the term “collectable weapon” means any
weapon which, in the judgment of the Chief of Police, because of age, workmanship, or design is not
likely to be used for criminal purposes and is suitable for decorative or similar purposes. Collectable
weapons shall be sold at public auction pursuant to Section 2-31(e). (Ordinance 375 effective
8/4/1998)
(d) Toys, Children’s Bicycles and Similar Items. Any toys, children’s bicycles or similar items may be
transferred by the Department to one or more tax exempt, non-profit charitable or community
organizations serving the residents of the Town. (Ordinance 375 effective 8/4/1998)
(e) Other Tangible Personal Property. The Department shall retain for its own use any item of tangible
personal property which will be useful for the Department’s function. All other items of tangible
personal property shall either be disposed of as rubbish or sold at public auction under such additional
terms and conditions as the Chief of Police determines are appropriate. The proceeds of such auction
shall be delivered to the Town Clerk and deposited in the Town’s General Fund. (Ordinance 375
effective 8/4/1998)
Section 2-32 Disposition of Contraband. All contraband in the position of the Department shall be forfeited and
disposed of in accordance with federal and State law. If federal and / or State law does not provide a procedure for the
disposition of a particular item of contraband, the Chief of Police shall determine whether the item shall be destroyed or
disposed of in accordance with Section 2-31. (Ordinance 375 effective 8/4/1998)
Section 2-33 Disposition of Motor Vehicles. Motor vehicles in the custody of the Department shall be disposed of
pursuant to applicable provision of State law. (Ordinance 375 effective 8/4/1998)
Section 2-34 No Additional Duties Imposed Upon Department; Chief of Police Authorized To Issue Regulation.
The provisions of this Article shall not be interpreted to impose upon the Easton Police Department or the Town of
Easton any duty, not otherwise existing, to investigate or attempt to ascertain the identity or whereabouts of any person
who is or may be entitled to possession of any item of abandoned, lost, or seized personal property in the custody of the
Department. The purpose of this Article is to provide a method by which the Easton Police Department shall maintain
custody of and dispose of personal property; it shall not create in any person a cause of action against the Town or any
official, agent or employee thereof for failure to follow the terms of this Article. The Chief of Police is authorized to
issue such regulations as he or she deems necessary to implement the intention of this Article. (Ordinance 375 effective
8/4/1998)
Article IX - Economic Development Program
Sec. 2-35. Establishment. The Town of Easton shall have an Economic Development Program for the purpose of:
(1) encouraging sound and balanced economic growth;
(2) attracting and retaining businesses, including, but not limited to, small, minority, and/or disadvantaged
enterprises;
(3) promoting the creation and retention of jobs in the Town;
(4) expanding the commercial and industrial tax base of the Town of Easton;
(5) applying for and administering grants and loans related to the economic vitality of the Town and assisting
with various tax credit and loan programs offered by Federal, State, and County governments as these
programs relate to the economic vitality of the Town;
(6) identifying areas of the Town in need of economic revitalization and assisting with plans for needed
revitalization;
(7) assisting existing businesses and prospective businesses in identifying sources of financing and professional
and technical services; and
(8) providing technical assistance, education, and information to the business community and its recognized
associations.
(Ordinance 623 effective 6/24/2013, historical reference 435 and 439)
Sec 2-36. Administration. The Economic Development Program shall be administered:
(1) by the Town through the employment of an Economic Development Coordinator appointed by the Mayor
and approved by the Town Council or;
(2) at the discretion of the Mayor and Town Council, by a nonprofit economic organization organized for the
purpose of implementing the Economic Development Program for the Town of Easton.
(Ordinance 623 effective 6/24/2013, historical reference 435 and 439)
Article X – Tree Board
Sec. 2-37. Establishment The Tree Board for the Town of Easton is hereby established. The Tree Board shall consist
of three to five volunteers appointed by the Mayor. (Ordinance 443 and 623 effective 5/26/2002 and 6/24/2013)
Sec. 2-38. Compensation. The Tree Board shall serve without compensation. (Ordinance 443 and 623 effective
5/26/2002 and 6/24/2013)
Sec. 2-39. Powers and Duties. The Tree Board shall serve at the discretion of the Mayor and Town Council. The Tree
Board shall assist the Public Works Department and the Town Engineer’s Office in the development and maintenance of
a comprehensive tree management program. The Tree Board shall report directly to the head of the Town Public Works
Department, and shall have such powers and duties as the Mayor, Town Council, Town Engineer’s Office, or the head of
the Public Works Department shall assign to him or her. (Ordinance 443 and 623 effective 5/26/2002 and 6/24/2013)
Sec. 2-40. Residency. The Tree Board members need not be residents of the Town of Easton if he or she has expertise
and experience that will assist the Public Works Department and Town Engineer’s Office in establishing or maintaining
a tree management program. (Ordinance 443 and 623 effective 5/26/2002 and 6/24/2013)
Article X. Elections
Sec. 2-36. Voting places. It shall be the duty of the Supervisor of Elections to provide for each Town election a
suitable place or places for voting. The Supervisor of Elections shall supply suitable voting machines and all
necessary equipment for use in the regular or special Town elections, and the expenses thereof shall be paid for by
the Town. (Ordinance 615 effective 11/20/2012)
Sec. 2-37. Notice of elections. The Supervisor of Elections shall, at least 25 days before any regular or special
election, unless otherwise provided, give notice to the voters of the Town, in one or more newspapers published in
the Town of Easton, of the day and hours and the place or places of holding such election, and such other
information as may be necessary or advisable to enable the voters to intelligently cast their ballots. (Ordinance 615
effective 11/20/2012)
Sec. 2-38. Ballots - Requirements generally. After the time has expired for presenting nomination petitions, the
Supervisor of Elections shall prepare the official ballots and shall cause to be printed thereon the names in
alphabetical order of the nominees for the respective offices to be filled, and he or she shall cause the names of the
candidates for the same office to be grouped together. No party or designation of any candidate shall be printed or
otherwise indicated upon the ballot. Whenever there is any question submitted to the voters for their decision, the
question shall be placed upon the ballot in full, and immediately below the question there shall appear, in the
following order, the words "yes" and "no" and to the left of each a square in which the voter may cast his or her
vote. Ballots other than those created by and printed at the direction of the Supervisor of Elections shall not be cast
or counted in any election. (Ordinance 615 effective 11/20/2012)
Sec. 2-39. Posting of sample ballot. At least four days before any election, the Supervisor of Elections shall
conspicuously and securely post accurate sample copies of the ballots to be used in the approaching election in one
or more public places. One sample ballot shall be placed upon the exterior of the building or buildings in which polls
will be held, so that the same can be readily seen and examined by pedestrians passing on the street on which the
polling place is located. (Ordinance 615 effective 11/20/2012)
Sec. 2-40. Posting of sample ballots - mistakes and challenges. A correct list of the names of the candidates as
they are to appear on the ballot shall be furnished on demand by the Supervisor of Elections to the candidates or
their authorized agents. If any mistakes are discovered, it shall be the duty of the Supervisor of Elections to correct
the same without delay, and if the Supervisor of Elections shall decline or refuse to make the correction, then upon
the sworn petition of any qualified voter who would have the right to vote for such candidate at the approaching
election, the Circuit Court for Talbot County may, by order, require said Supervisor of Elections to correct such
error or to show cause why such error should not be corrected. (Ordinance 615 effective 11/20/2012)
Sec. 2-41. Opening and closing hours of polls. For all Town elections, the polls shall remain open from 7:00 A.M.
to 8:00 P.M. on the same day. (Ordinance 615 effective 11/20/2012)
Sec. 2-42. Voting procedure. All voting in the Town of Easton, other than by absentee ballot, shall be performed
on voting machines, and the applicable Maryland State law shall govern the voting procedure with regard to the use
of these machines in all elections in the Town of Easton. (Ordinance 615 effective 11/20/2012)
Sec. 2-43. Electioneering and loitering near polls prohibited. There shall be no canvassing or electioneering in
said polling place or places or within one hundred feet of the same, nor shall anyone linger, be, or remain within said
distance of one hundred feet of the polls except election officials and peace officers, unless it be in approaching the
polls to vote, or in passing along the streets in the usual and orderly manner of travel. (Ordinance 615 effective
11/20/2012)
Sec. 2-44. Bribery of voters prohibited. Any person who shall bribe or attempt to bribe, coerce, or intimidate any
voter to vote or not to vote for or against any person or proposition, or to vote or not to vote at any election, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ordinance 615 effective 11/20/2012)
Sec. 2-45. Poll Watchers - Selection. Each candidate for elective office may select two (2) persons, both of whom
shall be qualified voters of the Town, to serve as Poll Watchers, and each candidate shall submit to the Supervisor of
Elections a list of Poll Watchers at least three (3) days prior to the election. The Poll Watchers shall not be
employees of the Town of Easton, and shall serve without compensation. (Ordinance 615 effective 11/20/2012)
Sec. 2-46. Duties of Poll Watchers. Each Poll Watcher shall have the right to observe every aspect of the conduct
of an election. Each Poll Watcher shall be assigned a position at the polling place near the Supervisor of Elections or
any assistants to the Supervisor of Elections, inside the registration or polling area so as to enable him or her to see
each person as he or she offers to register or vote. The Poll Watchers shall witness the canvass, including absentee
ballots, or the ascertainment and transcription of voters recorded on voting machines. Poll Watchers shall have the
right to enter the polling place one-half hour before the opening of the polls. It shall be unlawful for any Poll
Watcher to inquire or attempt to ascertain for which candidate any voter intends to vote, or has voted, or to converse
in the polling place with any voter or to assist any voter in the preparation of a ballot or in the operation of the
voting machine. Any Poll Watcher who violates the restrictions set forth herein may be lawfully ejected by the
Supervisor of Elections, and is subject to penalties provided for in this article. (Ordinance 615 effective 11/20/2012)
Sec. 2-47. Absentee ballot provisions. A person who is otherwise qualified to vote in the Town of Easton and who
may be absent for any reason from the Town on any election day, or is unable to vote due to illness, disability, or
emergency reason, may vote by absentee ballot. The procedure for absentee balloting in the Town of Easton shall be
that procedure described for absentee voting in the state election code, except as follows:
(a) The instructions for the casting of absentee ballots shall be prescribed by the Supervisor of Elections.
(b) The Supervisor of Elections shall prescribe the size, form, and content of the absentee ballot, material
envelopes, providing for a covering envelope, a ballot envelope, and a return envelope.
(c) Absentee ballots shall be counted, certified, and canvassed in accordance with the provisions of this article.
(Ordinance 615 effective 11/20/2012)
Sec. 2-48. Election results - Counting of votes and certification. As soon as the polls have closed following any
Town election, the Supervisor of Elections, in the presence of poll watchers, if any, and of the Board of Canvassers,
shall proceed to ascertain and transcribe the votes recorded on each voting machine, and shall certify the same to the
Board of Canvassers at or before 4:00 PM on the Wednesday next following the election. Not earlier than 4:00 P.M.
on that same day, the Board of Canvassers, in the presence of poll watchers, if any, shall proceed to count, certify,
and canvass the absentee ballots cast in the election. (Ordinance 615 effective 11/20/2012)
Sec. 2-49. Election results - Issuance of election certificates. The Board of Canvassers shall issue a certificate of
election to each official elected, and issue two certificates, one to the Mayor and one to the Council, whenever any
proposition is submitted to the vote of the people, showing the vote for and against, which certificate shall be on
blanks prepared by the Town Clerk, and shall contain a plain statement of the facts and be signed by a majority of
said Board of Canvassers. (Ordinance 615 effective 11/20/2012)
Sec. 2-50. Preservation of ballots after election. All ballots used in any Town election shall be preserved by the
Town Manager or Town Clerk for at least six months after the election. (Ordinance 615 effective 11/20/2012)
Sec. 2-51. Violations. Any person who is convicted of violating a provision of this Article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and subject to a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or imprisonment for six (6) months.
(Ordinance 615 effective 11/20/2012)
Sec. 2-52. Interpretation - Further authority of Town Council. The provisions of this article shall be interpreted
to encourage the registration of voters in the Town, and the participation by the citizens of the Town in the electoral
processes of the Town. The Town Council is hereby authorized to enact such ordinances to provide for additional
public notice regarding the times, places, and dates of election or to make such further provisions as the Town
Council deems appropriate in order to fulfill the purposes of this Article. (Ordinance 615 effective 11/20/2012)
CHAPTER 3
Reserved for future use
CHAPTER 4 ANIMALS AND FOWL
Article I. In General.
§ 4-1. Animals or poultry - License for raising.
§ 4-2. Same - Sanitary conditions for raising.
§ 4-3. Complaint of unsanitary conditions; hearing.
§ 4-4. Poultry running at large prohibited.
§ 4-5. Keeping swine prohibited.
§ 4-6. Animals running at large or unattended.
§ 4-7. Animal carcasses.
Article II. Dogs.
§ 4-8. Definitions.
§ 4-9. License required; rabies vaccinations.
§ 4-10. Obtaining title to stray dogs.
§ 4-11. At Large, Public Nuisance; Impoundment.
§ 4-12. Female dogs in season; impoundment; redemption.
§ 4-13. Suspected rabid dogs.
§ 4-14. Impoundment service fee.
§ 4-15. Liability for impounding fee.
§ 4-16. Enforcement.
§ 4-17. Animal wardens.
§ 4-18. Dog license responsibility.
§ 4-19. Humane Care Rrequired; Poisoning Prohibited; Control of Animals; Humane Destruction of a Suffering
Animal.
§ 4-20. Interference with authorized person prohibited.
§ 4-21. Kennels.
§ 4-22. Penalty
§ 4-23. Animals Fierce - Penalty.
§ 4-24. Summons Trial; Penalty
§ 4-25. Record.
Article I. In General.
Sec. 4-1. Animals or poultry - license for raising.
All persons engaged in the raising or breeding of poultry, pigeons, rabbits, hares and/or guinea pigs within the limits
of the town, for commercial purposes, shall be required to obtain a license; each application for such license shall
state the approximate number and kind of poultry or animals to be raised and the location of the premises to be used
for said purpose and said license shall be issued without a fee. (Ordinance 9 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 4-2. Same - sanitary conditions for raising.
All persons raising poultry or animals within the town, whether for commercial purposes or otherwise, shall be
required to keep the same at all times in a clean and sanitary condition and free from obnoxious odors. (Ordinance 9
effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 4-3. Complaint of unsanitary conditions; hearing.
Whenever a complaint is made to the council that any poultry, pigeons, rabbits hares and/or guinea pigs raised in
said town are creating a condition which is unsanitary or obnoxious to surrounding property owners, the council
shall give notice of a hearing to be held before it at such time and place as it shall designate, at which the party
complained against, and the complainant or complainants shall be notified to be present, and if upon hearing the
matter, the town council shall deem the condition in which said poultry, pigeons, rabbits, hares, and/or guinea pigs
are raised to be unsanitary and obnoxious, it shall revoke any license which may have been obtained by the said
owner of said poultry, pigeons, rabbits, hares and/or guinea pigs, and order said poultry or animals removed
forthwith from the limits of the town within a period not to exceed three (3) days. (Ordinance 9 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 4-4. Poultry running at large prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for poultry to be turned loose or to be allowed to run at large within the town limits. (Ordinance
9 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 4-5. Keeping swine prohibited.
The breeding, feeding, pasturing and/or penning of hogs or pigs, and the maintenance of piggeries, pig pens or pig
runs within the limits of the town is hereby prohibited. (Ordinance 9 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 4-6. Animals running at large or unattended.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit an animal to be turned loose or to be allowed to run at large within the
town limits, or to leave a draft animal whether hitched to a vehicle or not, to stand upon any street or alley without
being securely tied or fastened or in the immediate custody of the owner, driver or some competent person.
(Ordinance 519 aka E-34, effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 4-7. Animal carcasses.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of any dead horse, cow, sheep or other animal carcass, to permit the same to lie
within the town limits longer than a reasonable time for removing or burying the same. (Ordinance 519 aka E-34,
effective 5/7/1967)
Article II. Dogs
Sec. 4-8. Definitions.
For purposes of this article the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to therein
by this section:
At large. A dog shall be deemed to be at large whenever the dog is not on the owner's property or under the
immediate physical control of a responsible person capable of physically restraining the animal either by leash,
cord, chain, or similar means.
Keeping or harboring. The act or sufferance either of feeding or sheltering a dog on the premises of the
occupant or owner thereof.
Owner or own. Any person having a right of property in a dog and any person who keeps or harbors a dog or
has it in his care or acts as custodian or permits it to remain on or about any premises occupied or controlled by
him.
Public nuisance. Any animal found repeatedly making loud or objectionable sounds, damaging property,
molesting passersby, chasing vehicles or acting in any manner which is deemed to be doing damage to property
or to the public health and well being or which is known to have bitten two (2) or more persons or shall have
been determined by the animal control officer, the public health officer, or any other authorized representative
of the county to be a detriment to public health, welfare and safety shall be deemed to be a public nuisance. If a
dead animal is not properly disposed of and is deemed to be a public nuisance by reason of its appearance, odor,
or for public health reasons its owner may be charged by the local health officer or the animal control officer for
maintaining a public nuisance.
Vicious dog. Any dog that constitutes a physical threat to human beings, other dogs, cats, livestock, swine, or
fowl by the virtue of its specific training or demonstrated behavior excepting dogs belonging to a government
agency acting in the official performance of authorized duty.
(Ordinance 72 effective 9/7/1975, historical reference 53, 55)
Sec. 4-9. License Required; Rabies Vaccination.
No person shall own or have custody of any dog over four (4) months of age unless the dog is licensed as herein
provided, and has been vaccinated against rabies in a procedure approved by the maryland Public Health
Veterinarian. Proof of rabies vaccination shall be given to the dog license agent. This provision shall not apply to
dogs in the town owned by a non-resident, provided the dogs are duly licensed in their home city, county, or state,
and providing the owner sends a valid rabies vaccination certificate for the dog with the dog while it is in town.
(a) Application for licenses shall be made to Talbot County, Maryland, or its authorized representative
accompanied by a license fee of $4.00 for spayed female and male dogs, veterinarian certificate to be shown on
request of licensing authority, and $8.00 for female dogs. However, if individual licenses for owned dogs
exceeds $25.00, the owner may request a blanket dog or kennel license for $25.00 providing he gives duplicate
copies of the rabies certificate to the county and he notifies the animal control officer by the first of the
following month of the transfer of ownership of any dog so licensed. The notice shall be on a county dog
transfer form. Applications made during the license year which are not in default as provided in this paragraph
may be prorated to the nearest month.
(b) "Seeing eye" dogs trained to assist the blind and dogs trained and used by police in the official performance
of their duties shall be provided licenses free of charge.
(c) All licenses shall be valid for one year from each July 1; to June 30, of the following year.
(d) Applications for licenses may be made within 30 days following the establishment of residence within the
town, or within 30 days following the procurement of a dog, without a penalty.
(e) The license of an animal may not be transferred with a change of ownership. A license may not be
transferred by the owner from one dog to another.
(f) Upon payment of the dog license fee, a receipt and a numbered identification tag shall be issued to the
owner. The dog license tag should be securely fastened to each dog's choke chain, collar, or harness and worn
by the dog at all times.
(g) A dog license tag to replace a lost tag shall be issued to the dog's owner upon application and payment of a
$1.00 fee.
(Ordinance 72 effective 9/7/1975, historical reference 55)
Sec. 4-10. Obtaining title to stray dogs.
Any person obtaining possession of a stray unlicensed dog who wished to keep the dog, shall within 48 hours
deliver it to the animal control officer of Talbot County along with a statement declaring his assumption of boarding
expenses and his intention of obtaining ownership of the dog.
If the dog is unclaimed for five (5) days, any former title shall be forfeited, and the person delivering the dog shall
be given the dog upon payment of the board charges, other proper charges, his receiving a current dog license, and
upon receiving adoption approval of the Talbot County Humane Society.
(Ordinance 72 effective 9/7/1975, historical reference 55)
Sec. 4-11. At Large, Public Nusance; Impoundment.
(a) It shall be unlawful for the owner to permit his dog to run at large or to permit his animal to constitute a public
nuisance. (Ordinance 74 effective 6/7/1976, historical reference 53)
(b) Whenever any person finds a dog running at large with or without a license tag, or believes an animal constitutes
a public nuisance, he may notify the animal control officer who may cause the dog to be taken and impounded.
Upon the capture of any dog, the animal control officer shall make a genuine effort to notify the owner of its capture
if his identity can be ascertained through license records, if any, or otherwise. The dog may be confined and
disposed of either by destroying or being offered for adoption if not identified and claimed with five (5) days after
its capture. No owner may claim his dog unless and until all charges incident to the confinement of the dog shall be
paid. Dogs found "at large" and unlicensed which during the episode have bitten a human shall not be released from
impoundment, except as authorized by a court order but shall become the property of the town and shall be
humanely destroyed after 72 hours and its brain tested for rabies.
(Ordinance 72 effective 9/7/1975 and Ordinance 74 effective 6/7/1976, historical reference 53,55)
Sec. 4-12. Female dogs in season; impoundment; redemption.
Female dogs in heat found running at large shall be taken and impounded. Any female dog so captured may be
redeemed by the owner thereof upon payment of the impoundment service fee as provided in section 4-14. If the
same dog, belonging to the owner, shall be impounded for a second time within 12 months, the dog cannot be
reclaimed by the owner thereof unless the owner shall pay for the spaying of the dog within one week after notice.
(Ordinance 72 effective 9/7/1975, historical reference 53)
Sec. 4-13. Suspected rabid dogs.
(a) If a dog is believed to have rabies, or has been bitten by a dog suspected by having rabies, the dog or dogs shall
be confined by a leash or chain on the owner's premises and shall be placed under the observation of a veterinarian
at the expense of the owner for a period of two (2) weeks. The owner shall notify the animal control officer of the
fact that his dog has been exposed to rabies and at his discretion the animal control officer is empowered to have the
dog removed from the owner's premises to a veterinary hospital and there placed under observation for a period of
12 weeks at the expense of the owner.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person knowing or suspecting a dog to have rabies to allow the dog to be taken off
his premises or beyond the limits of the town without the written permission of the animal control officer. Every
owner, or other person, upon ascertaining a dog is rabid shall immediately notify the animal control officer who
shall either remove the dog to the pound or, if required under the circumstances, summarily destroy it.
(Ordinance 72 effective 9/7/1975)
Sec. 4-14. Impoundment service fee.
Whenever a dog is impounded pursuant to this article or any other provision of the law, the owner thereof shall pay
an impounding fee of $10.00 for a dog with a valid license and $20.00 for a dog subject to license and without a
current valid license and costs of any required veterinary services, and furnish satisfactory evidence that the dog is
licensed before release. (Ordinance 72 effective 9/7/1975)
Sec. 4-15. Liability for impounding fee.
Where the owner of an impounded dog can be ascertained the owner shall be liable for the impounding fee and other
proper charges even in cases wherein the dog is disposed of pursuant to this article. In addition to the impounding
fee the animal control officer may issue a summons pursuant to section 4-24 of this article. (Ordinance 72 effective
9/7/1975)
Sec. 4-16. Enforcement.
An animal control officer shall be designated by the mayor as the enforcement authority for the provisions of the
animal control and dog licensing provisions of the town, acting under the general supervision of the mayor. The
animal control officer may be an employee of a nonprofit organization, independent of the town governmental
system. (Ordinance 72 effective 9/7/1975)
Sec. 4-17. Animal wardens.
The animal control officer is authorized and empowered to deputize animal wardens, who, acting under his
supervision, shall be empowered to take into custody and turn over to the Talbot County Humane Society stray,
injured, sick or dead animals in accordance with the provisions of this article. (Ordinance 72 effective 9/7/1975,
historical reference 53,55)
Sec. 4-18. Dog license responsibility.
Nothing in this article shall relieve any dog owner of the responsibility for securing a proper dog license as required
by section 4-9 of this article. (Ordinance 72 effective 9/7/1975)
Sec. 4-19. Humane Care Required: Poisoning Prohibited; Control of Animals; Humane
Destruction of a Suffering Animal.
(a) All owners of animals shall provide the animals with sufficient food and water, suitable shelter, veterinary care
when needed to prevent suffering, and humane care and treatment. No person shall poison any animal other than
rodents. No person shall mistreat or abandon any animal in a manner as to cause suffering by the animal.
(b) All owners of animals shall exercise care and control of such animals, so as to prevent same from becoming
public nuisances.
(c) Any Maryland licensed veterinarian in Talbot County is herein authorized by the town to immediately and
humanely euthanize a suffering animal without liability if its owner cannot be promptly identified.
(Ordinance 72 effective 9/7/1975)
Sec. 4-20. Interference with authorized person prohibited.
No person shall attempt to interfere with the animal control officer, animal warden or any other authorized person in
the performance of their duties; nor shall any person attempt to or release without authority any animal impounded
pursuant to the animal control laws of the town. (Ordinance 72 effective 9/7/1975)
Sec. 4-21. Kennels.
(a) Any structure or place used for the housing, maintaining, or breeding of three (3) or more dogs (or other animals)
for which a fee is charged shall be deemed a "commercial kennel."
(b) In order to maintain such a structure a special exception must be approved by the board of zoning appeals as
follows: veterinary clinic, animal hospital, or commercial kennel for the raising, breeding or boarding of dogs and
other animals, provided that all buildings and runways shall be distant at least 200 feet from any lot line.
(c) It shall be unlawful to maintain any kennel, commercial or otherwise, within the corporate limits of the town that
becomes a nuisance. If upon an investigation by the town or county animal control officer, a kennel is found to be a
nuisance, it shall be the owner's duty to close the kennel and remove the dogs or bitches from the corporate limits of
the town with 24 hours. Upon failure of the owner to comply, the animal control officer shall have the dogs or
bitches impounded; however, nothing in this section is intended to interfere with the proper operations of animal
hospitals.
(Ordinance 72 effective 9/7/1975, historical reference 53)
Sec. 4-22. Penalty.
(a) To the extent that the provisions of this article are coincident with those of the Talbot County Animal Control
Ordinance (County Ordinance) the penalty shall be that provided for under Section Sixteen of the County
Ordinance.
(b) Any person who violates any section of this article in which the provisions differ from those of the County
Ordinance; being Section 4-11 (Impoundment for running at large with a license tag), 4-12 (Females in season), 4-
13 (Suspected rabid dogs), 4-21 (Kennels) and any other section in which there is a material variance from the
provisions of the County Ordinance; shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not
more than Fifty Dollars ($50.00) for each violation. Each day the violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense. All fines imposed under this section shall be transferred to the Town.
(Ordinance 72 effective 9/7/1975, historical reference 53)
Sec. 4-23. Animal Fierce - Penalty.
Any animal of fierce, dangerous, or vicious nature must be confined on the premises of the owners or person in
possession of the animal, at all times, and in a manner that it cannot reach persons who may have occasion to
lawfully enter upon the premises at any reasonable time. The animal shall not be taken out of the confinement on
the premises unless securely muzzled and under suitable control. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and upon conviction be fined not less than Twenty-five Dollars ($25.00) nor more than Two hundred
Fifty Dollars ($250.00) for each offence. Upon conviction the prosecuting judge may order the amimal destroyed
and the owner to refrain from the ownership of other animals as be deemed proper. (Ordinance 72 effective
9/7/1975)
Sec. 4-24. Summons: Trial: Penalty.
The animal control officer, animal wardens, the county health officer or his deputy, or any law enforcement officer
may issue a summons to anyone found to be in violation of this article. No summons shall be issued except under
their personal knowledge. The animal control officer shall be promptly notified of such action. In addition, the
animal control officer may accept a written affidavit of any other person personally observing the violation. Any
owner so summoned, desiring to stand trial on the date of trial set on the summons, shall notify the district court of
Talbot County of such desire at least seven (7) days prior to his trial date. Any person desiring to plead guilty to the
violation prior to his trial shall be subject to a fine as fixed by the summons, payable by mail or in person at the
clerk's office of the district court. Any person who shall fail to appear at the trial when there has been no pre-trial
plea of guilty and payment of fine shall be guilty of a separate misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof be fined no
less than Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00), plus court costs. (Ordinance 72 effective 9/7/1975)
Sec. 4-25. Records.
Except for any necessary accounting records, no criminal record shall be kept of any violations of this article.
(Ordinance 72 effective 9/7/1975).

CHAPTER 5 BICYCLES AND SIMILAR DEVICES
§ 5-1. Inspections, permit card and license tags; fees.
§ 5-2. Suspension of registration; removal of license tags.
§ 5-3. Manner of riding generally.
§ 5-4. Riding on sidewalks prohibited.
§ 5-5. Brakes and warning devices.
§ 5-6. Lamps required.
§ 5-7. Passengers.
§ 5-8. Riding abreast.
§ 5-9. Clinging to vehicles.
§ 5-10. Speeding.
§ 5-11. Operation of skateboards and scooters prohibited.
Sec. 5-1. Inspections, permit cards and license tags; fees; expiration.
Every operator of a bicycle within the corporate limits of the Town shall be required to submit his or her machine,
on or before the first day of April of each year, for inspection as to brakes, tires, wheels, frame, handlebars, and such
other inspection as may be required; said inspection shall be made under the supervision of the Police Department,
and if said examination is satisfactory, said operator shall be given a Permit Card, bearing an identifying number,
certifying that said bicycle has been satisfactorily inspected. All of said Permit Cards shall expire on the last day of
March in each year, after which time all bicycles are subject to the annual examination and issuance of a new Permit
Card. No person shall operate any bicycle in the Town without having first obtained such Permit Card. A License
Tag, bearing the same number as the permit card, shall be attached to each bicycle, and shall remain thereon
constantly. Such operator of a bicycle in the Town shall be required to pay a fee of Twenty-five Cents ($.25)
annually, at the time such Permit Card and License Tag are issued. (Ordinance 201, passed 6/24/91.)
Sec. 5-2. Suspension of registration; removal of license tags.
The Chief of police, or some reliable person or persons designated by him, shall have the authority to suspend the
registration of and remove the license tag from any bicycle operated contrary to any applicable State law or town
ordinance, such suspension and removal to continue for a period not to exceed ten days. (Ordinance 60 effective
3/1/1965)
Sec. 5-3. Manner or riding generally.
It shall be unlawful for any person riding on any bicycle on any of the streets of the town to coast upon such bicycle
in a negligent manner, and the operator of any such bicycle is required to keep his feet on the pedals and his hands
upon the handles of such vehicle so as to have the same under proper control and management to avoid accidents.
(Ordinance 519 aka E-34, effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 5-4. Riding on sidewalks prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle upon any of the sidewalks within the limits of the town.
(Ordinance 10 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 5-5. Brakes and warning devices.
Every bicycle while in use on the streets of the town shall be provided with effective brakes and with a suitable bell,
horn or other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least one hundred feet; except that no
bicycle shall be equipped with any siren or whistle. (Ordinance 519 aka E-34, effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 5-6. Lamps required.
(A) Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light
visible from a distance of at least five hundred feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type which
shall be visible from all distances from fifty to three hundred feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper
beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of five hundred feet to
the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector. (Ordinance 519 aka E-34, effective 5/7/1967)
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person at nighttime to operate a bicycle along the streets of the town unless said
bicycle is properly equipped with such lamps and reflectors as require herein. (Ordinance 60, effective 3/1/1965)
Sec. 5-7. Passengers.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any bicycle upon the streets of the town to carry any other person or persons
upon the said bicycle. (Ordinance 60, effective 3/1/1965)
Sec. 5-8. Riding abreast.
It shall be unlawful for any person to proceed along the streets of the town abreast of more than one other bicycle
proceeding in the same direction. (Ordinance 60, effective 3/1/1965)
Sec. 5-9. Clinging to Vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person while riding a bicycle to hang onto any other vehicle while the same is in motion.
(Ordinance 60, effective 3/1/1965)
Sec. 5-10. Speeding.
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then
existing. (1967 Code by Ordinance 519 aka E-34, effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 5-11. Operation of skateboards and scooters prohibited.
(A) Except as provided in subsection (D) hereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to ride, propel, push, or
otherwise operate a skateboard or scooter on any public way, street, alley, sidewalk, parking lot, or other public
property (except for public skateboard or scooter facilities and publicly sponsored or authorized skateboard or
scooter events) within the corporate boundaries of the town.
(B) Any person violating the provisions of subsection (A) hereof shall be guilty of a municipal infraction and, any
provision of this code to the contrary notwithstanding, shall be subject to a fine of Five Dollars ($5.00) for a first
offense and Ten Dollars ($10.00) for each subsequent offense.
(C) In the event that any law enforcement officer of the Town of Easton observes any minor child operating a
skateboard or scooter in violation of the provisions of this section, the law enforcement officer may confiscate the
skateboard or scooter operated by that minor child and shall return the skateboard or scooter only to that minor's
parent or guardian. The law enforcement officer shall be authorized to confiscate a skateboard or scooter under the
provisions of this subsection whether or not he or she issues a citation for a violation of this section.
Nothing in this section shall prohibit any person 12 years or under from operating a non-motorized scooter on the
streets, alleys, or sidewalk of the town. (Ordinance 152 effective 7-31-88, historical reference 146)
CHAPTER 6 BUILDING CODES
§ 6-1. Chapter Title
§ 6-2. General References
Article I. Building Codes Administration.
§ 6-3. Applications and Permits.
§ 6-4. Application Construction Documents.
§ 6-5. Fees.
§ 6-6. Inspections.
§ 6-7. Certificate of Occupancy.
§ 6-8. Violations.
§ 6-9. Stop Work Order.
§ 6-10. Unsafe Structure and Equipment.
Article II. Building Codes for; Commercial, Residential and Industrial Buildings.
§ 6-11. Incorporated by Reference.
Article III. Building Codes for Residential One and Two Family Dwellings.
§ 6-12. Incorporated by Reference.
Article IV. Electrical Codes
§ 6-13. Incorporated by Reference.
Article V. Energy Codes
§ 6-14. Incorporated by Reference.
Article VI. Fuel Gas Codes
§ 6-15. Incorporated by Reference.
Article VII. Mechanical Codes
§ 6-16. Incorporated by Reference.
Article VIII. Plumbing Codes
§ 6-17. Incorporated by Reference.
Editor's Note. -- The Codes incorporated herein have copies on file in the Code Enforcement Office – Building
Inspection Division, where they may be examined between the hours of 8:30 A.M. and 4:00 P.M., Monday through
Friday, except on holidays. (Historical reference Ordinances: 16, 17, 25, 27, 33, 34, 41, 42, 44, 45, 71, 73, 76, 82,
86, 90, 93, 110, 115, 180, 238, 325, 405, 417, 566, 567, 568, 599, 600, 601, 602, 603, 604 and 605)
§ 6-1. Chapter Title. That this chapter shall be known and may be cited as “Building Codes” for the Town of
Easton, Maryland. (Ordinance 547 effective July 1st 2009)
§ 6-2. General References. That this chapter shall reference General Provisions – Chapter 1, Licenses – Chapter 14,
Plumbing – Chapter 20, Zoning – Chapter 28 of the Code of the Town of Easton. (Ordinance 547 effective July 1st
2009)
Article I: Building Codes Administration
§ 6-3 Applications and Permits. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-3.1 Applications for Permit. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application(s) therefor in
writing on a form furnished by the Building Inspection Division for that purpose. Such applications shall:
(Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
1. Identify and describe the work to be covered.
2. Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal description, street address or
similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work.
3. Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is intended.
4. Be accompanied by construction documents and other information asrequired.
5. State the valuation of the proposedwork.
6. Be signed by the applicant, or the applicant’s authorized agent.
7. Give such other data and information as required by the code official.
Exception for Repairs. Application or notice to the code official is not required for ordinary repairs to
structures. Repairs include the restoration to good or sound condition of any part of an existing building
for the purpose of its maintenance. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any wall, partition
or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structure beam or load bearing support, or the removal
or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress
requirements, nor shall repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
plumbing, gas mechanical or electrical system.
Exception for Emergency Situations: Where repair or replacement must be performed in an
emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted within the next working business day to
the Building Inspection Division.
§ 6-3.2 Action on Application: The code official shall examine or cause to be examined all application for
permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing. If the application or the construction
documents do not conform to the requirements of all pertinent laws or if the application is incomplete for
appropriate review, the code official shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the
code official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of these codes and all laws and
ordinances applicable thereto, the code official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. (Ordinance
562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-3.2.1 Substantially Improved or Substantially Damaged Existing Building and Dwellings. For
applications for alteration, addition, or other improvement of existing buildings or dwellings located in an
area prone to flooding, the code official shall examine or cause to be examined the construction documents
and shall prepare a finding with regard to the value of the proposed work. If the code official finds that the
value of the proposed work equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building or dwelling,
the applications shall meet the requirements for Flood Resistant Construction. (Ordinance 562 effective
November 8th 2009)
§ 6-3.3 Time Limitation of Application: An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to
have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or
a permit has been issued; except that the code official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for
additional periods not exceeding 90 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause
demonstrated. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-3.5 Permit Required. Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, move,
demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove,
convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by
these codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the code official and obtain the
required permit. A building permit, or application shall not be transferred from one applicant’s name to
another’s without express written approval of the code official. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-3.6 Work Exempt from Permit. Except that the work included below shall be exempt from the requirement
for a permit. Exemption from the permit requirements of these codes shall not be deemed to grant authorization
for work to be done in violation of the provisions of these codes. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-3.6.1 Building and Dwelling Codes: (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009 and Ordinance
578 effective November 8th 2010)
1. Residential Accessory Structures that are; not greater than 220 square feet in floor area, with an
eave height of 10 feet or less and are not permanently fixed to the ground by a foundation.
Provided the accessory structure is anchored to the ground, on a flat and level surface area, by
means of screw anchors or other anchor device to prevent overturning in high winds.
2. Retaining walls which are not over 4 feet in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the
top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or II-Aliquids.
3. Docks, piers, shoreline protection. However, a zoning certificate must be obtained from Town of
Easton Planning and ZoningDepartment.
4. Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches above grade and not over any basement or story
below and which are not part of an accessible route.
5. Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work.
6. Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery.
7. Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to one and two family dwellings occupancy which are
less than 24 inches deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons and are installed entirely above ground.
8. Swings and other playground equipment accessory to one- and two-family dwellings.
9. Window awnings supported by an exterior wall of one and two family dwellings and Group U
occupancies. However, a zoning certificate from the Easton Planning and Zoning office is
required.
10. Movable cases, counters and partitions not over 5 feet 9 inches in height.
11. Tents and other membrane structures erected for a period of less than 180 days. Provided the
accessory structure is anchored to the ground, on a flat and level surface area, by means of screw
anchors or other anchor device to prevent overturning in highwinds.
§ 6-3.6.2 Fuel Gas Codes: (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
1. Portable heating appliance.
2. Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment
unsafe.
§ 6-3.6.3 Mechanical Codes: (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
1. Portable heating appliance.
2. Portable ventilation equipment.
3. Portable cooling unit.
4. Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by these
codes.
5. Replacement of any part which does not alter its approval or make itunsafe.
6. Portable evaporative cooler.
7. Self-contained refrigeration system containing 10 pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant and
actuated by motors of 1 horsepower (746 W) or less.
§ 6-3.6.4 Plumbing Codes: (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
1. The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe; provided, however, that if any
concealed trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes
necessary to remove and replace the same with new material such work shall be considered as new
work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in these codes.
2. The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves, or fixtures, and the removal
and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve orrequire the replacement
or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures.
§ 6-3.6.5 Electrical Codes: (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
1. Installation of one single-phase, 20-ampere or less, electrical branch circuit.
2. Installation or replacement of equipment approved for connection to suitable permanently installed
receptacles.
3. Replacement of devices: switches, lamp sockets and receptacles.
4. Repair or replacement of branch circuit over current devices of the required capacity in thesame
location.
5. Minor maintenance and repairs such as tightening connections on a device.
§ 6-3.6.6 Public service agencies. A permit shall not be required for the installation, alteration or repair of
generation, transmission, distribution or metering or other related equipment that is under the ownership
and control of public service agencies by established right. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-3.7 Temporary Structures and Uses. The code official is authorized to issue a permit for temporary
structures and temporary uses. Such permits shall be limited in classification and to the time of service as
follows: (Ordinance 578 effective November 8th 2010, historical referance 562)
1. Temporary Structures including Marketplace Buildings,Mobile Offices and Storage Trailers shall
be limited to the time of service, but shall not be permitted for more than 1095 days.
Exception: Temporary Structures time of service may be permitted for more than 1095 days;
upon written request of the property owner prior to the expiration of the time of service and
inspection by the code official. The code official is authorized to renew the time of service
upon approval for up to an additional 365 days for each written request and inspection.
2. Temporary Structures with an associated Building Permit including Mobile Offices and Storage
Trailers may be used on construction sites for the duration of a Building Permit if such structures
are incidental to the construction work being performed on site. When such work is completed or
abandoned, the temporary structure shall be removed.
3. Temporary Uses of Existing; Buildings and Dwellings shall be limited to the time of service, but
shall not be permitted for more than 180 days. The code official is authorized to grant extension for
demonstrated cause of an additional 180 days.
§ 6-3.7.1 Temporary Power. The code official is authorized to give permission to temporarily supply and
use power in part of an electric installation before such installation has been fully completed and the final
certificate or completion has been issued. The part covered by the temporary certificate shall comply with
the requirements within these codes for temporary lighting, heat or power. (Ordinance 562 effective
November 8th 2009)
§ 6-3.7.2 Termination of Approval. The code official is authorized to terminate such permit for a
temporary structure or use and to order the temporary structure or use to be discontinued. (Ordinance 562
effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-3.8 Validity of Permit. The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an
approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of these codes or of any other ordinance of the Town.
Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of these codes or other ordinances of the
Town shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit based on construction documents and other data shall not
prevent the code official from requiring the correction of errors in the construction, construction documents and
other data. The code official is authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a structure which are in violation of
these codes or of any other ordinances of the Town. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-3.9 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become: invalid unless the work on the permit is commenced
within 180 days after the permit’s issuance or expired if the commenced work is suspended or abandoned for a
period greater than 180 days from the last inspection. Validation of commencement shall be through required
inspections and, suspension or abandonment shall be through periodic inspections by the Building Inspection
Division, All permits shall expire 630 days from the date of their issuance. The code official is authorized to
grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not exceeding 90 days each. The extension shall
be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-3.10 Suspension or Revocation. The code official is authorized to suspend, revoke or withhold any permits
or future permits to such contractor, developer, or owner issued under the provisions of these codes whenever
the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or if the
contractor, developer, or owner is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of these
codes or any other code, ordinance or provision of law applicable within the Town of Easton. Permits that are
being withheld shall continue to be withheld until all violations, penalties and fees have been corrected and
paid, if any. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-3.11 Placement of Permit. Issued permits shall be kept on the premises designated therein at all times and
shall be readily available for inspection by the Building Inspection Division. (Ordinance 562 effective
November 8th 2009)
§ 6-3.12 Responsibility. It shall be the duty of every person who performs work for the installation or repair of
building, dwelling, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems, for which these codes are applicable, to
comply with these codes. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-4 Application Construction Documents.
§ 6-4.1 Submittal Documents. Construction documents, special inspection and structural observation programs,
and other data shall be submitted in one or more sets with each application for a permit. The construction
documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional as defined by the statutory requirements of the
professional registration laws of the State of Maryland. Where special conditions exist, the code official is
authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional, the
cost of which shall be borne by the owner or developer. All construction documents shall be submitted with
sufficient clarity and detail to show the nature of the work to be performed. (Ordinance 562 effective November
8th 2009)
Exception: The code official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and other
data not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work
applied for is such that reviewing of construction documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with
these codes.
§ 6-4.2 Design Professional. When it is required that documents be prepared by a registered design
professional, the code official shall be authorized to require the owner to engage and designate on the building
permit application a registered design professional who shall act as the registered design professional in
responsible charge. If the circumstances require, the owner shall designate a substitute registered design
professional in responsible charge who shall perform the duties required of the original registered design
professional in responsible charge. The code official shall be notified in writing by the owner if the registered
design professional in responsible charge is changed or is unable to continue to perform the duties. (Ordinance
562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-4.2.1 Submittal Documents. The registered design professional in responsible charge shall be
responsible for reviewing and coordinating submittal documents prepared by others, for compatibility with
the design of the building. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-4.2.2 Structural Observation. Where structural observation is required, the inspection program shall
name the individual firms who are to perform structural observation and describe the stages of construction
at which structural observation is to occur. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-4.3 Information on Construction Documents. Construction documents shall be dimensioned and drawn
upon suitable material. Electronic media documents are permitted to be submitted when approved by the code
official. Construction documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the
work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of these codes and relevant laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations, as determined by the code official. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th
2009)
§ 6-4.3.1 Fire Protection System Shop Drawings. Fire protection system requirements may be
concurrently covered in the state Fire Code, Article 38A, ºº3-67 (State Fire Prevention Code, Public Safety
Article, §§6-101—6-202), and COMAR 29.06.01. The State Fire Code is enforced by the State Fire
Marshal or authorized fire official. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-4.3.2 Means of Egress. The construction documents shall show in sufficient detail the location,
construction, size and character of all portions of the means of egress in compliance with the provisions of
these codes. The construction documents shall designate the number of occupants to be accommodated on
every floor, and in all rooms and spaces. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-4.3.4 Exterior Wall Envelope. Construction documents for all buildings shall describe the exterior wall
envelope in sufficient detail to determine compliance with these codes. The construction documents shall
provide the details of the exterior wall envelope as required, including flashing, intersections with
dissimilar materials, corners, end details, control joints, intersections at roof, eaves, or parapets, means of
drainage, water-resistive membrane, and details around openings. The construction documents shall, only
as required by the code official, include manufacturing installation instructions that provide supporting
documentation that the proposed penetration and opening details described in the construction documents
maintain the weather resistance of the exterior wall envelope. The supporting documentation shall fully
describe the exterior wall system, which was tested, where applicable, as well as the test procedure used.
(Ordinance 562 effective November 8th2009)
§ 6-4.3.5 Site Plan. The construction documents submitted with the application for permit shall be
accompanied by a site plan, including existing and proposed structures on the site, distances from lot lines
and between buildings and dwellings, grades, including all utilities, water, sewer, electric, telephone; and it
shall be drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary line survey. In the case of demolition, the site plan
shall show the size and location of construction to be demolished and existing structures and construction
that are to remain on the site or plot. The code official is authorized to waive or modify the requirement for
a site plan when the application for permit is for alteration or repair or when otherwise warranted. If
applicable, the site plan shall first be submitted and approved by the Easton Planning and Zoning
Commission before submittal to the Building Inspection Division. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th
2009)
§ 6-4.3.5.1 Information for Construction in Areas Prone to Flooding. For buildings and structures in
flood hazard areas as established by the current revised edition of the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) as revised by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). (Ordinance 562 effective
November 8th 2009)
1. Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries, and flood zones, and the design flood
elevation, as appropriate.
2. The elevation of the proposed lowest floor, including basement; in areas of shallow flooding
(AO zones), the height of the proposed lowest floor, including basement, above the highest
adjacent grade; and if design flood elevations are not included on the community’s Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), the applicant shall obtain and reasonably utilize any design
flood elevation and floodway data available from other sources.
§ 6-4.3.6 Deferred Submittals. For the purpose of this section, deferred submittals are defined as those
portions of the design that are not submitted at the time of the application and that are to be submitted to the
code official within a specified period. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-4.3.6.1 Deferred Submittal Approval. Deferral of any submittal items shall have the prior
approval of the code official. The registered design professional in responsible charge shall list the
deferred submittals on the construction documents for review by the code official. Submittal
documents for deferred submittal items shall be submitted to the registered design professional in
responsible charge who shall review them and forward them to the code official with a notation
indicating that the deferred submittal documents have been reviewed and that they have been found to
be in general conformance with the design of the building. The deferred submittal items shall not be
installed until their design and submittal documents have been approved by the code official.
(Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-4.3.6.2 Manufacturer’s Installation Instructions. Manufacturer’s installation instructions as
required by these codes shall be submitted to the code official prior to the request for a required
inspection that involves those installation instructions and shall be available on the job site at the time
of inspection. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-4.4 Examination of Documents. The code official shall examine or cause to be examined the accompanying
construction documents and shall ascertain by such examinations, whether the construction indicated and
described is in accordance with the requirements of these codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. The
code official may decide to have an outside plan review professional review the plans for projects such as major
medical buildings, education institutions, etc. The costs for such outside plan review professional shall be
borne by the applicant. (Ordinance 562 effective November8th 2009)
§ 6-4.4.1 Approval of Construction Documents. When the code official issues a permit, the construction
documents shall be approved, in writing or by stamp, as “Reviewed for Code Compliance.” One set of
construction documents so reviewed shall be retained by the code official. The other set shall be returned
to the applicant, shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the code official.
(Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-4.4.2 Previous Approvals. These codes shall not require changes in the construction documents,
construction of designated occupancy of a structure for which a lawful permit has been heretofore issued or
otherwise lawfully authorized, and the construction of which has been pursued in good faith within 180
days after the effective date of these codes and has not been abandoned. (Ordinance 562 effective
November 8th 2009)
§ 6-4.4.3 Phased Approvals. The code official is authorized to issue a permit for the construction of
foundation or any other part of a building or structure before the construction documents for the whole
building or structure have been submitted, provided that adequate information and detailed statements have
been filed complying with pertinent requirements of these codes. The holder of such permit for the
foundation or other parts of a building or structure shall proceed at the holder’s own risk with the building
operation and without assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be granted. (Ordinance 562
effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-4.5 Amended Construction Documents. Work shall be installed in accordance with the reviewed
construction documents, and any changes made during construction that are not in compliance with the
approved construction documents shall be resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction
documents. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-4.6 Retention of Construction Documents. Construction documents shall be retained by the code official
for a period of not less than 180 days from date of completion of the permitted work, or as required by state or
local laws. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-5 Fees
§ 6-5.1 Payment of Fees. A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law have been paid. Nor shall
an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid. (Ordinance 562 effective
November 8th 2009)
§ 6-5.2 Schedule of Fees. On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems or
alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit, plan review, inspection, and re-inspection shall be paid as
required at the time of application, in accordance with the adopted schedule of fees as established by the Town
Council, which schedule of fees may be revised from time to time by resolution of the Town Council.
(Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-5.3 Building Permit Valuations. The applicant for a permit shall provide an estimated permit value at the
time of application. Such estimates shall include total value of work including electrical, mechanical,
plumbing, gas; building components and equipment, inclusive of materials and labor. Permit valuations will be
determined in accordance with the schedule of fees. Final building permit valuation shall be set by the code
official. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-5.4 Work Commencing Before Permit Issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building,
structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be
subject to an inspection violation and or municipal infraction that shall be in addition to the required permit
fees. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-5.5 Related Fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal or demolition for work
done in connection with or concurrently with the work authorized by a building permit shall not relieve the
applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law or ordinance
including but not limited to the following: plan review, floodplain management, forest conservation, sanitary
construction, sediment & erosion control, storm water management, wetlands, plumbing, electrical, gas,
mechanical, inspections, entrance, water & sewer connection, sign, weed & litter and zoning certificates both
within and not within the Town of Easton. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-5.6 Refunds. The code official is authorized to establish a refund policy. (Ordinance 562 effective
November 8th 2009)
§ 6-6 Inspections
§ 6-6.1 General. Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the code
official and such construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until
approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the
provisions of these codes or of other ordinances of the Town of Easton. Inspections presuming to give authority
to violate or cancel the provisions of these codes or of other ordinances of the Town of Easton shall not be
valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for
inspection purposes. Neither the code official nor the Town of Easton shall be liable for the expense entailed in
the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th
2009)
§ 6-6.2 Preliminary Inspection. Before issuing a permit, the code official is authorized to examine or cause to
be examined buildings and sites for which an application has been filed. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th
2009)
§ 6-6.3 Required Inspections. The code official, upon notification, shall make the inspections required upon an
issued permit. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-6.3.1 Required Electrical Inspection. All electrical installations, consisting of more than one singlephase
20 ampere electrical branch circuit installed over a period of 90 days, shall require an inspection of
the installation. In the event that an inspection is required for work that did not require a permit, the owner
shall have the same responsibilities as a holder of an electrical permit. (Ordinance 562 effective November
8th 2009)
§ 6-6.3.1 Partial Inspections. Partial Inspections shall require prior approval from the code official. The
project shall require an outline from the applicant of the desired inspection schedule and the manner in
which the required inspections will be completed by partial inspections. Additional inspections fees may
apply. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-6.4.1 Types of Inspections. For on-site construction, from time to time the code official, upon notification
from the permit holder or their agent, shall make or cause to be made any necessary inspections and shall either
approve that portion of the construction as completed or shall notify the permit holder or their agent wherein the
same fails to comply with these codes. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-6.4.1.1 Footing Inspection. Footing inspection shall be made after excavations for footings are complete
and reinforcing steel is in place. Materials for the footing shall be on the job, except where concrete is
ready mixed in accordance with ASTM C 94, the concrete need not be on the job. (Ordinance 562 effective
November 8th 2009)
§ 6-6.4.1.2 Foundation Inspection.
§ 6-6.4.1.2 Concrete Foundation Inspection. Foundation inspection for concrete foundation walls shall
be made after forms are erected, and reinforcing steel, plumbing, mechanical, and electrical systems
embedded within the walls is in place and supported, but before any grout or concrete is placed.
Inspection shall verify the correct size, location, spacing, and lapping of reinforcing. A second
inspection will be required for; sole and sill plate foundation anchorage, dampproofing, waterproofing,
drainage systems and wood foundations. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-6.4.1.2 Masonry Foundation Inspection. Foundation inspection for masonry foundation walls shall
be completed after all masonry for the foundation is complete, including all sole and sill plate
foundation anchorage. The foundation inspection shall include any special requirements for;
dampproofing, waterproofing, drainage systems and wood foundations. (Ordinance 562 effective
November 8th 2009)
§ 6-6.4.1.3 Concrete Slab and or Under-Floor Inspection. Concrete Slab and or Under Floor inspection
shall be made after vapor retarder, reinforcing steel, building service equipment, conduit, piping
accessories, other ancillary equipment and other components are in place that will be concealed by the slab
or floor. Inspection shall be made before any concrete is placed or floor sheathing installed, including the
sub-floor. The inspection shall include excavations for thickened slabs intended for the support of bearing
walls, partitions, structural supports, or equipment. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-6.4.1.4 Floodplain Floor Elevation Certification. For construction, additions and substantial
improvements to existing buildings in flood hazard areas, upon placement of the lowest floor, including the
basement, and prior to further vertical construction. The code official shall require certification of the
elevation of the lowest floor, prepared and sealed by a registered design professional to be submitted to the
Building Inspection Division. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-6.4.1.5 Frame and or Masonry Inspection. Framing and or Masonry inspection shall be made after all
framing, masonry, fire blocking, fire stopping, draft stopping, bracing, reinforcing, and sheathing are in
place and after the plumbing, mechanical and electrical rough inspections are approved, but prior to the
installation of insulation, vapor retarders and moisture barriers. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th
2009)
Exception: Moisture barriers may be in place provided that there are no components of a fireresistance
assembly or braced wall construction that needs to be inspected.
§ 6-6.4.1.6 Fire-Resistance-Rated and Braced Construction Assembly Inspection. Where fire-resistancerated
or braced construction assemblies are constructed, inspections shall be made after the first application
of components (i.e.: sheathing, lathing or gypsum board) are in place, but before any subsequent aspect of
the assembly is constructed that would conceal the applied components. Subsequent inspections as
necessary to inspect the application of all components of the construction assembly shall be required until
the complete construction assembly has been inspected, notwithstanding the protection of joints and
penetrations in fire-resistance-rated construction assemblies. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-6.4.1.7 Energy Efficiency Inspection. Energy Efficiency inspection shall be made to determine
compliance and shall include, but not be limited to, inspections for: building envelope insulation R and U
values, fenestration U values, duct system R values, and equipment efficiencies. (Ordinance 562 effective
November 8th 2009)
§ 6-6.4.1.8 Ceiling Close-In Inspection. Ceiling Close-In inspection shall be made after above ceiling
reinforcing steel and building service equipment, conduit, piping accessories and other ancillary equipment
items are in place, but before any ceiling systems are installed. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th
2009)
§ 6-6.4.1.9 Final Inspection. Final inspection shall be made after: the permitted work is complete, a final
site plan, connection of service utilities, certification of site improvements and special inspections final
reports, as required, have been received by the Building Inspection Division and the structure is ready for
occupancy. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-6.4.1.9.1 Final Site Plan. A civil engineer or surveyor shall provided, prior to the final inspection
request, a final survey of the property with all structures and site improvements located and sized as
constructed, including distances from property lines and finished grades. (Ordinance 562 effective
November 8th 2009)
§ 6-6.4.1.9.2 Connection of Service Utilities. The utilities shall have been connected and approved by
the utility agency, in accordance with the local utility tariffs, prior to the final inspection request. No
person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system
that is regulated by these codes for which a permit is required, until approved by the code official.
(Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-6.4.1.9.3 Certification of Site Improvements. The design engineer shall certify, prior to the final
inspection request, that all site improvements associated with a development project have been
constructed per the approved plans and in accordance with all applicable Town of Easton standards. In
the event deviations exist between the post construction improvements and the approved plans the
design professional must provide detailed clarification of the variation(s) and demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Town of Easton that the subject improvement(s) function appropriately and are in
accordance with all applicable Town of Easton standards. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th
2009)
§ 6-6.4.1.9.4 Special Inspections Final Report. Each special inspectors used by the owner or owner’s
agent shall provide, prior to the final inspection request, a final report documenting the required special
inspections and correction of any discrepancies noted in the inspections. (Ordinance 562 effective
November 8th 2009)
§ 6-6.4.1.10 Other Inspections. In addition to the inspections specified above, the code official is
authorized to make or require other inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the
provisions of these codes and other laws that are enforced by the Building Inspection Division. (Ordinance
562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-6.4.1.11 Special Inspections. Special inspections may be required for Steel Construction, Concrete
Construction, Masonry Construction, Wood Construction, Soils, Sprayed Fire-Resistant Materials, Exterior
Insulation and Finish Systems and or for Smoke Control. The owner or owner’s agent may be required to
employ one or more special inspectors to perform inspections during construction. Special inspection
reports shall be forwarded to the Building Inspection Division upon their completion, but within forty-eight
(48) hours from the time of the inspection. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-6.4.1.12 Plumbing Underground/Underslab Inspection. Underground/Underslab inspection shall be
made after trenches or ditches are excavated and bedded, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in
place. When excavated soil contains rocks, broken concrete, frozen chunks or other rubble that could
damage or break the piping or cause corrosive action, clean backfill shall be on the project site and used in
the backfilling of those trenches or ditches. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-6.4.1.13 Plumbing Rough-In Inspection. Rough-in inspection shall be made after the roof, framing,
fireblocking, firestopping, draftstopping and bracing is in place and all sanitary, storm and water
distribution piping and other components to be concealed are complete, and prior to concealment.
(Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-6.4.1.14 Plumbing Finished Inspection. Finished inspection shall be made after the plumbing fixtures
have been set, the water supply system is under working pressure and prior to concealment, for each fixture
ready for systems concealment. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-6.4.1.15 Plumbing Final Inspection. Final inspection shall be made after the permitted work is
complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected and the structure is ready for
occupancy. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-6.4.1.16 Fuel Gas Underground/Underslab Inspection. Underground/Underslab inspection shall be
made after trenches or ditches are excavated and bedded, piping is installed and before backfill is put in
place. When excavated soil contains rocks, broken concrete, frozen chunks or other rubble that could
damage or break the piping or cause corrosive action, clean backfill shall be on the project site and used in
the backfilling of those trenches or ditches. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-6.4.1.17 Fuel Gas Rough-In Inspection. Rough-in inspection shall be made after the roof, framing,
fireblocking, firestopping, draftstopping and bracing is in place and all gas distribution piping and other
components to be concealed are complete, and prior to concealment. (Ordinance 562 effective November
8th 2009)
§ 6-6.4.1.18 Fuel Gas Final Inspection. Final inspection shall be made after the permitted work is complete
and the structure is ready for occupancy. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-6.4.1.19 Mechanical Underground/Underslab Inspection. Underground/Underslab inspection shall be
made after trenches or ditches are excavated and bedded, piping, ducting and other components installed,
and before backfill is put in place. When excavated soil contains rocks, broken concrete, frozen chunks or
other rubble that could damage or break the piping or cause corrosive action, clean backfill shall be on the
project site and used in the backfilling of those trenches or ditches. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th
2009)
§ 6-6.4.1.20 Mechanical Rough-In Inspection. Rough-in inspection shall be made after the roof, framing,
fireblocking, firestopping, draftstopping and bracing is in place and all ducting and other components to be
concealed are complete, and prior to concealment. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-6.4.1.21 Mechanical Final Inspection. Final inspection shall be made after the permitted work is
complete and the structure is ready for occupancy. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-6.4.1.22 Electrical Underslab Inspections. Underslab inspection shall be made after trenches or ditches
are excavated and bedded, piping, conductors installed, and before backfill is put in place. Where excavated
soil contains rocks, broken concrete, frozen chunks or other rubble that could damage or break the raceway,
cable or conductors, or where corrosive action will occur, protection shall be provided in the form of
granular or selected material, approved running boards, sleeves or other means. (Ordinance 562 effective
November 8th 2009)
§ 6-6.4.1.23 Electrical Rough-In Inspections. Rough-in inspection shall be made after the roof, framing,
fireblocking and bracing are in place and all wiring and other components to be concealed are complete,
and prior to concealment. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-6.4.1.24 Electrical Final Inspection. Final inspection shall be made after the permitted work is complete
and the structure is ready for occupancy. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-6.4.1.25 Electrical Service Inspection. An electrical service inspection shall be made after the electrical
service has been roughed-in and a single circuit containing a minimum of one ground fault circuit
interrupter receptacle has been rough-in and completed. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-6.5 Inspection Agencies. The code official is authorized to accept reports from approved inspection
agencies, provided such agencies satisfy the requirements as to qualifications and reliability. The code official
may, in their discretion, require professional certification before accepting such reports. (Ordinance 562
effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-6.6 Inspection Requests. It shall be the duty of the holder of the permit or their duly authorized agent to
notify the code official when work is ready for inspection, to provide access to such work and means for
inspection of such work, for all required inspections. Inspection requests shall be made twenty-four hours in
advance of the work being ready for inspection. Requested inspections will be made on the next available
business day, prior to the end of business. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-6.7 Approval Required. Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection
without first obtaining the approval of the code official. The code official, upon notification, shall make the
requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed,
or shall notify the permit holder or an agent of the permit holder wherein the same fails to comply with these
codes. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or concealed
until authorized by the code official. The code official may impose a re-inspection fee, pursuant to the fee
schedule adopted by the Easton Town Council by ordinance or resolution, for each additional inspection
required until that portion of the construction complies with the building code. All re-inspections must be
corrected within thirty days. The following are additional reasons that a re-inspection fee may be imposed
including but not limited to: (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
1. Permit not posted on site.
2. Approved building plans not on premises.
3. Premises locked.
4. Lack of safe access into premises or between levels.
5. Previous violation not corrected.
6. Proceeding through phases of construction without requested required inspections.
7. Work to be inspected is not completed.
§ 6-7 Certificate of Occupancy
§ 6-7.1 Use and Occupancy. No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing
occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the code official has
issued a certificate of occupancy. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the Building Inspection
Division shall have received all required approval from the following office: Planning and Zoning, Engineering,
Easton Utilities, State Fire Marshals Office, Environmental Health, Soil Conservation Services, Maryland
Department of the Environment, State Highway Administration and Middle Department Inspection Agency.
All required inspections for building, grading, demolition, swimming pools, signage, fuel gas, plumbing,
mechanical, and electrical permits associated with the building structure or portion thereof shall have been
approved. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-7.2 Validity of Certificate of Occupancy. The issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed
to be a certificate for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of these codes or of any other
ordinance of the Town. Certificates presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of these
codes or other ordinances of the Town shall not be valid. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-7.3 Temporary Occupancy. The code official is authorized to issue a temporary certificate of occupancy
before the completion of the entire work covered by the permit, provided that such portions shall be occupied
safely, and both the State Fire Marshall and Environmental Health have agreed to the issuance of the temporary
occupancy. The code official shall set a time period during which the temporary certificate of occupancy is
valid. All temporary occupancy requests shall be in writing, notarized, and be accompanied by a statement
reciting the remaining work to be done, a schedule for the completion of such work and an authorization for the
right of entry for the code official prior to the end of the time period for the temporary certificate of occupancy.
(Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-7.4 Change in Use. It shall be unlawful to make any change in the use or occupancy of any structure or
portion thereof which would subject it to any special provisions of these codes without approval of the code
official, and the code official’s certification that such structure meets the intent of the provisions of law
governing building construction for the proposed new use and occupancy, and that such change of use does not
result in any greater hazard to the public safety or welfare. Additionally, a change in use shall be submitted to
the Town of Easton Planning and Zoning department for approval of the compliance with zoning regulations.
(Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-7.5 Certificate Issued. After the code official inspects the building or structure and finds no violations of
the provisions of these codes or other laws that are enforced by the department of building safety, the code
official shall issue a certificate of occupancy that shall contain the following: (Ordinance 562 effective
November 8th 2009)
1. The building permit number.
2. The address of the structure.
3. The name and address of the owner.
4. A description of that portion of the structure for which the certificate is issued.
5. A statement that the described portion of the structure has been inspected for compliance with the
requirements of these codes for the occupancy and division of occupancy and the use for which the
proposed occupancy is classified.
6. The name of the code official.
7. The edition of the code under which the permit was issued.
8. The use and occupancy.
9. The type of construction.
10. The design occupant load.
11. If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, whether the system is required.
12. Any special stipulations and conditions of the buildingpermit.
§ 6-7.6 Revocation. The code official is authorized to, in writing, suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy
or completion issued under the provisions of these codes wherever the certificate is issued in error, or on the
basis of incorrect information supplied, or where it is determined that the building or structure or portion thereof
is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of these codes. The code official is
authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a structure which are in violation of these codes or of any other
ordinances of the Town. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-8 Violations
§ 6-8.1 Unlawful Acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend,
repair, move, remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated by these codes, or
cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of these codes. The owner or
occupant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, or any architect, builder, contractor, agent, realtor,
or other person who commits, participates in or assists, any violation of the terms of the code may each be
chargeable with such violation. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-8.1.1 Continuing Violation. Each day that a violation continues after the issuance of a notice of
violation or order shall be a separate offense for the purpose of penalties specified. An inspection that
indicates that a violation continues to exist shall be prima facie proof of a continuing violation that has
existed since the prior inspection. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-8.1.2 Repeat Violation. A violation will be considered repeated if it is of the same nature, committed
by the same person, and occurs within three years from the last infraction. (Ordinance 562 effective
November 8th 2009)
§ 6-8.2 Notice of Violation. The code official shall serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible
for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, removal, demolition, use or occupancy of a building
or structure in violation of the provisions of these codes, or in violation of a detail statement or a plan approved
thereunder, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of these codes. Such order shall
direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. The posting of
written notice of violation on the property shall constitute notice to the permittee. (Ordinance 562 effective
November 8th 2009)
§ 6-8.3 Prosecution of Violation. If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the code official shall
request the legal counsel of the Town of Easton to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to
restrain, correct or abate such violation or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful use of the
building or structure in violation of the provisions of these codes or of the order or direction made pursuant
thereto. Legal action under the provisions of this section may be taken in addition to prosecution of a violation
of these codes as a municipal infraction and legal proceedings pursuant to this section shall in no way bar the
code official or his deputies, from citing a person in violation of the ordinance with a notice of municipal
infraction. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-8.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of these codes or shall fail to comply with
any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation
of an approved plan or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of
these codes, shall be guilty of an inspection violation and or a municipal infraction, punishable as promulgated
by the Town of Easton Code Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ordinance 562 effective November 8th2009)
§ 6-9 Stop Work Order
§ 6-9.1 Authority. Whenever the code official find any work regulated by these codes being performed in a
manner contrary to the provisions of these codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, the code official is
authorized to issue a stop work order. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-9.2 Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property
involved, or to the owner’s agent, or to the person doing the work, or posted at a conspicuous location at the
Property. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order
shall state the reason for the order, and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume
and the right to appeal and the time limit for an appeal to the Board of Appeals. (Ordinance 562 effective
November 8th 2009)
§ 6-9.3 Unlawful Continuance. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop
work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition,
shall be subject to penalties. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-10 Unsafe Structures And Equipment
§ 6-10.1 Conditions. Structures or existing equipment that are or hereafter become unsafe, unsanitary, or
deficient because of inadequate means of egress facilities, inadequate light and ventilation, or which constitute a
fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, or which involve illegal or improper
occupancy or inadequate maintenance, shall be deemed an unsafe condition. Unsafe structures shall be taken
down and removed or made safe, as the code official deems necessary and as provided for in this section. A
vacant structure that is not secured against entry shall be deemed unsafe. (Ordinance 562 effective November
8th 2009)
§ 6-10.1.1 Vacating Structures. When, in the opinion of the code official, there is actual and immediate
danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure or any part thereof which would endanger life, or
when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the building
or structure, the code official is hereby authorized and empowered to order and require the inmates and
occupants to vacate the same forthwith. The code official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such
building a notice reading as follows:"This Structure is Unsafe and its Use or Occupancy has been
Prohibited by the Code official." It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such building or structure
except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of demolishing the same. (Ordinance 562 effective
November 8th 2009)
§ 6-10.1.2 Temporary Safeguards. When, in the opinion of the code official, there is actual and immediate
danger of collapse or failure of a building or structure or any part thereof which would endanger life, the
code official shall cause the necessary work to be done to render such building or structure or part thereof
temporarily safe, whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted. (Ordinance 562
effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-10.1.3 Closing Streets. When necessary for the public safety, the code official shall temporarily close
sidewalks, streets, buildings and structures and places adjacent to such unsafe structures, and prohibit the
same from being used. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-10.2 Authority to Disconnect Service Utilities. The code official shall have the authority to authorize and/or
cause disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by these codes and the codes
referenced in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property or when
such utility connection has been made without the approval required. The code official shall notify the serving
utility, and wherever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the
decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant
of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter.
(Ordinance 562 effective November 8th2009)
§ 6-10.2.1 Temporary Connection. The code official shall have the authority to authorize the temporary
connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power. (Ordinance 562 effective
November 8th 2009)
§ 6-10.3 Record. The code official shall cause a report to be filed on an unsafe condition. The report shall state
the occupancy of the structure and the nature of the unsafe condition. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th
2009)
§ 6-10.4 Notice. If an unsafe condition is found, the code official shall serve on the owner, agent or person in
control of the structure, a written notice that describes the condition deemed unsafe and specifies the required
repairs or improvements to be made to abate the unsafe condition, or that requires the unsafe structure to be
demolished within a stipulated time. Such notice shall require the person thus notified to declare immediately
to the code official acceptance or rejection of the terms of the order. The posting of written notice on the
property shall constitute notice to the owner, agent, or person in control of the structure. (Ordinance 562
effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-10.5 Method of Service. Such notice shall be deemed properly served if a copy thereof is (a) delivered to
the owner personally; (b) sent by certified or registered mail addressed to the owner at the last known address
with the return receipt requested; or (c) delivered in any other manner as prescribed by local law. If the
certified or registered letter is returned showing that the letter was not delivered and other methods for
delivering notice to the owner have been unsuccessful, a copy of the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous
place in or about the structure affected by such notice. Service of such notice in the foregoing manner upon the
owner’s agent or upon the person responsible for the structure shall constitute service of notice upon the owner.
(Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-10.6 Restoration. A building or structure condemned by the code official is permitted to be restored to a
safe condition provided that change of use or occupancy is not contemplated nor compelled by reason of such
reconstruction or restoration; except that if the damage or cost of reconstruction or restoration is in excess of 50
percent of its replacement value, exclusive of foundations, such structure shall be made to comply in all
respects with the requirements for materials and methods of construction of structures hereafter erected.
(Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
§ 6-10.7 Emergency Repairs. For the purposes of this section, the code official shall employ the necessary
labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible. (Ordinance 562 effective
November 8th 2009)
§ 6-10.8 Costs of Emergency Repairs. Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid
from the treasury of the Town of Easton on certificate of the code official. The legal counsel of the Town of
Easton shall institute appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe building or structure
is or was located for the recovery of such costs. (Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009)
Article II: Building Code for Commercial, Residential and Industrial Buildings.
§ 6-11 Incorporation by Reference.
§ 6-11.1 International Building Code 2018. The International Building Code 2018, with the modifications
found in §6-11.2 of this article, is incorporated by reference. International Building Code 2018 shall be known
and may be cited as the Town of Easton Building Code for Commercial, Residential and Industrial Buildings.
(Ordinance 735 effective September 25, 2019, historical reference 16, 17, 25, 27, 33, 34, 41, 42, 44, 45, 71, 73,
76, 82, 86, 90, 93, 110, 115, 180, 238, 325, 405, 417, 448, 562, 567, 599, and 652)
§ 6-11.2 International Building Code Amendments. Amendments for the International Building Code are as
follows: (Ordinance 599 effective July 1st 2012, historical reference 562 and 567)
§ 6-11.2.1 Chapter 1. Administration. Delete entire chapter and replace with the following: (Ordinance 567
effective March 22, 2010, historical reference 562)
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of the Town of Easton, Maryland
hereinafter referred to as “this code.”
101.2 Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement,
enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and
demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings
or structures.
Exceptions:
1.Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses)
not more than three stories above grade plane in height with a separate means of egress and
their accessory structures shall comply with the Town of Easton, Building Code for
Residential One and Two Family Dwellings under Chapter 6, Article III.
2.Existing buildings undergoing repair, alterations or additions, and change of occupancy shall
comply with the Maryland Building Rehabilitation Code set forth in COMAR09.12.58.
3.Maintenance of all structures, dwellings and premises shall comply with the Town of Easton,
Minimum Property Maintenance Standards under Chapter11 of the Town of Easton Code.
101.2.1 Appendices. Provisions in Appendix C, GROUP U—Agricultural Buildings; Appendix
F, Rodent Proofing; Appendix G, Flood Resistant Construction; Appendix H, Signs; and
Appendix I, Patio Covers, are adopted as part of the International BuildingCode. (Ordinance 735
effective September 25, 2019, historical reference 562 and 567)
101.2.2 Additional Scope. In addition to the requirements contained in the International Building
Code the follow requirements shall be in addition to those in the International Building Code:
101.2.2.1 State Fire Prevention Code. Annotated Code of Maryland, Public Safety Article,
Title 6: State Fire Prevention Commission and State Fire Marshal, and COMAR 29.06.01, are
in addition to the requirements of the International Building Code. The State Fire Prevention
Code is enforced by the State FireMarshal.
101.2.2.2 State Safety Glazing. Annotated Code of Maryland, Public Safety Article, Title 12:
Building and Material Code; Other Safety Provisions, Subtitle 4: Safety Glazing, are in
addition to Glass and Glazing requirements of the International Building Code. In the event of
a conflict between the International Building Code and the Annotated Code of Maryland, the
requirements of the Annotated Code of Maryland prevail.
101.2.2.3 State Elevators Safety. Annotated Code of Maryland, Public Safety Article, Title
12: Building and Material Code; Other Safety Provisions, Subtitle 8: Elevator Safety, are in
addition to Elevators and Conveying Systems requirements of the International Building
Code. In the event of a conflict between the International Building Code and the Annotated
Code of Maryland, the requirements of the Annotated Code of Maryland prevail.
101.3 Administration. The Building Code for Residential Commercial, Residential and Industrial
Buildings are regulated by the Building Codes Administration under Article I of Chapter 6. (Ordinance
562 effective T.B.D.)
101.4 Intent. The purpose of this code is to establish the minimum requirements to safeguard the
public health, safety and general welfare through structural strength, means of egress, facilities,
stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, energy conservation, and safety to life and property
from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment.
101.5 Referenced Codes. The other codes listed in Sections 101.5.1 through 101.5.7 shall be
considered as reference only and shall be superceded by the current; Electrical, Gas, Mechanical,
Plumbing, Property Maintenance, Fire Prevention, and Energy codes as adopted by the Easton Town
Council, if any.
101.5.1 Electrical. The provisions of the NFPA 70 National Electrical Code shall apply to the
installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment,
appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto.
101.5.2 Gas. The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code shall apply to the installation of
gas piping from the point of delivery, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this
code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the
inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial
gas appliances and relatedaccessories.
101.5.3 Mechanical. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code shall apply to the
installations, repairs, and replacement of mechanical systems, including equipment, appliances,
fixtures, fitting and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air-conditioning and
refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy-related systems.
101.5.4 Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code shall apply to the
installation, alterations, repairs and replacement of plumbing systems, including equipment,
appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and where connected to a water or sewage system
and all aspects of a medical gas system. The provisions of the International Private Sewage
Disposal Code shall apply to private sewage disposal systems.
101.5.5 Property maintenance. The provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code
shall apply to existing structures and premises; equipment and facilities; light, ventilation, space
heating, sanitation, life and fire safety, hazards; responsibilities of owners, operators, and
occupants; and occupancy of existing premises and structures.
101.5.6 Fire Prevention. Delete.
101.5.7 Energy. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code shall apply to all
matters governing the design and construction of buildings for energyefficiency.
102.1 General. Where, in any specific case, different sections of this code specify different materials,
methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a
conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be
applicable.
102.2 Other Laws. The provisions of this code shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local,
state or federal law.
102.3 Application of References. References to chapters or section numbers, or to provisions not
specifically identified by number, shall be construed to refer to such chapter, section or provision of
this code.
102.4 Referenced Codes and Standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be
considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where
differences occur between provisions of this code and referenced codes and standards, the provisions
of this code shall apply.
Exception: The Easton Zoning Ordinance, shall safeguard the health, property and public welfare
by controlling the design, location, use or occupancy of all buildings and structures through the
regulated and orderly development of land and land use within Easton. In the event of a conflict
between the International Building Code and the Easton Zoning Ordinance, the requirements of
the Easton Zoning Ordinance shall prevail.
102.5 Partial Invalidity. In the event any part or provision of this code is held to be illegal or void,
this shall not have the effect of making void or illegal any of the other parts or provisions.
102.6 Existing Structures. The legal occupancy of any structure existing on the date of adoption of
this code shall be permitted to continue without change, irrespective of any enforcement provisions
which may be contained in this code, except as deemed necessary by the building official for the
general safety and welfare of the occupants and thepublic.
§ 6-11.2.2 Chapter 2. Definitions. Add definition to Section 202 for Marketplace Buildings:
Marketplace Buildings – Commercial. A one story freestanding structure; located on the same lot as
a commercial business, that is not greater than 120 square feet in floor area, and with an eave height of
12 feet or less, the use of which is complementary to that of the commercial business on the same lot.
(Ordinance 578 effective November 8th 2010, historical reference 562)
§ 6-11.2.3 Chapter 10 Means of Egress. Delete Section 1011.8 Verticle rise and replace with the following:
(Ordinance 566 effective March 22, 2010, Ordinance 599 effective July 1, 2012 and Ordinance 652 effective
July 1, 2015)
1011.8 Vertical rise. Stairways with a vertical rise larger than 12 feet (3658 mm) between floor levels
shall be provided with landings so that no vertical rise exceeds 12 feet. Stairways with a vertical rise
smaller than 5 feet (1524 mm) between floor levels shall be continuous.
§ 6-11.2.4 Chapter 10 Means of Egress. Delete Section 1011.12 Stairway to roof and replace with the
following: (Ordinance 566 effective March 22, 2010, Ordinance 599 effective July 1, 2012 and Ordinance
652 effective July 1, 2015)
1011.12 Stairway to roof. For building with unoccupiable roofs; one stairway, alternating tread
device or ships ladder shall extend to the roof surface for the following buildings;
1.Buildings four or more stories above grade plane.
2.Buildings where equipment and appliances are installed on roofs at a height exceeding 16 feet
(4877 mm) from grade plane.
Exception: If the roof has a slope steeper than four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33-percent
slope).
§ 6-11.2.5 Chapter 10. Means of Egress. Delete the exception under section 1011.12 Stairway to roof.
(Ordinance 652 effective July 1st 2015)
§ 6-11.2.6 Chapter 10. Means of Egress. Delete Section 1011.16 Ladders, and replace with the
following: (Ordinance 652 effective July 1st 2015)
1011.16 Ladders. Permanent ladders shall not serve as a part of the means of egress from occupied
spaces within a building. Permanent ladders shall be permitted to provide access to elevated levels in
Group U that are not open to the general public and elevator pits.
1011.16.1 Rise of ladders. Ladders used for access shall not have a vertical rise greater than 30
feet (9144 mm) between floor levels or landings.
1011.16.6.1 Offsets and landings of ladders. Ladders over 30 feet (9144 mm) in height
shall be provided with offset sections and landings capable of withstanding 100 pounds per
square foot (488.2 kg/ m2).
1011.16.6.2 Offsets and intermediate landings dimension. Landing dimensions shall be not
less than 18 inches (457 mm) and not less than the width of the ladder served.
1011.16.6.3 Offsets and landings guards. A guard shall be provided on all open sides of the
offsets and landings and shall comply with Section 1015.
1011.16.2 Landing required. The ladder shall be provided with a clear and unobstructed floor or
landing at the top and bottom of each ladder, having a minimum dimension of 30 inches (762 mm)
by 30 inches (762 mm) centered on the ladder.
1011.16.3 Side railings of ladders. There shall be not less than 18 inches (457 mm) between
rails.
1011.16.4 Side railings extension of ladders. The side railing shall extend above the elevated
levels by not less than 30 inches (762 mm).
1011.16.5 Rungs of ladders. Rungs shall have a diameter not less than 0.75-inch (19 mm) and be
capable of withstanding a 300-pound (136.1 kg) load.
1011.16.6 Rung spacing of ladders. Ladders shall have rung spacing not to exceed 14 inches
(356 mm) on center.
1011.16.7 Toe spacing of ladders. Ladders shall have a toe spacing not less than 6 inches (152
mm) deep.
1011.16.8 Climbing clearance of ladders. . The distance from the centerline of the rungs to the
nearest permanent object on the climbing side of the ladder shall be not less than 30 inches (762
mm) measured perpendicular to the rungs. A minimum clear width of 15 inches (381 mm) shall be
provided on both sides of the ladder measured from the midpoint of and parallel with the rungs.
These distances shall be maintained clear.
Exception: Where cages or wells are installed.
1011.16.9 Corrosion. Ladders shall be protected against corrosion by approved means.
1011.16.10 Access Protection. Ladders shall be protected to prevent unauthorized access.
§ 6-11.2.7 Chapter 11. Accessibility. Chapter 11 is hereby deleted and replaced with the Maryland
Accessibility Code set forth in COMAR 09.12.53. (Ordinance 735 effective September 25, 2019,
historical reference 448, 562, and 567)
§ 6-11.2.8 Chapter 13 Energy Efficiency. Chapter 13 Energy Efficiency is hereby deleted and replaced
with the Town of Easton, Energy Code under Chapter 6 Article V. (Ordinance 567 effective March 22,
2010, historical reference 448, 562)
§ 6-11.2.9 Chapter 16 Structural Design. Delete Section 1612.3 Establishment of flood hazard areas and
replace with the following: (Ordinance 652 effective July 1st 2015, historical reference 566)
1612.3 Establishment of flood hazard areas. To establish flood hazard areas , the applicable
governing authority shall adopt a flood hazard map and supporting data. The flood hazard map shall
include, at a minimum, areas of special flood hazard as identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in an engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for the Town of
Easton," dated August 5th 2013 previously March 27th 1984, as amended or revised with the
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM)
and related supporting data along with any revisions thereto. The adopted flood hazard map and
supporting data are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this section.
§ 6-11.2.10 Chapter 18 Soils and Foundations. Delete Section 1809.5 Frost protection and replace with
the following: (Ordinance 566 effective March 22, 2010)
1809.5 Frost protection. Except where otherwise protected from frost, foundations and other
permanent supports of buildings and structures shall be protected from frost by one or more of the
following methods:
1. Extending below the frost line of the locality;
2. Constructing in accordance with ASCE 32; or
3. Erecting on solid rock.
Exceptions:
1. Free-standing buildings meeting all of the following conditions shall not be required to be
protected:
1.1. Assigned to Occupancy Category I, in accordance with Section 1604.5;and
1.2. Area of 400 square feet or less; and
1.3. Dimensions of 20’-0” or less in all directions; and
1.4. Eave height of 10 feet or less; and
1.5. Shallow foundations shall not bear on frozen soil unless such frozen condition is of a
permanent character.
2. Marketplace Buildings meeting all of the following conditions shall not be required to be
protected:
2.1. Area of 120 square feet or less; and
2.2. Eave height of 12 feet or less; and
2.3. Not permanently fixed to the ground by a foundation; and
2.4 Installed on a flat and level surface; and
2.5 Anchored to the ground by means of screw anchors or other anchor device to prevent
overturning in high winds.
§ 6-11.2.11 Chapter 27 Electrical. Chapter 27 Electrical is hereby deleted and replaced with the Town of
Easton, Electrical Code under Chapter 6 Article IV. (Ordinance 567 effective March 22, 2010, historical
reference 448, 562)
§ 6-11.2.12 Chapter 28 Mechanical Systems. Chapter 28 Mechanical Systems is hereby deleted and
replaced with the Town of Easton, Mechanical Code. (Ordinance 599 effective July 1st 2012)
§ 6-11.2.13 Chapter 29 Plumbing Systems. Chapter 29 Plumbing Systems is hereby deleted and replaced
with the Town of Easton, Plumbing Code. (Ordinance 567 effective March 22, 2010, historical reference
448, 562)
§ 6-11.2.14 Chapter 31. Special Construction. Chapter 31 Special Construction Section 3103.1 General,
3103.1.1 Conformance, 3103.1.2 Permit Required and Section 3103.4 Means of Egress are hereby deleted,
and replaced with the following: (Ordinance 578 and 652 effective November 8th 2010 and July 1st 2015)
3103.1 General. The provisions of this section shall apply to all temporary structures and uses.
3103.1.1 Conformance. Temporary structures and uses shall conform to the chapters for;
structural design, fire and smoke protection features, interior finishes, fire protection systems,
means of egress, accessibility and interior environment requirements to ensure public health,
safety and general welfare.
Exception: Marketplace buildings may forgo the interior environment requirements for
artificial light, sanitary and temperature controls by limiting the durational use of the building.
3103.1.2 Marketplace Buildings. Marketplace Buildings are habitable only during daylight
hours for the periods from May 16th thru September 30th.
Exception: Marketplace Building may be occupied for;
1. Additional periods of the year if heating facilities and energy efficiency details are
provided complying with the Energy Conservation, Mechanical and Property
Maintenance Codes.
2. Additional hours of the day if electrical systems are provided complying with the
Electrical Code.
3103.1.3 Marketplace Buildings. Marketplace building shall be occupied only by employees for
the protection from the elements and for point of sales transactions only.
Exception: Marketplace Building may be occupied for the; preparation and or sale of food
and beverages as a Food Service Facility if; the Talbot County Environmental Health Office
has issued a valid license for compliance with COMAR 10.15.03 and the plumbing systems
complies with applicable State and Town plumbing codes.
Article III: Building Code for Residential One and Two Family Dwellings
§ 6-12 Incorporation by Reference.
§ 6-12.1 International Residential Code 2018. The International Residential Code 2018, with the
modifications found in §6-12.2 of this article, is incorporated by reference. The International Residential Code
2018 shall be known and may be cited as the Town of Easton Building Code for One and Two Family
Dwellings. (Ordinance 736 effective September 25, 2019, historical reference 16, 17, 25, 27, 33, 34, 41, 42, 44,
45, 71, 73, 76, 82, 86, 90, 93, 110, 115, 180, 238, 325, 405, 417, 448, 562, 566, 600, and 653)
§ 6-12.2 International Residential Code Amendments. Amendments for the International Residential Code
are as follows: (Ordinance 600 effective July 1st 2012, historical reference 562 and 566)
§ 6-12.2.1 Part I Administrative, Chapter 1. Part I Administrative, Chapter 1 of the International
Residential Code is deleted and replaced with the following: (Ordinance 566 effective March 22, 2010 and
Ordinance 653 effective July 1st 2015, historical reference 448, 562)
R101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Town of Easton, Building Code for One and
Two Family Dwellings and shall be cited as such and will be referred to herein as “this code.”
R101.2 Scope. The provisions of the International Residential Code for One and Two Family
Dwellings shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair,
equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of detached one and
two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories
in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures.
Exception: The following shall be permitted to be constructed in accordance with this code
where provided with a residential fire sprinkler complying with Section P2904.
1. Live/work units located in townhouses and complying with the requirements of
Section 419 of the International Building Code.
2. Owner-occupied lodging houses with five or fewer guestrooms.
3. A care facility with five or fewer persons receiving custodial care within a
dwelling unit.
4. A care facility with five or fewer persons receiving medical care within a
dwelling unit.
5. A care facility for five or fewer persons receiving care that are within a single-family
dwelling.
R101.3 Purpose. The purpose of this code is to establish the minimum requirements to safeguard life
or limb, health and public welfare.
R101.4 Administration. The Building Code for Residential Commercial, Residential and Industrial
Buildings are regulated by the Building Codes Administration under Article I of Chapter 6. (Ordinance
562 effective T.B.D.)
R102.1 General. Where, in any specific case, different sections of this code specify different
materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where
there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement
shall be applicable.
R102.2 Other laws. The provisions of this code shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local,
state or federal law.
R102.3 Application of References. References to chapters or section numbers, or to provisions not
specifically identified by number, shall be construed to refer to such chapter, section or provision of
this code.
R102.4 Referenced Codes. The other codes listed in Sections R102.4.1 through R101.4.7 shall be
considered as reference only and shall be superceded by the current; Electrical, Gas, Mechanical,
Plumbing, Property Maintenance, Fire Prevention, and Energy codes as adopted by the Easton Town
Council, if any.
Exception: Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the conditions of the listing of
the equipment or appliance, the conditions of the listing and appliances, the conditions of the
listing and manufacturer’s instructions shall apply.
R102.4.1 Electrical. The provisions of the ICC Electrical Code shall apply to the installation of
electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures,
fittings and appurtenances thereto.
R102.4.2 Gas. The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code shall apply to the installation of
gas piping from the point of delivery, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this
code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the
inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial
gas appliances and related accessories.
R102.4.3 Mechanical. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code shall apply to the
installations, repairs, and replacement of mechanical systems, including equipment, appliances,
fixtures, fitting and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air-conditioning and
refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy-related systems.
R102.4.4 Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code shall apply to the
installation, alterations, repairs and replacement of plumbing systems, including equipment,
appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and where connected to a water or sewage system
and all aspects of a medical gas system. The provisions of the International Private Sewage
Disposal Code shall apply to private sewage disposal systems.
R102.4.5 Property Maintenance. The provisions of the International Property Maintenance
Code shall apply to existing structures and premises; equipment and facilities; light, ventilation,
space heating, sanitation, life and fire safety, hazards; responsibilities of owners, operators, and
occupants; and occupancy of existing premises and structures.
R102.4.6 Fire Prevention. Delete
R102.4.7 Energy. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code shall apply to
all matters governing the design and construction of buildings for energy efficiency.
R102.5 Appendices. The Town of Easton shall adopt the following appendices: Appendix A Sizing
and Capacities of Gas Piping; Appendix B Sizing of Venting Systems Serving Appliances Equipped
with Draft Hoods, Category I Appliances and Appliances Listed for Use with Type B Vents; Appendix
C Exit Terminals of Mechanical Draft and Direct-Vent Venting Systems; Appendix D Recommended
Procedure for Safety Inspection of an Existing Appliance Installation; Appendix F Radon Control
Methods; Appendix G Piping Standards for Various Applications; Appendix H Patio Covers; with
respect to Appendix I, Private Sewage Disposal systems that are specifically approved or legally exist
within the Town of Easton shall conform to the provisions, inspections and requirements of the Talbot
County Health Department; Appendix K Sound Transmission; Appendix M Home Day Care-R- 3
Occupancy; Appendix N Venting Methods; Appendix O Automatic Vehicular Gates; Appendix P
Sizing of Water Piping System; Appendix Q Tiny Houses; Appendix R Light Straw–Clay
Construction; Appendix S Strawbale Construction; and Appendix T Solar-Ready Provisions -
Detached One and Two Family Dwellings and Townhouses. (Ordinance 736 effective September 25,
2019, historical reference 653)
R102.6 Partial Invalidity. In the event any part or provision of this code is held to be illegal or void,
this shall not have the effect of making void or illegal any of the other parts or provisions.
R102.7 Existing Structures. The legal occupancy of any structure existing on the date of adoption of
this code shall be permitted to continue without change, irrespective of any enforcement provisions
which may be contained in this code, except as deemed necessary by the building official for the
general safety and welfare of the occupants and the public.
R102.7.1 Additions, alterations or repairs. Additions , alterations or repairs to any structure shall
conform to the requirements for a new structure without requiring the existing structure to comply with
all of the requirements of this code, unless otherwise stated. Additions , alterations or repairs shall not
cause an existing structure to become unsafe or adversely affect the performance of the building.
§ 6-12.2.2 Chapter 2. Definitions. Amend the definition of Accessory Structure included under Section
R202 to read as follows:
Accessory Structure - Residential. A freestanding structure; located on the same lot, that is not
greater than 1,250 square feet in floor area, and with an eave height of 18 feet or less, and not over
two stories in height, the use of which is accessory to and incidental to that of the dwelling on the
same lot. Examples include; garages, garden sheds, gazebos, playhouses, pool houses and tool
sheds. (Ordinance 578 effective November 8th 2010, historical reference 562)
§ 6-12.2.3 Chapter 3. Building Planning. Insert the following values into Table R301.2(1) (Ordinance
653 effective July 1st 2015, historical reference 448, 562, 566 and 600)
Groun
d
Snow
Load
Wind Speed
Seismic
Design
Categoryf
Subject to Damage From
Winter
Design
Temp.e
Ice Barrier
Underlayment
Requiredh
Flood Hazardsg
Air
Freezin
g Indexi
Mean
Annua
l
Tempj
Speed
d
(mph)
Topographi
c Effectsk
Special
Wind
Regionl
Wind-
Borne Debris
Zonem
Weatheringa
Frostlin
e
Depthb
Termitec
30 psf 115 No No No A Severe 24
inches
Moderate to
Heavy 10° F No
(a) 17 Sept 1984
(b) 27 March
1984 and 5
August 2013
(c) Footnote a.
1500
Less or 55° F
Footnote a. Firm Panel Numbers; 24041CIND0A, 24041C0180C, 24041C0185C, 24041C0186C, 24041C0187C, 24041C0188C, 24041C0189C,
24041C0191C, 24041C0193C, 24041C0302C and 24041C0306C effective on 5th August 2013
§ 6-12.2.4 Chapter 3. Building Planning. Delete Section R311.7.6 Landings for stairways and its exception
and replace with the following: (Ordinance 736 effective September 25, 2019, historical reference 448, 562,
566, and 600)
R311.7.6 Landings for stairways. There shall be a floor or landing at the top and bottom of each
stairway. Stairways with a vertical rise larger than 12 feet (3658 mm) between floor levels shall be
provided with a with landings so that no vertical rise exceeds 12 feet. Stairways with a vertical rise
smaller than 5 feet (1524 mm) between floor levels shall be continuous. The width of each landing
shall not be less than the width of the stairway served. Every landing shall have a minimum dimension
of 36 inches (914 mm) measured in the direction of travel.
Exception: A floor or landing is not required at the top of an interior stairway, including those in an
enclosed garage, provided a door does not swing over the stairway.
§ 6-12.2.5 (Reserved) (Ordinance 736 effective September 25, 2019, historical reference 448, 562, 566, and
600)
R311.7.8 Handrails. Handrails shall be provided on at least one side of stairways consisting of three
or more risers.
§ 6-12.2.6 Chapter 3. Building Planning. Delete Section R311.7.8.4 Continuity and replace with the
following: (Ordinance 736 effective September 25, 2019, historical reference 448, 562, 566, and 600)
R311.7.8.2 Continuity. All required handrails shall be continuous the full length of the stairway
from a point directly above the top riser to a point directly above the lowest riser of the stairway.
Handrail ends shall be returned to the wall or shall terminate in newel posts or safety terminals.
Handrails adjacent to a wall shall have a space of not less than 1 1/2 inch (38 mm) between the
wall and the handrails.
§ 6-12.2.7 Chapter 4. Foundations. Delete Section R403.1.4.1 Frost Protection and replace with the
following: (Ordinance 566 effective March 22, 2010)
R403.1.4.1 Frost protection. Except where otherwise protected from frost, foundation walls, piers and
other permanent supports of buildings and structures shall be protected from frost by one or more of
the following methods:
1. Extended below the frost line specified in TableR301.2.(1);
2. Constructing in accordance with Section R403.3;
3. Constructing in accordance with ASCE 32; or
4. Erected on solid rock.
Exceptions:
1. Protection of freestanding accessory structures with an area of 400 square feet (37 m2) or
less, dimensions of 20’-0” or less in all directions and with an eave height of 10 feet (3048
mm) or less shall not be required.
2. Decks not supported by a dwelling need not be provided with footings that extend below
the frost line.
Footings shall not bear on frozen soil unless the frozen condition is permanent.
§ 6-12.2.8 Chapter 4. Foundations. Delete the exception under Section R405.1 Concrete or masonry
foundations. (Ordinance 566 effective March 22, 2010)
§ 6-12.2.9 Chapter 4. Foundations. Delete Section R405.2.3 Drainage systems and replace with the
following: (Ordinance 566 effective March 22, 2010, historical reference 448, 562)
R405.2.3 Drainage system. In all soil types, a sump shall be provided to drain the porous layer
and footings. The sump shall be at least 24 inches (610 mm) in diameter or 20 inches square
(0.0129 mm), shall extend at least 24 inches (610 mm) below the bottom of the basement floor and
shall be capable of positive gravity or mechanical drainage to remove any accumulated water. The
drainage system shall discharge into an approved storm sewer system or to daylight.
§ 6-12.2.10 Chapter 4. Foundations. Add Section R405.3 Foundations with crawl space. (Ordinance 566
effective March 22, 2010 and Ordinance 653 effective July 1, 2015)
R405.3 Foundations with crawl space. In all soil types, a sump shall be provided to drain the crawl
space. The sump shall be a least 24 inches (610 mm) in diameter or 20 inches square (0.0129 mm),
shall extend at least 24 inches (610 mm) below the bottom of the crawl space and shall be capable of
positive gravity or mechanical drainage to remove any accumulated water. The drainage system shall
discharge into an approved storm sewer system or to daylight.
§ 6-12.2.11 Part IV Energy Conservation, Chapter 11. Part IV Energy Conservation, Chapter 11 is hereby
deleted and replaced with the Town of Easton, Energy Code under Chapter 6 Article V. (Ordinance 566
effective March 22, 2010)
§ 6-12.2.12 Part V Mechanical, Chapter 12 through 23. Part V Mechanical, Chapter 12 through 23 is
hereby deleted and replaced with the Town of Easton, Mechanical Code under Chapter 6 Article VII.
(Ordinance 600 effective July 1st 2012, historical reference 566)
§ 6-12.2.13 Part VI Fuel Gas, Chapter 24. Part VI Fuel Gas, Chapter 24 is hereby deleted and replaced
with the Town of Easton, Fuel Gas Code under Chapter 6 Article VI. (Ordinance 600 effective July 1st 2012,
historical reference 566)
§ 6-12.2.14 Part VII Plumbing, Chapters 25 through 33. Part VII, Chapter 25 through 33 is hereby
deleted and replaced with the Town of Easton, Plumbing Code under Chapter 6 Article VIII. (Ordinance
600 effective July 1st 2012, historical reference 448, 562 and 566)
§ 6-12.2.15 Part VIII Electrical, Chapter 34 thru 43. Part VIII, Chapter 34 through 43 is hereby deleted
and replaced with the Town of Easton, Electrical Code under Chapter 6 Article IV. (Ordinance 566
effective March 22, 2010 and Ordinance 600 effective July 1st 2012, historical reference 448, 562)
Article IV: Electrical Code
§ 6-13 Incorporation by Reference.
§ 6-13.1 NFPA 70 National Electrical Code 2017. The NFPA 70 National Electrical Code 2017, with the
modifications found in §6-13.2 of this article, is incorporated by reference. (Ordinance 737 effective September 25,
2019, historical reference 504, 601, and 654)
§ 6-13.2 NFPA 70 National Electrical Code Amendments. Amendments for the NFPA 70 National Electrical
Code are as follows: (Ordinance 601 effective July 1st 2012)
§ 6-13.2.1 Chapter A. Scope and Administration. Add Chapter A Scope and Administration Section 80.1
Title to read as follows: (Ordinance 601 effective July 1st 2012)
80.1 Title. The NFPA 70 National Electrical Code shall be known and may be cited as the Town of Easton,
Electrical Code. It is referenced within as this code.
§ 6-13.2.2 Chapter A. Scope and Administration. Add Section 80.2 Scope to read as follows: (Ordinance 601
effective July 1st 2012, Ordinance 547 effective July 1st 2009 and Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009
historical reference 537)
80.2 Scope. The this code shall regulate the design, construction, installation, alteration, repairs, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of electrical systems and equipment.
§ 6-13.2.3 Chapter A. Scope and Administration. Add Section 80.3 Applicability to read as follows:
(Ordinance 601 effective July 1st 2012, Ordinance 547 effective July 1st 2009 and Ordinance 562 effective
November 8th 2009 historical reference 537)
80.3 Applicability. The provisions of the Town of Easton Electrical Code shall apply to all matters
affecting or relating to structures and premises, as hereinafter provide:
80.3.1 New Installations. This Code applies to all new installations.
80.3.2 Existing Installations. Existing electrical installations that do not comply with the provisions of
this Code shall be permitted to be continued in use unless the Town of Easton determines that the lack
of conformity with this Code presents an imminent danger to occupants. Where changes are required
for correction of hazards, a reasonable amount of time shall be given for compliance, depending on the
degree of the hazard.
80.3.3 Repairs Alterations and Additions. Repairs, alteration and additions to electrical systems and
equipment shall conform to that required for new electrical systems and equipment without requiring
that the existing electrical systems or equipment to comply with all of the requirements of this Code.
Repairs, alteration and additions shall not cause existing electrical systems or equipment to become
unsafe, hazardous or overloaded.
§ 6-13.2.4 Chapter A. Scope and Administration. Add Section 80.4 Administration to read as follows:
(Ordinance 601 effective July 1st 2012)
80.4 Administration. The Electrical Code is regulated by the Building Codes Administration under Article
I of Chapter 6.
§ 6-13.2.5 Chapter A. Scope and Administration. Add Section 80.5 Applications and Permits to read as
follows: (Ordinance 601 effective July 1st 2012, Ordinance 547 effective July 1st 2009 and Ordinance 562
effective November 8th 2009 historical reference 537)
80.5 Applications and Permits. Applications and permits shall be obtained from the Building Inspection
Division. Permit fees, if any, shall be paid prior to issuance of the permit. Issued permits shall be kept on
the premises designated therein at all times and shall be readily available for inspection by the Building
Inspection Division.
80.5.1 Applications. Application for a permit shall be made to the Building Inspection Division in
such form or forms as the Building Inspection Division shall from time to time designate and shall be
accompanied by such plans or specifications as prescribed by the Building Inspection Division.
80.5.2 Commencement of Work. Work shall not be commenced on any electrical system, equipment
or connection to a Public Utility Company thereto in the town until the owner or owner's licensed
electrician shall have made application for a permit and, if required, such permit shall have been
issued.
Exception: Where repair or replacement of electrical systems or equipment must be performed in
an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted within the next working business
day of the Building Inspection Division.
§ 6-13.2.6 Chapter A. Scope and Administration. Add Section 80.5 Requirements for plans and
specifications to read as follows: (Ordinance 601 effective July 1st 2012, Ordinance 547 effective July 1st 2009
and Ordinance 562 effective November 8th 2009 historical reference 537)
80.5 Requirements for Plans and Specification. The Building Inspection Division may require
construction documents, engineering calculations, diagrams, schedules and other data for the proposed
work when in their discretion such requirement is deemed necessary. Such plans and specifications shall be
filed in duplicate with the Building Inspection Division at the time such application for permit is made.
Article V: Energy Codes.
§ 6-14 Incorporation by Reference.
§ 6-14.1 International Energy Conservation Code 2018. The International Energy Conservation Code 2018,
with the modifications found in §6-14.2 of this article, is incorporated by reference. (Ordinance 738 effective
September 25, 2019, historical reference 90, 403, 568, 602, and 655)
§ 6-14.2 International Energy Conservation Code Amendments. Amendments for the International Energy
Conservation Code are as follows: (Ordinance 602 effective July 1st 2012, historical reference 568)
§ 6-14.2.1 Chapter 1. Administration. Delete Section C101.1 and R101.1 Title and replace with the
following: (Ordinance 602 effective July 1st 2012, historical reference 568)
C101.1 or R101.1 Title. The International Energy Conservation Code shall be known and may be
cited as the Town of Easton, Energy Code. It is referenced within as this code.
§ 6-14.2.2 Chapter 1. Administration. Add Section C101.2.1 and R101.2.1 Additional Scope. (Ordinance
602 effective July 1st 2012, historical reference 568)
C101.2.1 or R101.2.1 Additional Scope. Additional requirements concerning energy conservation for
buildings and structures may be required by the Energy Conservation Building Standards, Public
Utility Companies Article, §7-401 thru §7-408 of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
§ 6-14.2.3 Chapter 1. Administration. Delete Section C102.1.1 and R102.1.1 Above code programs.
(Ordinance 602 effective July 1st 2012, historical reference 568)
§ 6-14.2.4 Chapter 1. Administration. Delete, Part 2 Administration and Enforcement for both the
Commercial Provisions and the Residential Provisions and replace with the following: (Ordinance 602
effective July 1st 2012, historical reference 568)
C103.1 or R103.1 Administration. The Energy Code are regulated by the Building Codes
Administration under Article I of Chapter 6.
§ 6-14.2.5 Chapter 2. Definitions. Delete Section C201.3 and R201.3 Terms defined in other codes, and
replace with the following: (Ordinance 602 effective July 1st 2012, historical reference 568)
C201.3 and R201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Terms that are not defined in this code but are
defined in the International Building Code, International Fuel Gas Code , International Mechanical
Code , International Plumbing Code or the International Residential Code shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in those codes.
§ 6-14.2.6 Chapter 3. Climate Zones. Delete entire Sections C301 and R301, Figures C301.1 and R301.1
and Tables C301.1, C301.3(1), C301.3(2), R301.1, R301.3(1) and R301.3(2) and replace with the
following: (Ordinance 602 effective July 1st 2012, historical reference 568)
C301.1 and R301.1 General. The climate zone for the Town of Easton used in determining the
applicable requirements from Chapters 4 for both the Commercial Provisions and the Residential
Provisions shall be 4A.
§ 6-14.2.7 Chapter 4. Commercial Energy Efficiency. Add Item 12 Hotel Guest Rooms to Section
C405.2.1 (Ordinance 738 effective September 25, 2019, historical reference 655)
§ 6-14.2.8 Chapter 4. Commercial Energy Efficiency. Add Section C403.4.2.2.1 Hotel Guest Room.
(Ordinance 738 effective September 25, 2019, historical reference 655)
C403.4.2.2.1 Hotel Guest Rooms: A master control device may also control the heating, ventilation,
or air conditioning default settings in hotel guest rooms 30 minutes after a room has been vacated by,
increasing the set temperature by at least 3 degrees Fahrenheit when in the air conditioning mode; or
decreasing the set temperature by at least 3 degrees Fahrenheit when in the heating mode.
Article VI: Fuel Gas Codes.
§ 6-15 Incorporation by Reference.
§ 6-15.1 International Fuel Gas Code 2015. The International Fuel Gas Code 2015, with the modifications
found in §6-15.2 of this article, is incorporated by reference. (Ordinance 656 effective July 1st 2015, Historical
referance 603)
§ 6-15.2 International Fuel Gas Code Amendments. Amendments for the International Mechanical Code are
as follows: (Ordinance 603 effective July 1st 2012)
§ 6-15.2.1 Chapter 1. Scope and Administration. Delete Section 101.1 Title and replace with the
following: (Ordinance 603 effective July 1st 2012)
101.1 Title. The International Fuel Gas Code shall be known and may be cited as the Town of Easton,
Fuel Gas Code. It is referenced within as thiscode.
§ 6-15.2.2 Chapter 1. Scope and Administration. Delete Section 101.2 Scope and it Exception and
replace with the following: (Ordinance 603 effective July 1st 2012)
101.2 Scope. This code shall apply to the installation of fuel-gas piping systems, fuel gas appliances,
gaseous hydrogen systems and related accessories in accordance with Sections 101.2.1 through
101.2.5.
Exceptions: The requirements herein do not apply to work areas subject to the Maryland Building
Rehabilitation Code as adopted by the Department of Housing and Community Development under
Public Safety Article, §12-1004, Annotated Code of Maryland, except as provided by that Code.
§ 6-15.2.3 Chapter 1. Scope and Administration. Delete Section 101.3 Appendices and replace with the
following: (Ordinance 603 effective July 1st 2012 and Ordinance 656 effective July 1, 2015)
101.3 Appendices. Provisions in the Appendices shall not apply unless specifically adopted.
Provisions in the Appendices A, B and C are incorporatedherein.
§ 6-15.2.4 Chapter 1. Scope and Administration. Delete, Part 2 Administration and Enforcement and
replace with the following: (Ordinance 603 effective July 1st 2012)
103.1 Administration. The Fuel Gas Code is regulated by the Building Codes Administration under
Article I of Chapter 6.
§ 6-15.3 NFPA 58 Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code 2014. The NFPA 58 Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code 2014,
with the modifications found in §6-15.4 of this article, are incorporated by reference. (Ordinance 656 effective
July 1st 2015, Historical referance 603)
§ 6-15.4 NFPA 58 Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code Amendments. Amendments for the NFPA 58 Liquefied
Petroleum Gas Code are as follows: (Ordinance 603 effective July 1st 2012)
§ 6-15.4.1 Chapter 1. Scope and Administration. Add Section 1.0 Title to read as follows: (Ordinance
603 effective July 1st 2012)
1.0 Title. The NFPA 58 Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code shall be known and may be cited as the Town
of Easton, Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code. It is referenced within as this code.
§ 6-15.4.2 Chapter 1. Scope and Administration. Delete, Section 1.7 Enforcement and replace with the
following: (Ordinance 603 effective July 1st 2012)
1.7 Administration. The Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code is regulated by the Building Codes
Administration under Article I of Chapter 6.
Article VII: Mechanical Codes.
§ 6-16 Incorporation by Reference.
§ 6-16.1 International Mechanical Code 2018. The International Mechanical Code 2018 with the
modifications found in §6-16.2 of this article, is incorporated by reference. (Ordinance 739 effective
September 25, 2019, historical reference 604 and 657)
§ 6-16.2 International Mechanical Code Amendments. Amendments for the International Mechanical Code
are as follows: (Ordinance 604 effective July 1st 2012)
§ 6-16.2.1 Chapter 1. Scope and Administration. Delete Section 101.1 Title and replace with the
following: (Ordinance 604 effective July 1st 2012)
101.1 Title. The International Mechanical Code shall be known and may be cited as the Town of
Easton, Mechanical Code. It is referenced within as thiscode.
§ 6-16.2.2 Chapter 1. Scope and Administration. Delete Section 101.2 Scope and replace with the
following: (Ordinance 604 effective July 1st 2012)
101.2 Scope. This code shall regulate the design, installation, maintenance, alteration and inspection
of mechanical systems that are permanently installed and utilized to provide control of environmental
conditions and related processes within buildings. This code shall also regulate those mechanical
systems, system components, equipment and appliances specifically addressed herein. The installation
of fuel gas distribution piping and equipment, fuel gas-fired appliances and fuel gas-fired appliance
venting systems shall be regulated by the International Fuel GasCode.
Exceptions: The requirements herein do not apply to work areas subject to the Maryland Building
Rehabilitation Code as adopted by the Department of Housing and Community Development under
Public Safety Article, §12-1004, Annotated Code of Maryland, except as provided by that Code.
§ 6-16.2.3 Chapter 1. Scope and Administration. Delete Section 101.2.1 Appendices and replace with
the following: (Ordinance 604 effective July 1st 2012)
101.2.1 Appendices. Provisions in the Appendices shall not apply unless specifically adopted.
Provisions in the Appendices A are incorporated herein.
§ 6-16.2.4 Chapter 1. Scope and Administration. Delete Section 101.3 Intent and replace with the
following: (Ordinance 604 effective July 1st 2012)
101.3 Intent. The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life or limb,
health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, installation,
quality of materials, location, operation and maintenance or use of mechanical systems. If a conflict
arises as to methods of installation, maintenance, and repair under this Code, the manufacture’s
operation and installation manual shall govern.
§ 6-16.2.5 Chapter 1. Scope and Administration. Delete, Part 2 Administration and Enforcement and
replace with the following: (Ordinance 604 effective July 1st 2012)
103.1 Administration. The Mechanical Code is regulated by the Building Codes Administration under
Article I of Chapter 6.
103.2 Requirements for Plans and Specifications. Plans and specifications for the installation of all
heating, ventilation, air-conditioning, or refrigeration systemsshall;
1. Be approved by a and have affixed to them the name, signature and license number of the
Maryland; HVACR Master, Master Restricted, or Engineer.
2. Provide adequate details of mechanical and electrical work, including computations,
diagrams, and other essential technical data, shall be filed.
3. Plans shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance rating integrity will be
maintained, and where penetrations will be made for electrical, mechanical, plumbing,
and communication conducts, pipes, and systems.
Exceptions:
1. For one-family and two-family dwellings, a residential heat gain and loss load
calculation, for example, Manual J or its equivalent, shall be filed for new
installations.
2. For one-family and two-family dwellings, for the replacement of a condensing unit,
air-handling unit, furnace, or boiler in an existing HVACR system documentation
shall provide the calculations by which the sizing of the equipment installed was
determined. A signed and dated copy of this document shall be retained by the
contractor and a copy shall be left with the homeowner upon completion of the work.
§ 6-16.2.6 Chapter 2. Definitions. Add definition to Section 202 for Repair to read as follows: (Ordinance
604 effective July 1st 2012)
REPAIR. To put back in good condition, fix, to renew parts, to make existing systems function.
Anything that can be made to work is repairable. The replacement of a system or a condenser unit, airhandling
unit, furnace, or boiler, which make up a system shall constitute altering or remodeling, not
repair.
§ 6-16.2.7 Chapter 2. Definitions. Amend the definition of Self Contained Equipment under Section 202
to read as follows: (Ordinance 604 effective July 1st 2012)
SELF-CONTAINED EQUIPMENT. A heating, ventilation, air conditioning or refrigeration device
that is designed and manufactured:
1. with its component parts housed within a single chassis;
2. with a standard factory-installed electrical line cord that requires a plug-in device;
3. with no additional external fuel source; and
4. independent of an air-distribution system.
§ 6-16.2.8 Chapter 3. General Regulations. Add Table 301.2.1 Design Conditions – Temperature as
follows: (Ordinance 604 effective July 1st 2012)
TOWN OF EASTON DESIGN CONDITIONS - TEMPERATURES
Winter Summer
Design
Temp.
Heating
Degree Days
Below 65°F
Design
Temp.
Dry Bulb
Coincident
Design
Wet Bulb
Grains
Differenc
e 55%
RH
Grains
Differenc
e 50%
RH
Daily
Range
10° F 4220 95° F 75 35 42 18 M
§ 6-16.2.9 Chapter 3. General Regulations. Add Section 301.14.1 Heat Exchangers Repair to read as
follows: (Ordinance 604 effective July 1st 2012)
301.14.1 Heat Exchangers. Temporary repairs may not be made to a damaged heat exchanger.
§ 6-16.2.10 Chapter 3. General Regulations. Delete Section 306.5 Equipment and appliances on roofs or
elevated structures, including its exception and replace with the following: (Ordinance 604 effective July 1st
2012)
306.5 Equipment and appliances on roofs or elevated structures. Where equipment and appliances
are located on an elevated structure or the roof of a building such that personnel will have to climb
higher than 16 feet (4877 mm) above grade to access such equipment or appliance, an interior or
exterior means of access shall be provided. Such access shall not require climbing over obstructions
greater than 30 inches (762 mm) in height or walking on roofs having a slope greater than 4 units
vertical in 12 units horizontal (33-percent slope). Where access involves climbing over parapet walls,
the height shall be measured to the top of the parapet wall. Such access shall;
1. Not require the use of portable ladders
2. Be provided with Stairway to Roof installed in accordance with the requirements specified in
the International Building Code in the path of travel to and from appliances, fans or
equipment requiring service and or,
3. Catwalks installed to provide the required access which are not less than 24” wide and shall
have railings as required for service platforms.
§ 6-16.2.11 Chapter 3. General Regulations. Delete Section 306.5.1 Sloped roofs and replace with the
following: (Ordinance 604 effective July 1st 2012)
306.5.1 Sloped Roofs. Where appliances, equipment , fans or other components that require service
are installed on a roof having a slope of three units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-percent slope) or
greater and having an edge more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade at such edge, a level platform
shall be provided on each side of the appliance or equipment to which access is required for service,
repair or maintenance. The platform shall be not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in any dimension and
shall be provided with guards. The guards shall extend not less than 42 inches (1067 mm) above the
platform, shall be constructed so as to prevent the passage of a 21-inch diameter (533 mm)
sphere and shall comply with the loading requirements for guards specified in the International
Building Code.
§ 6-16.2.12 Chapter 3. General Regulations. Delete Section 307.2.3 Auxiliary Protection Method
#3. (Ordinance 739 effective September 25, 2019, historical reference 604)
§ 6-16.2.13 Chapter 3. General Regulations. Delete Section 309 Temperature Control,
including its exception and replace with the following: (Ordinance 604 effective July 1st 2012)
309.1 Space-heating systems. Interior spaces intended for human occupancy shall be provided
with active or passive space-heating systems capable of maintaining a minimum indoor
temperature of 70°F at a point 3 feet above floor during the period from October 1st to May 15th.
The installation of portable space heaters shall not be used to achieve compliance with this section.
Exceptions:
1. When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design temperature of 10°F,
maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be required provided that the
heating system is operating at its full design capacity.
2. Interior Spaces where the primary purpose is not associated with human comfort.
§ 6-16.2.14 Chapter 6. Duct Systems. Section 603.6.1.1 Duct length of Chapter 6, § 6-16.2.14 of the
Code of the Town of Easton is hereby deleted and replaced with the following:
603.6.1.1 Duct length. Flexible air ducts shall be limited to 25 feet (7620 mm) in total length
from plenum/trunk duct to supply register, including intermediate distribution boxes.
Exception: Flexible air ducts shall not be limited in length provided that a Manual D has
been submitted with the application to analyze the duct system design. (Ordinance 739
effective September 25, 2019)
§ 6-16.2.14 Chapter 6. Duct Systems. Add Section 603.6.1.2 Duct Limitation to read as
follows: (Ordinance 604 effective July 1st 2012)
603.6.1.2 Duct limitation. Flexible air ducts shall not be installed in concealed or nonaccessible
locations.
§ 6-16.2.15 Chapter 6. Duct Systems. Add Section 603.6.2.3 Connector Limitation to read as
follows: (Ordinance 604 effective July 1st 2012)
603.6.2.3 Connector limitation. Flexible air connectors installed in concealed or nonaccessible
locations shall be limited in length to 5 feet.
§ 6-16.2.16 Chapter 13. Fuel Oil System Installation. Delete Section 1301.4 Fuel Tanks,
Piping and Valves and replace with the following: (Ordinance 604 effective July 1st 2012)
1301.4 Fuel tanks, piping and valves. The tank, piping and valves for appliances burning oil
shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. When an oil burner is
served by a tank, any part of which is above the level of the burner inlet connection and where the
fuel supply line is taken from the top of the tank, an approved antisiphon valve or other siphonbreaking
device shall be installed in lieu of the shutoff valve. Fill and vent piping minimum size
shall be: fill piping 2 inches; vent piping 1.25 inches or according to the tank manufacturer's
recommendation. All piping shall be of black steel (Schedule 40)
§ 6-16.2.17 Chapter 15. Referenced Standards. Replace all references to the International Fire
Code, IFC-12 with the Maryland Fire Prevention Code. (Ordinance 604 effective July 1st 2012)
Article VIII: Plumbing Code.
§ 6-17 Incorporation by Reference.
§ 6-17.1 International Plumbing Code 2018. The International Plumbing Code 2018 with the
modifications found in §6-17.2 of this article, is incorporated by reference. (Ordinance 740 effective
September 25, 2019, historical reference 12, 605, and 658)
§ 6-17.2 International Plumbing Code Amendments. Amendments for the International Plumbing
Code are as follows: (Ordinance 605 effective July 1st 2012)
§ 6-17.2.1 Chapter 1. Administration. Delete Section 101.1 Title and replace with the following:
(Ordinance 605 effective July 1st 2012)
101.1 Title. The International Plumbing Code shall be known and may be cited as the Town of Easton,
Plumbing Code. It is referenced within as this code.
§ 6-17.2.2 Chapter 1. Administration. Delete the Exception under Section 101.2 Scope. (Ordinance 605
effective July 1st 2012)
§ 6-17.2.3 Chapter 1. Administration. Add Section 101.3.1 thru 101.3.22 Basic Principles to read as
follows: (Ordinance 605 effective, July 1st 2012)
101.3.1 PRINCIPLE NO. 1 – ALL OCCUPIED PREMISES SHALL HAVE POTABLE
WATER. All premises intended for human habitation, occupancy, or use shall be provided with a
supply of potable water. Such a water supply shall not be connected with unsafe water sources, nor
shall it be subject to the hazards of backflow, so installed as to prevent backflow or siphonage.
101.3.2 PRINCIPLE NO. 2 – ADEQUATE WATER REQUIRED. Plumbing fixtures, devices,
and appurtenances shall be supplied with water in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to
enable them to function properly and without undue noise under normal conditions of use.
101.3.3 PRINCIPLE NO. 3 – HOT WATER REQUIRED. Hot water shall be supplied to all
plumbing fixtures which normally need or require hot water for their proper use and function.
101.3.4 PRINCIPLE NO. 4 – WATER CONSERVATION. Plumbing shall be designed and
adjusted to use the minimum quantity of water consistent with proper performance, cleaning and
with Business Occupations and Professions Article, 12-605(b), Annotated Code of Maryland.
101.3.5 PRINCIPLE NO. 5 – SAFETY DEVICES. Devices for heating and storing water shall
be so designed and installed as to guard against dangers from explosion oroverheating.
101.3.6 PRINCIPLE NO. 6 – USE PUBLIC SEWER WHERE AVAILABLE. Every building
with installed plumbing fixtures and intended for human habitation, occupancy, or use, and
located on premises where a public sewer is on or passes said premises within a reasonable
distance, shall be connected to thesewer.
101.3.7 PRINCIPLE NO. 7 – REQUIRED PLUMBING FIXTURES. Each family dwelling
unit shall have at least one water closet, one lavatory, one kitchen-type sink, and one bathtub or
shower to meet the basic requirements of sanitation and personal hygiene. All other structures for
human habitation shall be equipped with sufficient sanitary facilities. Plumbing fixtures shall be
made of durable, smooth, non-absorbent and corrosion resistant material and shall be free from
concealed fouling surfaces.
101.3.8 PRINCIPLE NO. 8 – DRAINAGE SYSTEM. The drainage system shall be designed,
constructed, and maintained to guard against fouling, deposit of solids and clogging, and with
adequate cleanouts so arranged that the pipes may be readily cleaned.
101.3.9 PRINCIPLE NO. 9 – DURABLE MATERIALS AND GOOD WORKMANSHIP.
The piping of the plumbing system shall be of durable material, free from defective workmanship
and so designed and constructed as to give satisfactory service for its reasonable expected life.
101.3.10 PRINCIPLE NO. 10 – FIXTURE TRAPS. Each fixture directly connected to the
drainage system shall be equipped with a liquid seal trap.
101.3.11 PRINCIPLE NO. 11 – TRAP SEALS SHALL BE PROTECTED. The drainage
system shall be designed to provide an adequate circulation of air in all pipes with no danger of
siphonage, aspiration, or forcing of trap seals under conditions of ordinary use.
101.3.12 PRINCIPLE NO. 12 – EXHAUST FOUL AIR TO OUTSIDE. Each vent terminal
shall extend to the outer air and be so installed as to minimize the possibilities of clogging and the
return of foul air to the building.
101.3.13 PRINCIPLE NO. 13 – TEST THE PLUMBING SYSTEM. The plumbing system
shall be subjected to such tests as will effectively disclose all leaks and defects in the work or the
material.
101.3.14 PRINCIPLE NO. 14 – EXCLUDE CERTAIN SUBSTANCES FROM THE
PLUMBING SYSTEM. No substance which will clog or accentuate clogging of pipes, produce
explosive mixtures, destroy the pipes or their joints, or interfere unduly with the sewage-disposal
process shall be allowed to enter the building drainagesystem.
101.3.15 PRINCIPLE NO. 15 – PREVENT CONTAMINATION . Proper protection shall be
provided to prevent contamination of food, water, sterile goods, and similar materials by backflow
of sewage. When necessary, the fixture, device, or appliance shall be connected indirectly with the
building drainage system.
101.3.16 PRINCIPLE NO. 16 – LIGHT AND VENTILATION. No water closet or similar
fixture shall be located in a room or compartment which is not properly lighted andventilated.
101.3.17 PRINCIPLE NO. 17 – INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS. Ifwater
closets or other plumbing fixtures are installed in buildings where there is no sewer within a
reasonable distance, suitable provision shall be made for disposing of the sewage by some
accepted method of sewage treatment anddisposal.
101.3.18 PRINCIPLE NO. 18 – PREVENT SEWER FLOODING. Where a plumbing drainage
system is subject to backflow of sewage from the public sewer or private disposal system, suitable
provision shall be made to prevent its overflow in thebuilding.
101.3.19 PRINCIPLE NO. 19 – PROPER MAINTENANCE. Plumbing systems shall be
maintained in a safe and serviceable condition from the standpoint of both mechanics and health.
101.3.20 PRINCIPLE NO. 20 – FIXTURES SHALL BE ACCESSIBLE.All plumbing fixtures
shall be so installed with regard to spacing as to be accessible for their intended use and for
cleaning.
101.3.21 PRINCIPLE NO. 21 – STRUCTURAL SAFETY. Plumbing shall be installed with
due regard to preservation of the strength of structural members and prevention of damage to walls
and other surfaces through fixture usage.
101.3.22 PRINCIPLE NO. 22 – PROTECT GROUND AND SURFACE WATER. Sewage or
other waste shall not be discharged into surface or sub-surface water unless it has first been
subjected to some acceptable form oftreatment.
§ 6-17.2.4 Chapter 1. Administration. Delete Part 2 Administration and Enforcement and replace with the
following: (Ordinance 605 effective, July 1st 2012)
103.1 Administration. The Plumbing Code is regulated by the Building Codes Administration under
Article I of Chapter 6.
§ 6-17.2.5 Chapter 2. Definitions. Delete Section 201.3 Terms defined in other codes, and replace with the
following: (Ordinance 605 effective, July 1st 2012)
201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Terms that are not defined in this code but are defined in the
International Building Code, International Energy Conservation Code, International Fuel Gas Code,
International Mechanical Code or the International Residential Code shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in those codes.
§ 6-17.2.6 Chapter 2. Definitions. Delete the definition of Air Break under Section 202 General
Definitions, and replace with the following: (Ordinance 605 effective, July 1st 2012)
AIR BREAK (Drainage System). A piping arrangement in which a drain from a fixture, appliance or
device discharges indirectly into another fixture, receptacle or interceptor at a point below the flood
level rim and above the trap seal so installed as to prevent backflow or siphonage.
§ 6-17.2.7 Chapter 2. Definitions. Add a definition for Frostproof Closet under Section 202 General
Definitions, to read as follows: (Ordinance 605 effective, July 1st 2012)
FROSTPROOF CLOSET. A hopper with no water in the bowl and with the trap and water supply
control valve located below the frost line."
§ 6-17.2.8 Chapter 2. Definitions. Add a definition for Incidental Plumbing Services under Section 202
General Definitions, to read as follows: (Ordinance 605 effective, July 1st 2012)
INCIDENTAL PLUMBING SERVICES. Repair of faucets, ball-cock valves, and shutoff valves;
cleaning of choked drain lines and repairing of minor leaks. Incidental Plumbing Services does not
include replacement of any plumbing fixture, new installation, or any work, including repairs of
faucets, ball-cock valves, and shutoff valves, cleaning of choked drain lines, and repairing of minor
leaks, that requires a permit by the Town of Easton.
§ 6-17.2.9 Chapter 2. Definitions. Add a definition for Minor Repair Services under Section 202 General
Definitions, to read as follows: (Ordinance 605 effective, July 1st 2012)
MINOR REPAIR SERVICES. Repair or replacement of faucets, ball-cock valves, and shut-off
valves; cleaning of choked drain lines; and repairing leaks in piping and fixtures that do not require
changes in sizes, types of materials, or pipe configuration. Minor Repair Services does not include
complete replacement of any plumbing fixture, new installation, or any work described in this
paragraph if a permit is required by the Town of Easton.
§ 6-17.2.10 Chapter 2. Definitions. Delete the definition of Plumbing System under Section 202 General
Definitions, and replace with the following: (Ordinance 605 effective, July 1st 2012)
PLUMBING SYSTEM. Includes the water supply and distribution pipes; plumbing fixtures and traps;
water-treating or water-using equipment; soil, waste and vent pipes; and sanitary and storm sewers and
building drains; in addition to their respective connections, devices and appurtenances within a
structure or premises, within the property line. It does not include the mains of a public sewer system
or private or public sewage treatment or disposal plant outside the property line.
§ 6-17.2.11 Chapter 2. Definitions. Add a definition for Scavenger under Section 202 General Definitions,
to read as follows: (Ordinance 605 effective, July 1st 2012
SCAVENGER. Any person engaged in the business of cleaning and emptying septic tanks, seepage
pits, privies, or any other sewage disposal facility.
§ 6-17.2.12 Chapter 2. Definitions. Add a definition for Vacuum Intake under Section 202 General
Definitions, to read as follows: (Ordinance 605 effective, July 1st 2012)
VACUUM INTAKE. A vacuum intake has no trap or mechanical device to keep gasses from leaving
the sewer line. An intake is a vertical pipe installed to provide circulation of air to the drainage system.
No intake terminal shall be located directly beneath any door, window or other ventilating opening of
the building or of an adjacent building, nor shall any such intake terminal be within 10 feet
horizontally of such an opening unless it is at least 2 feet above the top of such opening.
§ 6-17.2.13 Chapter 3 General Regulations. Add Section 303.5 Uniform Color Code, to read as follows:
(Ordinance 605 effective, July 1st 2012)
303.5 Uniform Color Code. All non-potable water shall be identified in accordance with section
608.8. All subsurface pipes must be permanently marked or completely colorized for easy
identification as follows:
303.5.1 YELLOW. Gas, oil, steam, petroleum, or gaseousmaterials
303.5.2 BLUE.Water
303.5.3 LAVENDER. Reclaimedwater
§ 6-17.2.14 Chapter 3 General Regulations. Delete Section 305.4.1 Sewer Depth, and replace with the
following: (Ordinance 605 effective, July 1st 2012)
305.4.1 Sewer depth. Building sewers that connect to private sewage disposal systems shall be a
minimum of 30 inches below finished grade at the point of septic tank connection. Building sewers
shall be a minimum of 30 inches below grade.
§ 6-17.2.15 Chapter 3 General Regulations. Add Section 306.5 Trenching Protection, to read as follows:
(Ordinance 605 effective, July 1st 2012, historical reference 12)
306.5 Trenching Protection. Trenching shall be protected by proper guards around all excavations
made on any public right-of-way in the Town and shall cause lights to be provided and maintained on
same each night between sunset andsunrise.
§ 6-17.2.16 Chapter 3 General Regulations. Add Section 306.6 Trenching Restoration, to read as follows:
(Ordinance 605 effective, July 1st 2012, historical reference 12)
306.6 Trenching Restoration. All streets, road, lanes, alleys and similar, including gutters, curbs and
sidewalks, disturbed by trenching shall replace and restore to the standards of theTown.
§ 6-17.2.17 Chapter 4 Fixture, Faucets and Fixture Fittings. Delete Section 403.2.1 Family or Assisteduse
toilet facilities serving as separate facilities and replace with the following: (Ordinance 740 effective
September 25, 2019, historical reference 605)
403.2.1 Accessible, Family, Assisted-Use or Unisex Toilet Facility. In new construction for
assembly and mercantile occupancies, an accessible toilet facility may be provided where an aggregate
of six or more male or female water closets are required. In buildings of mixed occupancy, those water
closets required for the assembly or mercantile portion of the occupancy would be used to determine
the ability to make use of the toilet facility option. The inclusion of the one accessible toilet facility
room shall be allowed to replace both one male and one female toilet. Accessible, Family, Assisted-
Use or Unisex Toilet Facility shall comply with this section and the requirements for accessible toilet
rooms as per standardsprescribed in COMAR 09.12.53 Maryland Accessibility Code.
403.2.1.1 Toilet facility shall include only one water closetand only one lavatory.
403.2.1.2 Toilet facility shall be located on an accessible route. Unisex toilet rooms shall be located
not more than one story above or below separate-sex toilet rooms. The accessible route from any
separate-sex toilet rooms to a unisex toilet room shall not exceed 500 feet/152.4m.
403.2.1.3 Toilet facility shall be designated by accessible signs. Directional signage shall be
provided at all separate-sex toilet rooms indicating the location of the nearest unisex toilet room.
§ 6-17.2.18 Chapter 5. Water Heaters. Add Section 501.2.1 Water Circulation, to read as follows:
(Ordinance 605 effective, July 1st 2012)
105.2.1 Water Circulation. The system shall be equipped with a means to prevent and provide for
periodic circulation between the water heater and the exchanger during offseasons.
§ 6-17.2.19 Chapter 5. Water Heaters. Add Section 501.2.2 Informational Sheet, to read as follows:
(Ordinance 605 effective, July 1st 2012)
105.2.2 Informational Sheet. For all such devices used in Maryland, an informational sheet shall
be provided that outlines all of the requirements COMAR 09.20.01.02(I)(1).
§ 6-17.2.20 Chapter 6. Water Supply and Distribution. Add Section 605.4.1 Water Service Pipe, to read
as follows: (Ordinance 605 effective, July 1st 2012)
605.4.1 Water Service Pipe. Copper tube when used underground may not be less than type L. All
threaded ferrous pipe and fittings shall be galvanized or cement lined, and, when used underground
in corrosive soil or filled ground, shall be coal-tar enamel coated, or its equivalent, and threaded
points shall be coated and wrapped when installed.
§ 6-17.2.21 Chapter 6. Water Supply and Distribution. Delete Section 608.14 Backflow Protection, and
replace with the following: (Ordinance 740 effective September 25, 2019, historical reference 605)
608.14 Backflow Protection. Means of protection against backflow shall be provided in accordance
with Sections 608.14.1 through 608.14.9 including but not limited to the following: Operating,
dissection, embalming and mortuary tables or similar equipment; in these installations, the hose used
for water supply shall terminate at least 12 inches away from every point of the table or attachments;
Water closets equipped with flushometer valves or with flushing tanks with submerged float operated
ball-cocks; Seat-acting water closets; Bed pan washers; Bidets; Sterilizers with water supply
connections; Therapeutic baths with inlets below the rim of the fixture; Water operating waste ejectors,
such as used by dentists, undertakers and those who practice colonic irrigation; Bathtubs with inlets
below the rim of the fixture; Wash basins with inlets below the rim of the fixture; Bar, soda fountain,
or other sinks with submerged inlets; Laundry trays with faucets below the rim; Sinks with faucets or
water inlets below the rim and sinks with loose hose connections; Dishwashing sinks or machines with
water inlets below the rim; Cuspidors with water supply connections; Dental cuspidors with water
supply connections; Hospital appliances generally, such as sterilizers, condensers, filters, stills, pipette
washers, aspirators, and washers; Frostproof hydrants with underground bleed or automatic livestock
watering devices; Industrial vats, tanks, etc. of any description which have an inverted water supply
connection, or a water supply connection below the top of the spill rim, or in which a hose filler is
used; Industrial water supplied process appliances with direct water connections; A rubber hose with
hand control or self-closing faucets attached, as used in connection with baths, industrial vats,
tanneries, etc.; Pressure water supplied sealing rings on sewage and sludge pumps; Water supply for
priming connections; Water supply (hot or cold) to laundry equipment; Condenser cooling connections
for refrigeration and air conditioning machinery; Drains from fire sprinklers connected directly to
sewers or wastes; Steam tables; Condensers; Stills; Aspirators; Chlorinators; Photographic developing
tanks; Laboratory water faucets and cocks with serrated nipples or hose connections; and Any other
fixture or installation creating a similar hazard.
§ 6-17.2.22 Chapter 7. Sanitary Drainage. Delete Section 701.2 Connection to Sewer Required, and
replace with the following: (Ordinance 740 effective September 25, 2019, historical reference 605)
701.2 Connection to Sewer Required. Every building in which plumbing fixtures are installed and
all premises having drainage piping shall be connected to a public sewer, where available, or an
approved private sewage disposal system in accordance with the Talbot County Environmental
Health Office.
§ 6-17.2.23 Chapter 7. Sanitary Drainage. Add Section 703.7 Building Sewer Size, to read as follows:
(Ordinance 605 effective, July 1st 2012 and Ordinance 658 effective July 1, 2015)
703.7 Building Sewer Size. The minimum size of the building sewer shall be 4 inches.
§ 6-17.2.24 Chapter 8. Indirect/Special Waste. Add Section 803.3 Refrigeration Waste, to read as
follows: (Ordinance 605 effective, July 1st 2012 and Ordinance 658 effective July 1, 2015)
803.3 Refrigeration Waste. Refrigeration waste pipes may not be smaller than shown in the
following:
a. 1 ¼ inch: 1 inlet serving not more than 100 cubic feet of refrigeration space;
b. 2 inch: 2 to 12 - 1 ¼ inch inlets or the equivalent refrigerationspace;
c. 3 inch: 13 to 36 - 1 ¼ inch inlets or the equivalent refrigeration space.
§ 6-17.2.25 Chapter 9 Vents. Delete Section 903.1 Roof Extensions, and replace with the following:
(Ordinance 605 effective, July 1st 2012)
903.1 Roof extension. All open vent pipes that extend through a roof shall be terminated at least 14
inches above the roof, except that where a roof is to be used for any purpose other than weather
protection, the vent extensions shall be run at least 7 feet (2134 mm) above the roof.
§ 6-17.2.26 Chapter 9 Vents. Delete Section 913.3 Stack Vent, and replace with the following: (Ordinance
605 effective, July 1st 2012)
913.3 Stack Vent. A stack vent shall be provided for the waste stack . The size of the stack vent shall
be not less than the size of the waste stack . Offsets shall be permitted in the stack vent , shall be
located at least 6 inches (152 mm) above the flood level of the highest fixture, Offsets in stacks greater
than at a 45 degree angle are not permitted unless all piping from the start of the offset is increased one
pipe size and shall be in accordance with Section 905.2. The stack vent shall be permitted to connect
with other stack vents and vent stacks in accordance with Section904.5.
913.3.1 Stack Vent. May be used in any building up to three-story levels of plumbing fixtures. All
stacks shall continue undiminished in size through theroof.
913.3.2 Fixture Unit Loading. Capacities may not exceed one-half of the capacities listed in
Table 710.1(1) and Table 710.1(2).
913.3.2.1 When all of the plumbing fixtures can only be on one story level, the stack or
horizontal drain can receive all of the permitted fixture unit capacity.
913.3.2.2 When the plumbing fixtures can be on two story levels, the maximum fixture unit
load on each possible story level may not exceed one half of the total permitted fixture unit
capacity.
913.3.2.3 When the plumbing fixtures can be on three story levels, the maximum fixture unit
load on each possible story level may not exceed one third of the total permitted fixture unit
capacity.
913.3.3 Fixtures for clothes washing and washing machines. Shall be installed only on the
lowest story level.
913.3.4 Fixtures Downstream of a Water Closet. Fixtures other than another water closet may
not be installed downstream from a water closet unless there is a 5 foot length of pipe without any
fixture connections before the next fixture is connected.
913.3.5 Stack Vent Junction. There may not be any fixtures connected within 5 feet downstream
or 3 feet upstream from the junction of a vertical line with a horizontal line. The fitting at the
junction of a vertical line with a horizontal line shall be full size of the horizontal line to the point
where the line is 90 degrees from a horizontal plane.
913.3.6 Minimum size building drain and extensions. Shall be 4 inches to the base of allstacks.
913.3.7 Trap Arm. Each trap arm shall be individually connected into the stack or horizontalline,
and the maximum length of the trap arm may not exceed 5 feet. Side inlet connections into a 4-
inch closet bend shall be accepted as individual connections.
913.3.8 Entrance fittings from a stack into a horizontal line. Shall have the equivalent sweep
and radius of two 45 degree fittings with 1 foot of pipe between the fittings, or the fittings shall
have a radius of two times the nominal pipe diameter. The vertical portion of the line shall be
completely outside the junction area that turnshorizontal.
913.3.9 Entrance fittings into a stack or in a change of direction from horizontal to vertical,
horizontal to horizontal. Shall have a minimum radius of one pipe diameter of the upstream
horizontal pipe.
913.3.10 Additional Venting. Venting the base of the stack, or other venting, into the building
drain, at least 5 feet downstream or upstream from any other connection. Venting may also be
permitted into a stack at least 5 feet downstream or upstream from any other connection.
§ 6-17.2.27 Chapter 10 Traps, Interceptors and Separators. Delete Exception 2 for Section 1002.1
Fixture Traps, and replace with the following: (Ordinance 605 effective, July 1st 2012)
2. A combination plumbing fixture is permitted to be installed on one trap, providedthat one
compartment is not more than 6 inches (152 mm) deeper than the other compartment, the waste
outlets are not more than 30 inches (762 mm) apart and neither outlet is equipped with a foodwaste
grinder.
§ 6-17.2.28 Chapter 10 Traps, Interceptors and Separators. Add an Exception to Section 1003.1 Where
Required, to read as follows: (Ordinance 605 effective, July 1st 2012, historical reference 12)
Exception: Commercial Buildings, a grease interceptor may not be required in restaurants, hotel
kitchens, bars, factory cafeterias or restaurants, clubs, or other similar establishments, as
determined by the Town of Easton.
§ 6-17.2.29 Chapter 10 Traps, Interceptors and Separators. Add Section 1003.4.3 Point of Discharge,
to read as follows: (Ordinance 605 effective, July 1st 2012, historical reference 12)
1003.4.3 Point of Discharge. In a structure where a public sanitary sewer is available, the waste pipe
from oil separators shall discharge, if installed, into the public sanitary sewer, or any more restrictive
manner as otherwise mandated by the Town of Easton.
§ 6-17.2.30 Chapter 10 Traps, Interceptors and Separators. Add Section 1003.5.1 Point of Discharge,
to read as follows: (Ordinance 605 effective, July 1st 2012, historical reference 12)
1003.5.1 Point of Discharge. In a structure where a public sanitary sewer is available, the waste pipe
from sand interceptors shall discharge, into the public sanitary sewer, or any more restrictive manner
as otherwise mandated by the Town of Easton.
§ 6-17.2.31 Chapter 10 Traps, Interceptors and Separators. Delete Section 1003.1 Where required and
replace with the following: (Ordinance 658 effective July 1st 2015)
1003.1 Where required. Interceptors, separators, neutralizers, dilution tanks, or other means shall be
provided to prevent the discharge of fats, oils, greases, flammable liquids, sand, solids, acid or alkaline
waste, chemicals, or other harmful-hazardous substances from entering a building drainage system, a
public or private sewage system or the sewage treatment plant or processes.
§ 6-17.2.32 Chapter 10 Traps, Interceptors and Separators. Add Section 1005 On-Site Subsurface
Disposal, to read as follows: (Ordinance 658 effective, July 1st 2015, historical reference 12 and 605)
SECTION 1005 On-Site Subsurface Disposal
1005.1 On-Site Subsurface Disposal. Any new construction of a structure or renovation of
an existing structure which discharges liquid wastes which require a interceptor and
separator according to Section 1003.1 or which discharges other industrial waste waters shall
have the option of discharging into an on-site subsurface disposal system, providing the
facility's owner/operator applies for and obtains from the Maryland Department of the
Environment a water discharge permit issued pursuant to the provisions and conditions of
COMAR
1005.1.1 Underground Tanks. If an underground tank is installed, it shall be corrosion
protected and designed according to COMAR
§ 6-17.2.33 Chapter 12. Special Piping and Storage Systems. Delete Section 1201.1 Scope, and replace
with the following: (Ordinance 605 effective, July 1st 2012 and Ordinance 658 effective July 1, 2015)
1201.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the design and installation of piping and
storage systems for nonflammable medical gas systems and nonmedical oxygen systems. All
maintenance and operations of such systems shall be in accordance with the Maryland Fire Prevention
Code.
§ 6-17.2.34 Appendix A. Add Appendix A Mobile Home and Travel Trailer Park Plumbing Standards, to
read as follows: (Ordinance 605 effective, July 1st 2012 and Ordinance 658 effective July 1, 2015)
APPENDIX A
MOBILE HOME & TRAVEL TRAILER PARK PLUMBING STANDARDS
SECTION A101
GENERAL
A101.1 General. The requirements of this chapter are intended as general requirements for parks and
campgrounds that serve travel trailers, recreational vehicles, and mobile homes. Travel trailers and
recreational vehicles are used as temporary dwellings for travel or recreational purposes. Mobile
homes are movable structures or units that are designed as living quarters.
A101.2 Plumbing Requirements. The primary objective of this Chapter is to assure sanitary
plumbing installations in trailer parks and operation of trailer parks.
SECTION A102
DEFINITIONS
Service Buildings. A building housing toilet, laundry and any other such facilities as may be required.
Sewer Connection. Sewer connection is that portion of the drainage piping that extends as a single
terminal under the trailer coach for connection with the trailer park drainage system.
Trailer Coach. Any camp-car, trailer, or other vehicle with or without motive power, designed and
constructed to travel on the public thoroughfares in accordance with provisions of the Vehicle Code
and designed or used for human habitation.
Trailer Coach, Dependent. One which is not equipped with a water closet for sewage disposal.
Trailer Coach, Independent. One which is equipped with a water closet for sewage disposal.
Trailer Coach Drain Connection. The removable extension connecting the trailer coach drainage
system to the trailer connection fixture.
Trailer Coach, Left Side. The side farthest from the curb when the trailer home is being towed or in
transit.
Trailer Connection Fixture. A connection to a trap that is connected to the park drainage system, and
receives the water, liquid or other waste discharge from a trailer coach.
Trailer Park Drainage System. The entire system of drainage piping used to convey sewage or other
waste from a trailer connection fixture to the sewer.
Trailer Park Branch Line. That portion of drainage piping that receives the discharge from not more
than two trailer connection fixtures.
Trailer Park. Any area or tract of land where space is rented or held-out for rent or occupied by two
or more trailer coaches.
Trailer Park Sewer System. That piping that extends from the public or private sewage disposal
system to a point where the first trailer park drainage system branch fitting is installed.
Trailer Park Water Service Main. That portion of the water distribution system that extends from the
street main, water meter, or other source of supply to the trailer site water service branch.
Trailer Site. That area set out by boundaries on which one trailer can be located.
Trailer Site Water Service Branch. That portion of the water distributing system extended from the
park service main to a trailer site, and includes connections, devices, and appurtenances thereto.
Water Service Connection. That portion of the water supply piping that extends as a single terminal
under the trailer coach for connection with the trailer coach park water supply system.
SECTION A103
STANDARDS
A103.1 General. Plumbing systems hereafter installed in parks and campgrounds shall conform to the
provisions set forth in the Plumbing Code and also to the provisions set forth in this Chapter.
A103.2 Plans and Specifications. Before any plumbing or sewage disposal facilities are installed or
altered in any parks and campgrounds, plans and specifications shall be filed, and required permits
obtained. Plans shall show the following in detail:
A103.2.1 Plot Plan. Plot plan of the park, drawn to scale, indicating elevations, property lines,
driveways, existing or proposed buildings, and sizes of trailer sites.
A103.2.2 Plumbing Layout. Complete specifications and piping layout of proposed plumbing
system or alteration.
A103.2.3 Sewage Disposal Layout. Complete specifications and piping layout of proposed sewer
system or alteration.
A103.2.4 Conformance. Trailer park plumbing systems shall be designed and installed in
accordance with the requirements of this Code and shall, in addition, conform to all other pertinent
local codes and State regulations.
A103.3 Materials. Materials shall conform to the approved standards set forth in other sections of this
Code.
SECTION A104
DRAINAGE SYSTEM
A104.1 Design and Installation. The parks and campgrounds drainage system shall be designed and
installed in accordance with the requirements of this Code.
A104.2 Alternate. The parks and campgrounds drainage system may be installed by the use of a
combination waste and vent drainage system, which shall consist of an installation of waste piping, as
hereinafter provided in this Section, in which the traps for one or more trailer connection fixtures are
not separately or independently vented, but which is vented through the waste piping of such size to
provide free circulation of air therein.
A104.3 Each Independent Trailer Site. Each independent trailer site shall be provided with a trapped
trailer connection that shall consist of a three inch horizontal iron pipe-size threaded connection,
installed a minimum of three inches and a maximum of six inches (from the bottom of the connection),
above the finished grade. The vertical connection to the trailer connection fixture shall be anchored in a
concrete slab four inches thick, and 18" x 18" square.
A104.4 Above Ground. Any part of the plumbing system extending above the ground shall be
protected from damage.
A104.5 Trap Connections. Each trailer site shall be provided with a three-inch I.P.S. male or female
threaded connection, extended above the surrounding grade, from a three- inch minimum size vented
p-trap.
A104.5.1 Location. Traps shall be located with reference to the immediate boundary lines of the
designated space or area within each trailer site that will actually be occupied by the trailer. Each
such trap shall be located in the rear third-quarter section along the left boundary line of the trailer
parking area not less than one foot or more than three feet from the road side of the trailer and
shall be a minimum of five feet from the rear boundary of the trailer site.
A104.5.2 Material. All traps, tail pipes, vertical vents, the upper five feet of any horizontal vent,
and the first five feet of any trap branch shall be fabricated from materials approved for use within
a building.
A104.6 Restriction. No vertical pipe shall be used in a special waste and vent system, except the vent
pipe, and the connection to the trailer connection fixture.
A104.7 Drain Connections. Mobile home and travel trailer drain connections shall be of approved
semi-rigid or flexible reinforced hose having smooth interior surfaces and not be less than a 3-inch
inside diameter. Main connections shall be equipped with a standard quick-disconnect screw or clamp
type fitting, not smaller than the outlet. Main connections shall be gas-tight and no longer than
necessary to make the connection between the trailer coach drain connection and the trailer connector
fixture on the site.
A104.8 Cleanouts. Cleanouts shall be provided as required by Section 708, except cleanouts shall be
provided in the vent stacks one foot above grade.
A104.9 Fixture Unit Loading. For the purpose of determining pipe sizes, each trailer site connection
shall be assigned a waste loading value of six fixture units and each trailer park drainage system shall
be sized as provided in Table A104.12.
A104.10 Slope. The grade on sewers shall provide a minimum velocity of two feet per second when
the pipe is flowing half full.
A104.11 Discharge. The discharge of the parks and campgrounds drainage systems shall be connected
to a public sewer.
A104.12 Minimum Pipe Size. Minimum pipe sizes in the drainage system shall be as set forth in
Table A104.12.
TABLE A104.12
DRAIN PIPE SIZING
Maximum Number of
Trailers, Individually
Vented Systems
Max. No. of Trailers,
Wet-Vented System Size of Drain
2 1 3”
30 210 4”
100 50 6”
400 - 8”
1000 - 10”
SECTION A105
VENTING
A105.1 Location. Each wet-vented drainage system shall be provided with a vent not more than 15
feet downstream from its upper trap, and long mains shall be provided with additional relief vents at
intervals of not more than 100 feet thereafter. The minimum size of each vent serving a wet-vented
system shall be as set forth in Table A105.1.
TABLE A105.1
VENT SIZING
Size of Wet-Vented Drain Minimum Size of Vent
3” 2”
4” 3”
5” 4”
6” 5”
A105.2 Vent Connections. All vent intersections shall be taken off above the center line of the
horizontal pipe. All vent stacks shall be supported by a four-inch by four-inch redwood post, set in at
least two feet of concrete extending at least four inches above the ground, or supported by another
approved method.
A105.3 Galvanized Steel Vent Pipe. Galvanized steel vent pipe may extend below the ground
vertically, and may directly intersect a drainage line with an approved fitting, if the entire section
around both the drain and the galvanized pipe is encased in concrete to prevent any movement.
Galvanized steel pipe encased in concrete shall be first coated with bituminous paint, or equivalent
protective material.
A105.4 Location of Vent Pipes. Vent pipes shall terminate at least 10 feet above grade and be at least
10 feet from any property line. No vent shall terminate directly beneath any door, window, or
ventilation openings of the building or of an adjacent building, nor shall any such vent terminal be
within 10 feet horizontally from such opening unless it is at least 2 feet above the top of such opening.
A105.5 Size of Vent Stack. All vent stacks in the wet-vented system shall be three inches or more in
diameter, except that a three-inch branch line may be vented by a two-inch vent. See Table A105.1.
A105.6 Wet Vented Branch Drain Lines. No three-inch branch drain shall exceed six feet in length,
and no four-inch branch drain shall exceed 15 feet in length, unless they are properly vented.
A105.7 Trailer Connections. Each trailer connection fixture outlet shall be provided with a screwtype
plug or cap, and be effectively capped when not in use.
SECTION A106
WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM
A106.1 Conformance. Each parks and campgrounds water distribution system shall conform to the
requirements of Chapter 6 of this Code and shall be so designed and maintained as to provide a
residual pressure of not less than 20 psi at each trailer site under normal operating conditions.
A106.2 Individual Water Service Branch. Every trailer site shall be provided with an individual
water service branch line that shall not be less than 3/4" size, delivering safe, potable water.
A106.3 Connection Components. A control valve shall be installed on the water service branch,
followed by an approved backflow preventer in accordance with ASSE 1024 or CSA B64.6 on the
discharge side of the control valve, with a pressure relief valve located on the discharge side of the
backflow preventer; with a hose connection or other approved attachment on the trailer side of the
relief valve. Each such pressure relief valve shall be equipped with a full-size drain with the end of the
pipe not more than two feet or less than six inches above the ground and pointing downward. Such
drain may terminate at other approved locations. No part of such drain pipe shall be trapped. No shutoff
valve shall be installed between any such pressure relief valve and the trailer it serves. The
backflow device and relief valve shall be located not less than 12 inches above the grade.
A106.4 Connection Details. The service connection shall not be rigid. Flexible metal tubing is
permitted. Fittings at either end shall be of a quick disconnect type not requiring any special tools or
knowledge to install or remove.
A106.5 Water Fixture Units. Each trailer outlet on the water distribution system shall be rated as six
water supply fixture units.
A106.6 Location of Water Connection. The parks and campgrounds water outlet for each trailer
coach space shall be located near the center of the left side of each trailer coach.
A106.7 Fire Protection. In the design of the water distribution system in a parks and campgrounds,
consideration for fire outlet stations throughout the park should be made relative to the location and
quantity of water necessary during an emergency period.
A106.8 Backflow Protection. All requirements as described in Chapter 6 of this Code shall be
considered a part of this Section.
SECTION A107
TESTING
A107.1 TESTING. Installations shall be tested and inspected as required by this Code.
SECTION A108
SANITARY FACILITIES
A108.1 Public Water Closets, Showers, and Lavatories. Separate public water closets, showers, and
lavatories shall be installed and maintained for each sex in accordance with the following ratio of
trailer sites:
A108.1.1 Dependent Trailer. Parks and campgrounds constructed and operated exclusively for
dependent trailers shall have one water closet, one shower, and one lavatory for each 10 sites or
fractional part thereof
A108.1.2 Independent Trailer. Parks and campgrounds constructed and operated exclusively for
independent trailers shall have one water closet, one shower, and one lavatory for each 100 sites or
fractional part thereof.
A108.1.3 Combined Trailer Use. Parks and campgrounds constructed and operated for the
combined use of dependent and independent trailers shall have facilities as shown in Table
A108.1.3.
TABLE A108.1.3
FACILITIES REQUIRED FOR COMBINED TRAILER USE
Sites Water Closets Showers Lavatories
2-25 1 1 1
26-70 2 2 2
A108.1.4 Additional Water Closets. For combined trailer use, one additional water closet shall
be provided for each 100 sites or fractional part thereof in excess of 70 sites.
A108.2 Exclusivity. Each toilet facility shall be for the exclusive use of the occupants of the trailer
sites in the parks and campgrounds.
A108.3 Showers. In every parks and campgrounds, shower bathing facilities with hot and cold running
water shall be installed in separate compartments. Every compartment shall be provided with a selfclosing
door or otherwise equipped with a waterproof draw curtain.
A108.4 Shower Compartments. The inner face of walls of all shower compartments shall be finished
with concrete, metal, tile or other approved waterproof materials extending to a height of not less than
six feet above the floor. Floors or shower compartments shall be made of concrete or other similar
impervious material. Floors shall be waterproof and slope 1/4 inch per foot to the drains.
A108.5 Laundry Facilities. Every parks and campgrounds shall be provided with an accessory utility
building containing at least one clothes washer or laundry tray equipped with hot and cold running
water for every 20 trailer sites or fractional part thereof, but in no case shall there be less than two
laundry trays in any parks and campgrounds.
SECTION A109
MAINTENANCE
A109.1 MAINTENANCE. All required devices or safeguards shall be maintained in good working
order. The owner, operator, or lessee of the parks and campgrounds, or their designated agent shall be
responsible for the maintenance.
SECTION A110
OPERATOR’S RESPONSIBILITY – VIOLATIONS
A110.1 OPERATOR’S RESPONSIBILITY – VIOLATIONS. When it is evident that there exists,
or may exist, a violation of any pertinent regulation, the owner, operator, lessee, person in charge of
the park, or any other person causing a violation shall immediately disconnect the trailer water supply
and sewer connections from the park or campground system and shall employ such other corrective
measures as may be ordered.
CHAPTER 6A STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Editor's Note. -- The storm water management ordinance, and all amendments thereto, are incorporated into this
volume by reference as if fully set out herein. Copies are on file in the office of the town clerk, where they may be
examined between the hours of 8:30 A.M. and 4:00 P.M., Monday through Friday, except on holidays. (Ordinance
522, historical reference 117, 121, 406, 429)
CHAPTER 6B EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
Editor's Note. -- The erosion and sediment control ordinance, and all amendments thereto, are incorporated into this
volume by reference as if fully set out herein. Copies are on file in the office of the town clerk, where they may be
examined between the hours of 8:30 A.M. and 4:00 P.M., Monday through Friday, except on holidays. (Ordinance
123, historical reference 65, 68)

CHAPTER 7 CIVILIAN DEFENSE
§ 7-1. Purpose of chapter.
§ 7-2. Definition
§ 7-3. Civilian defense director - Office created.
§ 7-4. Same - Powers and authority.
§ 7-5. Ex officio director.
Sec. 7-1. Purpose of chapter.
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the civil
defense of persons and property within the town in the event of a national emergency, and to provide for the
coordination of civil defense functions of the town with all public agencies and affected private persons,
corporations and organizations. Any expenditures made in connection with such civil defense activities shall be
deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the town. (1967
Code by Ordinance 519 aka E-34, effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 7-2. Definition.
For purposes of this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, "Civil Defense" shall include measures
necessary to provide for the mobilization, organization and direction of civilian populace and necessary support
agencies to prevent or minimize the effects of national emergencies. (1967 Code by Ordinance 519 aka E-34,
effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 7-3. Civilian defense director - office created.
During national emergencies, there shall be a director of civilian defense of the town. (Ordinance 20 effective
5/19/1942)
Sec. 7-4. Same - powers and authority.
The director of civilian defense shall have:
(a) Full power and authority to organize, coordinate, train and direct the various agencies of civilian defense
within the corporate limits of the town;
(b) Full and complete control of said agencies during all periods of attach by hostile forces, imminent danger of
such attack and periods of blackouts, and all agencies of the town shall, during such periods, be subject to his
order and control and give him full cooperation.
(c) Authority to appoint such deputies and assistants and delegate such power to the same as may be requisite
for the proper functioning of said office and he shall have full power to organize said agencies and to prescribe
and carry out training there for at such times as it is, in his opinion, necessary and desirable so to do, and during
said training periods, all the agencies of the town shall give him full cooperation.
(Ordinance 20 effective 5/19/1942)
Sec. 7-5. Ex officio director.
Such person as shall be appointed as director of civilian defense for Talbot County, Maryland, by the county
commissioners of Talbot County, Maryland or other competent authority, shall be ex officio the director of civilian
defense of the town with the full powers set forth in this chapter. (Ordinance 20 effective 5/19/1942)

CHAPTER 8 FILLING STATIONS
§ 8-1. Definitions.
§ 8-2. Pumps at curb.
§ 8-3. Dispensing gasoline between curb lines prohibited.
§ 8-4. Installation and operation.
§ 8-5. Shutting off motors during fueling.
§ 8-6. Smoking.
§ 8-7. Attendants required.
§ 8-8. Display of prices.
§ 8-9. Display of brand names or trademarks.
Sec. 8-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates:
"Motor fuel" shall mean a light distillate of petroleum or allied substance with suitable volatility and other characteristics
to be used as fuel for operating internal combustion engines whether or not it is mixed with other materials, or any other
product or liquid when sold for use as a fuel in any type of internal combustion engine furnishing power to operate a
vehicle.
"Retail dealer" shall mean any person operating a service station, filling station, store, garage or other place of business
for the retail sale of motor fuel or the sale of or dispensing of motor fuel for delivery into the service tank of any motor
vehicle which is propelled by an internal combustion motor other than such a motor vehicle belonging to the person
owning or operating such place of business. (1967 Code by Ordinance 519 aka E-34, effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 8-2. Pumps at curb.
The issuance of any permit or license for the erection of any gasoline pump on or along the curb or sidewalk of any
public street or highway within the town is hereby prohibited. (Ordinance 10 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 8-3. Dispensing gasoline between curb lines prohibited.
The placing of gasoline or other petroleum products in any motor vehicle, or the servicing of the same while said vehicle
is standing or parked between the curb lines of any public street or highway within the town is unlawful, and it shall be
unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, to sell any gasoline or petroleum products in such manner that said gasoline
or petroleum products are placed in such motor vehicle while it is so located. (Ordinance 10 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 8-4. Installation and operation.
The installation and operation of gasoline filling stations shall conform in all respects to chapter 9 of this Code relating to
fire prevention. (Ordinance 519 aka E-34, effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 8-5. Shutting off motors during fueling.
The motor of any vehicle shall be shut off during fueling operations at any filling station. "Stop Your Motor" signs shall
be placed in plain view. (Ordinance 519 aka E-34, effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 8-6. Smoking.
There shall be no smoking in areas where gasoline is dispensed in filling stations. Suitable "NO SMOKING" signs shall
be displayed in filling stations. (Ordinance 519 aka E-34, effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 8-7. Attendants required.
Attendants in a number sufficient to preserve the public safety shall always be present at a filling station when motor fuel
is dispensed. (Ordinance 519 aka E-34, effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 8-8. Display of prices.
(a) Every retail dealer in motor vehicle fuel shall publicly display and maintain on each pump or other dispensing
device, from which motor fuel is sold by him, at least one sign stating the price per gallon of the motor fuel, the state
and federal taxes, and the total price. All figures, including fractions, upon such signs, other than figures and
fractions used in any price computing mechanism constituting a part of any such pump or dispensing device, shall be
of the same size.
(b) No signs relating to the price of motor fuel or other products sold by any retail dealer shall be posted or
displayed on or about the premises which shall violate any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the town or
law of the state or which shall constitute a traffic or driving hazard, or which shall mislead the public, or in any way
tend to constitute a fraud upon the public.
(c) In lieu of such sign as described in subsection (a), the total selling price to be paid for motor vehicle fuel shall
show and be displayed on a quantity computing device or calculator attached, to the pump from which such gasoline
is sold or offered for sale.
(Ordinance 519 aka E-34, effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 8-9. Display of brand names or trademarks.
All above ground equipment for storing or dispensing motor fuel operated by a retail dealer shall bear in a conspicuous
place the brand name or trademark of the manufacturer or distributor of the product stored therein or dispensed
therefrom. If the motor fuel stored in or sold or dispensed from above ground equipment by a retail dealer has no brand
name or trademark, such container or dispensing equipment shall have conspicuously displayed thereon the words "NO
BRAND", or retail dealer's own brand or trade name. (Ordinance 519 aka E-34, effective 5/7/1967)

CHAPTER 9 FIRE PREVENTION
Article I. In General.
§ 9-1. Intent of chapter; standards.
§ 9-2. "Approved" defined.
§ 9-3. Authority to enter premises.
§ 9-4. Inspection of premises.
§ 9-5. Power of inspector to order fire hazards removed or remedied.
§ 9-6. Compliance with order; appeal.
§ 9-7. Fire records.
§ 9-8. Taking fire apparatus beyond town limits.
§ 9-9. Speeding limitations - Suspension; appeal.
§ 9-10. Resisting or impeding firemen prohibited.
Article II. General precautions against fire.
§ 9-11. False alarms and false information.
§ 9-12. Tampering with fire hydrants.
§ 9-13. Burning combustible materials.
§ 9-14. Hot ashes.
§ 9-15. Stoves and heating devices; installation.
§ 9-16. Storage of oily waste and rags.
§ 9-17. Accumulation of rubbish.
§ 9-18. Obstruction of exits.
§ 9-19. Closing fire-doors and windows.
§ 9-20. Storage of matches.
§ 9-21. Bonfires.
Article III. Dry cleaning establishments.
§ 9-22. Requirements for operation and maintenance.
Article. IV. Explosives, firearms, and similar devices.
§ 9-23. Definitions.
§ 9-24. Manufacturing prohibited.
§ 9-25. Discharge of fireworks, firearms, bows, and similar devices prohibited.
§ 9-26. Storage of explosives.
§ 9-27. Transportation of explosives - public conveyances.
§ 9-28. Same - Regulation of vehicles.
§ 9-29. Discharge of explosives.
Article V. Flammable liquids.
§ 9-30. Hazardous heating and lighting appliances.
§ 9-31. Restrictions on storage and use.
§ 9-32. Appeal.
§ 9-33. Extinguishers required.
§ 9-34. Smoking prohibited.
Article VI. Nitrocellulose motion picture film.
§ 9-35. Storage of film.
§ 9-36. Smoking prohibited.
Article VII. Oil burning equipment.
§ 9-37. Definitions.
§ 9-38. Permit required.
§ 9-39. Certificate of approval for oil burning equipment.
§ 9-40. Fuel oil.
§ 9-41. Use of non-automatic burner limited.
§ 9-42. Gravity feed to burner.
§ 9-43. Pressure tank feed.
§ 9-44. Installation of underground tanks.
§ 9-45. Installation of tanks inside buildings.
§ 9-46. Tank construction.
§ 9-47. Tank vents.
§ 9-48. Tank fill and overflow pipes.
§ 9-49. Oil gauging.
§ 9-50. Oil pumps.
§ 9-51. Piping.
§ 9-52. Valves.
§ 9-53. Preheating of oil.
§ 9-54. Oil burner controls.
§ 9-55. Electric wiring and equipment.
§ 9-56. Installation of burners.
§ 9-57. Modifications of requirements in unusual circumstances.
§ 9-58. Basement garage - Ventilation.
§ 9-59. Repair work.
§ 9-60. Cleaning with flammable liquids.
§ 9-61. Gasoline storage.
§ 9-62. Handling of gasoline and oil.
§ 9-63. Extinguishers required.
§ 9-64. Garage maintenance.
Article XIV – Shopping Centers
§ 9-65. Identification of Rear Entrances
Article VII – Security Key Lock Boxes
§ 9-22. Key Lock Box System
Article VIII – Maryland State Fire Prevention Code
§ 9-65. Maryland State Fire Prevention Code Applicable to Single Family and Two Family Dwellings
§ 9-66. New Construction
§ 9-67. Existing Dwellings
§ 9-68. Maintenance
§ 9-69. Enforcement
Article I. In general.
Sec. 9-1. Intent of chapter; standards.
The intent of this chapter is to safeguard and restrict the storage, handling and use of dangerous and hazardous materials
to a reasonable degree with respect to injury to persons and destruction of property. Installation, construction and
safeguards shall be provided in a standard modern and approved manner. Compliance with the Standards of the
American Insurance Association (1956 Edition), shall be prima facie evidence of such approved manner. The town clerk
shall maintain a public file of the Standards of the American Insurance Association (1956 Edition), which shall be
deemed as requirements to this chapter only insofar as they can be applied to each particular installation for which a
permit is required. (Ordinance 519 aka E-34, effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 9-2. "Approved" defined.
"Approved" when applied to materials, types of construction and appliances, means acceptable to the building inspector
by reason of having been tested and examined by him or by some recognized testing laboratory and found to be properly
safeguarded against fire hazard. (Ordinance 519 aka E-34, effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 9-3. Authority to enter premises.
The chief of the fire department or any member of the fire department designated by him as an inspector may at all
reasonable times enter any building or premises for the purpose of making any inspection which under the provisions of
this chapter he or they may deem necessary to be made. (Ordinance 5 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-4. Inspection of premises.
It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department to inspect or cause to be inspected by fire department officers or
members, as often as may be necessary, but not less than twice a year, all buildings, premises and thoroughfares, for the
purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire, or any violations of the provisions
or intent of any ordinance affecting the fire hazard. (Ordinance 5 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-5. Power of inspector to order fire hazards removed or remedied.
Whenever any officer or member of the fire department shall find in any building or upon any premises or other place,
combustible or explosive matter or dangerous accumulation of rubbish or unnecessary accumulation of waste paper,
boxes, shavings or any highly flammable materials, which is so situated as to endanger lives or property, or whenever he
shall find obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or windows, liable to interfere with the operation
of the fire department or egress of occupants in case of fire, he shall order the same to be removed or remedied.
(Ordinance 5 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-6. Compliance with order; appeal.
Such order as provided in section 9-5 shall forthwith be complied with the owner or occupant of such premises or
buildings, subject to appeal within twenty-four hours to the fire board, whose decision shall be final. Any owner or
occupant failing to comply with such order within ten days after said appeal shall have been determined, or if no appeal
is taken, then within ten days after the service of the said order, shall be liable to a penalty provided in this Code.
(Ordinance 5 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-7. Fire records.
The chief of the fire department shall keep a record of all fires and of all facts concerning the same, including statistics as
to the extent of such fires and damage caused thereby. Such record shall be made daily from the reports made by the
inspectors under the provisions of this chapter. All such records shall be public. (Ordinance 519 aka E-34, effective
5/7/1967)
Sec. 9-8. Taking fire apparatus beyond town limits.
None of the fire fighting equipment belonging to the town shall be removed from within the legal boundaries of the town
for any purpose other than for fires in places having a standard water system for fighting fires, without specific
permission having been granted to the fire chief or to the first assistant chief by the mayor or the acting mayor, or by two
members of the fire board; provided, however, that in every case there shall be left at all times within the corporate limits
at least two motorized pumpers. (Ordinance 4 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-9. Speeding limitations - Suspension; appeal.
It shall be unlawful to drive any fire fighting equipment on any of the streets of the town in a reckless manner or at a rate
of speed in excess of that rate prescribed by State law for emergency vehicles. Drivers operating fire fighting equipment
belonging to the town are subject to suspension of the right of such operation, if after having been given the opportunity
of a hearing before the fire board, said board shall decide by majority vote that the driver so heard is guilty of such
violation. Any driver so suspended shall have the right of appeal to the council, whose decision shall be final. (Ordinance
4 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-10. Resisting or impeding firemen prohibited.
The fire department shall have the management of all fires and no person shall resist, impede, obstruct or interfere with
the movement of the chief of the fire department or his assistants or any firemen in the execution of their duty, and no
person shall refuse to obey any order lawfully given by any officer of the fire department at any fire. (Ordinance 519 aka
E-34, effective 5/7/1967)
Article II. General precautions against fire.
Sec. 9-11. False alarms and false information.
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to five a false alarm of fire in the town, or knowingly to proclaim that any
fire is extinguished or out when such is not the case. (Ordinance 519 aka E-34, effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 9-12. Tampering with fire hydrants.
It shall be unlawful for any person other than a member of an organized fire department or any employee of the town or
of the Easton Utilities Commission to open or operate any of the fire hydrants in the town, and such opening or operation
shall be allowable only in line of official duty, and with standard wrench for such purpose. (Ordinance 5 effective
1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-13. Burning combustible materials.
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn trash, leaves, lumber, straw, grass or other combustible material within the
town limits except in a furnace, stove or built-in incinerator. (Ordinance 5 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-14. Hot ashes.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place hot ashes in any wooden box, barrel or container or on any wooden floor
within the corporate limits of the town. (Ordinance 5 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-15. Stoves and heating devices; installation.
Stoves, ranges, furnaces and other heating devices and their connecting pipes shall be so installed as to comply with
usually accepted rules of safety as interpreted by the building inspector or by the chief of the fire department; provided,
however, that no such heating device, connecting flue, or smoke pipe shall be installed or erected in violation of any
requirement or rule contained in the building code of the town. (Ordinance 5 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-16. Storage of oily waste and rags.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit to be kept any oil waste or oily rags unless such waste or rags shall
be kept in a metal can with a self-closing cover which can is standing on metal legs. (Ordinance 5 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-17. Accumulation of rubbish.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit on his premises any dangerous accumulation of rubbish, waste paper, boxes,
shavings or other flammable or combustible material which is so situated as to endanger person and property. (Ordinance
5 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-18. Obstruction of exits.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit on his premises any condition which shall obstruct or restrict the free use of
fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or windows for egress of occupants in case of fire. (Ordinance 5 effective
1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-19. Closing fire-doors and windows.
Fire doors, fire shutters and fire windows on exterior openings, when not required to be open, shall be closed by the
occupant or occupants of the building having the use or control of them. (Ordinance 5 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-20. Storage of matches.
Matches stored in mercantile establishments shall be in covered, metal-lined bins. (Ordinance 5 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-21. Bonfires.
No person shall make or assist in making any bonfire in or upon any public street or place within the town without the
written permission of the fire chief. (1967 Code by Ordinance 519 aka E-34 effective 5/7/1967)
Article III. Dry Cleaning Establishments.
Sec. 9-22. Requirements for operation and maintenance.
The operation and maintenance of dry cleaning establishments shall conform to the published requirements of the
American Insurance Association (1956 Edition). A copy of these requirements shall be on public file in the town clerk's
office. (Ordinance 5 effective 1/1/1941)
Article IV. Explosives, Firearms and Similar Devices.
Sec. 9-23. Definitions.
"Explosive" or "explosives", whenever used in this chapter, shall mean any chemical compound, mixture, or device,
the primary or common purpose of which is to function by explosion. The term "explosive" includes all materials
classified as Class A, Class B or Class C explosives by Interstate Commerce Commission Regulations, and includes,
but is not limited to, dynamite, blackpowder, pellet powders, initiating explosives, blasting caps, electric blasting
caps, safety fuse, fuse igniters, fuse lighters, squibs, cordeau detonant fuse, instantaneous fuse, igniter cord and
igniters, small arms ammunition, small arms ammunition primers, smokeless propellant, cartridges for propellantactuated
power devices and cartridges for industrial guns, and pyrotechnics.
"Fireworks", wherever used in this chapter shall mean and include any combustible or explosive composition, or any
substance or combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible
effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy
cannons, toy canes or toy guns in which explosives are used, they type of balloons which require fire underneath to
propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, Daygo bombs, sparklers, or other devices of
like construction and any devices containing any explosive or flammable compound or any tablets or other devices
containing any explosive substance, except that the term "fireworks" shall not include auto flares, paper caps
containing not in excess of an average of twenty-five hundredths of a grain of explosive content per cap
manufactured in accordance with the Interstate Commerce Commission Regulations for packing and shipping as
provided therein, and toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices for use of such caps, the sale and use of which
shall be permitted at all times.
"Magazine" shall mean any building or structure approved for the storage of explosives.
(1967 Code by Ordinance 519 aka E-34 effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 9-24. Manufacturing prohibited.
The manufacture of explosives and fireworks is prohibited. (Ordinance 5 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-25. Discharge of fireworks, firearms, bows, and similar devices prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to shoot or discharge any gun, pistol, sling shot, squib, rocket,
firecracker or mixture of gunpowder or other fireworks, or to use any bow, crossbow, or similar device within the
corporate limits of the town. (Ordinance 129 effective 3/23/1987, historical reference 5)
Sec. 9-26. Storage of explosives.
(a) Magazines containing explosives shall be located at distances from neighboring buildings, highways and railroad
in conformity with the American Quantity and Distance Table.
(b) Blasting caps or detonators of any kind shall not be placed or kept in the same magazine with other explosives.
(c) Magazines shall be kept locked except when being inspected or when explosives are being placed therein or
removed there from.
(d) Magazines shall be kept clean and free from grit, rubbish and empty packages.
(Ordinanace 5 effective 1/1/1941)
(e) Magazines shall be made of fireproof material or wood covered with sheet iron and shall be conspicuously
marked "Magazine - Explosives." (Ordinance 519 aka E-34 effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 9-27. Transportation of explosives - public conveyances.
Explosives shall not be transported or carried on and in any conveyance carrying passengers for hire. (Ordinance 5
effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-28. Same - Regulation of vehicles.
Every vehicle, while carrying explosives, shall display the word "EXPLOSIVES" painted on or attached to the rear
and sides of such vehicle in letters at least four (4) inches in height.
(a) No person in charge of a vehicle containing such explosive shall smoke in, near, or upon such vehicle; drive,
load or unload the vehicle while intoxicated; drive load or unload such vehicle in careless or reckless manner.
(b) No person shall place or carry, or cause to be placed or carried, in the bed or body of any vehicle containing such
explosives, any metal tool or other piece of metal or any matches.
(c) No person shall place or carry or cause to be placed or carried, in any vehicle containing explosives, any
exploders, detonators, blasting caps or other similar explosive material.
(Ordinance 5 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-29. Discharge of explosives.
No person shall discharge any explosives, except construction devices such as explosive rivets and explosive-driven pins
or studs. (Ordinance 519 aka E-34 effective 5/7/1967)
Article V. Flammable liquids.
Sec. 9-30. Hazardous heating and lighting appliances.
The chief of the fire department may prohibit the sale or use of any heating or lighting appliance using flammable
liquids, which has not been tested by Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., or some other competent authority, and found to
be properly safeguarded against fire hazard. (Ordinance 5 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-31. Restrictions on storage and use.
The chief of the fire department shall prohibit, except as may otherwise specifically be provided herein, the storage or
use of any flammable and/or explosive liquid, material or substance whenever, in his opinion, the storage or use of same
shall constitute or create a menace, actual or potential, to the safety of the lives or property of the citizens of the town.
(Ordinance 5 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-32. Appeal.
Appeal from any decision of the chief of the fire department in connection with this article may be made to the fire
board. (Ordinance 5 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-33. Extinguishers required.
Where flammable liquids are kept, used or handled, a quantity of loose non-combustible absorbents, such as dry sand or
ashes, together with pails or scoops, and chemical extinguishers or other extinguishing devices or material shall be
provided in such kind or quantities as may be directed by the chief of the fire department. (Ordinance 5 effective
1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-34. Smoking prohibited.
Smoking or the carrying of matches or other smoking material in rooms where flammable liquids are handled is
prohibited. Suitable "NO SMOKING" signs shall be displayed. (Ordinance 5 effective 1/1/1941).
Article VI. Nitrocellulose motion picture film.
Sec. 9-35. Storage of film.
The storage or keeping on hand of nitrocellulose motion picture film, and the enclosures or booths for the operation of
projectors for such film, shall be based upon compliance with the regulations of the American Insurance Association
(1956 Edition). (Ordinance 5 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-36. Smoking prohibited.
Smoking or the carrying of a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette or other form of smoking material in rooms where film is
stored or handled is prohibited. (Ordinance 5 effective 1/1/1941)
Article VII. Oil burning equipment.
Sec. 9-37. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article:
"Oil burners" shall mean any device designed to burn fuel oil having a flash point of 100 Deg. F. or higher, as
determined by the Tag Closed Tester in accordance with the method of test adopted by the American Society for
Testing Materials (A.S.T.M. Designation D56-21), and having a fuel tank or container with a capacity of more than
five gallons connected thereto.
"Oil burning equipment" shall include oil burners and all tanks, piping, pumps, control devices and accessories
connected to the burners.
(Ordinance 13 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-38. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install any oil burning equipment unless they shall have been
issued on oil burner installation permit for each separate installation. (Ordinance 13 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-39. Certificate of approval for oil burning equipment.
(a) Application for certificates of approval shall be made in writing to the town in such form and detail as it shall
prescribe.
(b) No certificate of approval shall be issued for any kind of oil burning equipment which has not been tested and
examined by the Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., and bears their label of approval.
(c) Certificates of approval may be revoked by the town, after a hearing, for wilful violation of the provisions of this
article over which the holder of the certificate of approval has direct control.
(Ordinance 13 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-40. Fuel oil.
The grade of fuel oil used with any burner shall be one which tests and experience have shown to be suitable for use with
that burner. The oil shall have a flash point not less than 100 Def. F. determined as specified in section 9-37 and shall be
free from acid, grit, and fibrous or other foreign matter likely to clog or injure the burners or valves. (Ordinance 13
effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-41. Use on non-automatic burner limited.
Oil burners which are not equipped with automatic means for preventing abnormal discharge of oil at the burner, shall
not be installed or operated in any location where a competent attendant will not be constantly on duty in the room where
the burner is located while the burner is in operation. (Ordinance 13 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-42. Gravity feed to burner.
(a) When to be used: Gravity feed shall be used only with burners arranged to prevent abnormal discharge of oil at
the burner by automatic means specifically approved for the burner with which it is used.
(b) Supply tanks: Gravity supply tanks shall not exceed 275 gallons individual capacity. Where more than one
gravity supply tank is used, such tanks shall be connected to the feed pipe leading to the burner in such a way that
only one tank can discharge its contents at a time.
(c) Level valve: Where oil is supplied to the burner by gravity and a constant level device is not incorporated in the
burner assembly or in an auxiliary tank used in connection with an automatic pump, an approved constant level
device shall be installed in the oil feed line at the gravity tank or as close thereto as practicable. The vent opening of
such constant level device shall be connected by piping or tubing to the gravity tank vent pipe.
(Ordinance 13 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-43. Pressure tank feed.
Pressure tank feed shall be used only with burners arranged to prevent abnormal discharge of oil at the burner by
automatic means specifically approved for the burner with which it is used. Pressure tanks shall not exceed a capacity of
sixty gallons and shall not be operated at pressures exceeding fifty pounds per square inch. They shall be equipped with a
reliable pressure gauge, and with an automatic relief valve piped to discharge outside of buildings. (Ordinance 13
effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-44. Installation of underground tanks.
(a) Underground tanks shall be so buried as to have a cover of earth not less than 2 feet thick or shall be covered
with not less than 1 foot of earth on top of which shall be placed a slab of reinforced concrete not less than 4 inches
thick. The slab shall be set on a firm, well tamped earth foundation and shall extend at least 1 foot beyond the tank
in all directions. Where tanks are buried underneath buildings such a concrete slab shall be provided in every
instance.
(b) Underground tanks shall be set on a firm foundation and surrounded with soft earth or sand well tamped in place.
Where necessary to prevent floating, they shall be securely anchored or weighted.
(Ordinance 13 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-45. Installation of tanks inside buildings.
(a) Oil supply tanks larger than 60 gallons capacity shall not be located in buildings above the lowest story, cellar or
basement.
(b) Unenclosed inside storage tanks and auxiliary tanks shall not be located within 4 feet, horizontally, of any fire or
flame.
(c) Inside storage and auxiliary tanks shall be securely supported by substantial incombustible supports to prevent
settling, sliding or lifting.
(d) Oil supply tanks located inside buildings shall not exceed 275 gallons individual capacity or 550 gallons
aggregate capacity (in one building) unless installed in an enclosure or casing constructed as follows:
The walls of the enclosure shall be constructed of reinforced concrete at least 6 inches thick or of brick at least 8
inches thick, and shall be bonded to the floor. The space between the tank and the enclosure shall be completely
filled with sand or well tamped earth. Where the floor or other construction immediately above the tank is of fireresistive
construction capable of safely sustaining a load of 150 pounds per square foot, the walls of the enclosure
shall be carried to a height not less than 1 foot above the tank and the space filled with sand or well tamped earth to
the top; otherwise the enclosure shall have a top of reinforced concrete at least five inches thick or of equivalent
construction.
Instead of an enclosure as above described the tank may be encased in reinforced concrete not less than 6 inches in
thickness, applied directly to the tank so as to completely eliminate any air space.
(e) In ordinary buildings the nominal gross capacity of tanks shall not exceed 5,000 gallons.
(f) In fire-resistive buildings the nominal gross capacity of tanks shall not exceed 15,000 gallons.
(Ordinance 13 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-47. Tank vents.
(a) Storage tanks shall (except for hydraulic or inert gas systems) be equipped with an open vent or an approved
automatically operated vent, arranged to discharge to the open air. Vent openings and vent pipes shall be of ample
size to prevent abnormal pressure in the tank during filling but no smaller than 1 inch pipe size.
(b) Vent pipes shall be arranged to drain to the tank. The lower end of the vent pipe shall not extend through the top
into the tank for a distance of more than one inch.
(c) Vent pipes shall terminate outside of buildings at a point not less than 2 feet measured vertically or horizontally
from any window or other building opening. Outer ends of vent pipes shall be provided with a weather-proof hood.
Vent pipes of tanks containing heaters shall be extended to such a height that oil vapors discharging from the vent
will be readily diffused without danger of ignition.
(d) Vent pipes shall not be cross-connected with fill pipes or return lines from burners.
(Ordinance 13 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-48. Tank fill and overflow pipes.
(a) Underground tanks and storage tanks inside buildings shall be filled only through fill pipes terminating outside of
buildings at a point at least 5 feet from any building opening at the same or lower level. Fill terminals shall be closed
tight, when not in use, by a metal cover designed to prevent tampering.
(b) Auxiliary tanks shall be filled by pumping from storage tanks.
(c) Auxiliary tanks other than vacuum tanks shall be equipped with an overflow pipe draining to the storage tank, at least
one size larger than the supply pipe.
(d) Overflow pipes of auxiliary gravity tanks shall have no valves or obstructions. Overflow pipes of auxiliary pressure
tanks shall be provided with interconnected valves or other means for automatically venting the tank during filling.
(Ordinance 13 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-49. Oil gauging.
(a) All tanks in which a constant oil level is not maintained by an automatic pump shall be equipped with an
approved method of determining the oil level.
(b) Test wells shall not be installed inside buildings and where permitted for outside services shall be closed tight,
when not in use, by a metal cover designed to prevent tampering.
(c) Gauging devices such as liquid level indicators or signals shall be installed so that oil or vapor will not be
discharged into the building from the fuel supply system.
(Ordinance 13 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-50. Oil pumps.
(a) Oil pumps shall be of a type approved by Underwriters' Laboratory, Inc., secure against leaks, and shall be
rigidly fastened in place.
(b) Automatic pumps not an integral part of the burner shall be arranged to stop automatically in case of total
breakage of the supply line to the burner.
(Ordinance 13 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-51. Piping.
(a) All piping shall be standard full weight wrought iron, steel or brass pipe with standard fittings or approved brass
or copper tubing with approved fittings, except that approved flexible metal hose may be used for reducing the
effects of jarring and vibration or where rigid connections are impracticable.
(b) Pipe used in the installation of domestic and industrial type burners shall not be smaller than 1/2 inch iron pipe
size. Copper or brass tubing shall not be smaller in size than 1/2 inch O.D. for outside tank installations, nor less
than 3/8 inch O.D. for inside tank installation. Flexible metal hose shall be installed strictly in accordance with the
limitations of its approval.
(c) Piping shall be rigidly secured in place and protected from injury in a workmanlike manner, and where
necessary, shall be protected against corrosion. Where practicable, oil piping shall be buried underground or in a
concrete floor or placed in a metal-covered pipe trench.
(d) Pipe joints and connections shall be made tight in a workmanlike manner. Unions and tubing fittings shall be
approved type. Unions requiring gaskets or packing, and right and left couplings shall not be used in oil lines.
(e) Proper allowance shall be made for expansion, contraction, jarring and vibration. Pipe lines, other than tubing,
connected to underground tanks, except fill lines and test wells, shall be provided with double swing joints arranged
to permit the tank to settle without impairing the efficiency of the pipe connections.
(f) Openings for pipes through outside walls below the ground level shall be made water tight.
(g) Oil supply lines to burners shall be provided with approved strainers.
(Ordinance 13 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-52. Valves.
(a) Readily accessible shut-off valves of approved type shall be installed in oil supply lines close to gravity and
pressure supply tanks. Shut-off valves of approved type shall be installed on each side of oil strainers which are not
a part of the oil burner unit and on the discharge and suction side of oil pumps which pump directly to the burner but
which are not a part of the burner unit.
(b) Where a shut-off valve is installed in the discharge line of an oil pump, an approved pressure relief valve shall be
connected into the discharge line between the pump and the shut-off valve and arranged to return surplus oil to the
storage tank or to by-pass it around the pump.
(c) Control valves shall be provided with stuffing box of liberal size, containing a removable cupped bland designed
to compress the packing against the valve stem and arranged so as to facilitate removal. Valves shall be designed to
close against the supply, and to prevent withdrawal of stem by continued operation of the handwheel. Packing
affected by the oil or by heat shall not be used.
(Ordinance 13 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-53. Preheating of oil.
Preheating of oil, where necessary, shall be done by steam, hot water or approved electric heaters. Heaters shall be
substantially constructed with all joints made oil tight. Thermometers shall be installed at suitable locations to indicate
the temperature of the heated oil. Heaters shall be by-passed or provided with suitable means to prevent abnormal
pressure. (Ordinance 13 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-54. Oil burner controls.
(a) Oil burning equipment shall be provided with some means for manually stopping the flow of oil to the burner,
from a conveniently located point at a safe distance from the burner. With electrically driven equipment this may be
accomplished by a switch in the motor supply circuit, placed near the entrance to the room where the burner is
located. A quick-closing valve in the oil supply line may also be used.
(b) Automatically operated oil burners used in connection with hot water, steam or warm air heating systems shall
be equipped with approved automatic devices to shut down the burner in the event of undue pressure in a steam
boiler or overheating within a hot water boiler or warm air furnace.
(c) Automatically operated oil burners used in connection with steam heating systems shall be equipped with
approved automatic devices to prevent the operation of the burner at all times when there is not sufficient water in
the boiler.
(d) In systems where steam or air is used for atomizing the oil, the equipment shall be so arranged that in case of
interruption of the atomizing supply, the oil supply will be immediately shut off.
(Ordinance 13 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-55. Electric wiring and equipment.
Electric wiring and equipment used in connection with oil burning equipment shall be installed in accordance with the
National Electric Code. (Ordinance 13 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-56. Installation of burners.
(a) Oil burners shall be securely installed in a workmanlike manner, in accordance with the instructions of the
manufacturer, by qualified mechanics experienced in making such installations.
(b) All furnaces containing oil burner installation shall be set on a metal, concrete or other approved noncombustible
and rigid foundation. Such foundation shall not rest on or be joined to any wood or other combustible
material.
(c) Said furnaces shall be so installed as to be separated on all sides by not less than 12 inches of air space from all
wood or other combustible material, and furnace and smoke pipe shall be so set as to be at least two feet from
overhead joists, and to the under side of said joists shall be fastened a solid asbestos sheet of 1/8 inch thickness
extending not less than 12 inches on either side of smoke pipe.
(d) Where oil burners are installed in furnaces or originally designed for solid fuel, the ash door of the furnace shall
be removed or bottom ventilation otherwise provided to prevent the accumulation of vapors in the ash pit, unless the
burner is of a type which mechanically purges the ash pit.
(e) Boilers and furnaces in which oil burners are installed shall be connected to flues having sufficient draft at all
times to assure safe operation of the burner; a suitable draft regulating device shall be installed where necessary to
prevent excessive draft. Smoke pipe dampers, if any, shall be such that they cannot close off more than 80 percent of
the internal cross section area of the smoke pipe.
(f) Rooms in which oil burners are located shall be provided with adequate ventilation to assure continuous complete
combustion of the oil.
(g) Contractors installing industrial oil burning systems shall furnish diagrams showing the main oil lines and
controlling valves, one of which shall be posted near the oil burning equipment and another at some point which will
be accessible in case of fire at the burners.
(Ordinance 13 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-57. Modifications of requirements in unusual circumstances.
Where the circumstances or conditions of any particular installation are unusual and such as to render the strict
application of this article impracticable, the town may permit such modifications as will provide a substantially
equivalent degree of safety. (Ordinance 13 effective 1/1/1941)
Article VIII. Garages.
Sec. 9-58. Basement garages - Ventilation.
Basements used as public garages shall be continuously ventilated by mechanical ventilating systems so designed as to
assure suitable dilution and removal of gasoline vapors and motor exhaust fumes. (Ordinance 5 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-59. Repair work.
Carbon and lead burning, welding and other processes involving direct application of flame shall be carried on in the
open air not less than ten (10) feet from any building or in a special room separated from the rest of the garage by two (2)
hour partitions. (Ordinance 5 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-60. Cleaning with flammable liquids.
Volatile flammable liquids shall not be used for cleaning purposes in a garage unless in a special closed machine of
approved type or in a special room separated from the rest of the garage by two (2) hour partitions. (Ordinance 5
effective 1/1/1941.)
Sec. 9-61. Gasoline storage.
Exclusive of that in the tanks of vehicles, gasoline shall be kept at a public garage only in underground tanks, in
approved safety cans, or in approved portable wheeled tanks not exceeding a capacity of sixty (60) gallons each.
(Ordinance 5 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-62. Handling of gasoline and oils.
The tanks of vehicles shall be filled directly through hose from pumps attached to portable tanks or to permanent
filling stations connected to underground storage tanks. Gasoline shall not be handled in any open container.
Gasoline and other volatile flammable liquids shall not be allowed to run upon the floor or to fall or pass into the
drainage system of the premises. Self-closing metal cans shall be used for all oily waste or wasted oils.
(Ordinance 5 effective 1/1/1941)
Contents of oil separators or traps or floor drainage systems shall be collected at frequent intervals and removed
from the premises. (1967 Code by Ordinance 519 aka E-34 effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 9-63. Extinguishers required.
In every public garage two or more approved chemical fire extinguishers and four or more pails of sand shall be kept
convenient for quick use in case of fire. (Ordinance 5 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 9-64. Garage maintenance.
Garages shall be swept frequently and kept clean. (Ordinance 5 effective 1/1/1941)
Article XIV. Shopping Centers.
9-65 Identification of Rear Entrances.
Any office, business or store located in a shopping center shall, in addition to identifying its front entrance , identify
all of its rear entrances by posting a permanent sign on or near each rear entrance. Letters on such signs shall be not
less than three (3) inches nor greater than four (4) inches in height. Any sign which may be used to comply with this
ordinance shall comply with the requirements of Section 606 of the Easton Zoning Ordinance; provided, however,
that such sign placed by the rear entrance of an office, business or store shall not be counted or applied towards the
number of signs any such office, business or store may be entitled to have under the Easton Zoning Ordinance.
(Ordinance 217 effective 2/10/1992, historical reference 215)
Article VII. Security Lock Boxes.
9-22 Key Lock Box System
(a) The following structures shall be equipped with a key lock box at or near the main entrance or such other
location required by the Chief of the Easton Volunteer Fire Department, Inc. or his or her designee:
(1) Commercial or industrial structures protected by an automatic alarm system or automatic suppression
system, or such structures that are secured in a manner that restricts access during an emergency;
(2) Multi-family residential structures that have restricted access through locked doors and have common
corridor for access to the living units;
(3) Governmental structures and nursing care facilities.
(b) All newly constructed structures which are subject to this section shall have the key lock box installed and
operational prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit. All structures in existence on the effective date of this
section and subject to this section shall have one year from the effective date of this section to have a key lock
box installed and operational.
(c) The Fire Chief shall designate the type of key lock box system to be implemented within the Town and shall
have the authority to require all structures to use the designated system.
(d) The owner or operator of a structure required to have a key lock box shall, at all times, keep a key in the lock
box that will allow for access to the structure.
(e) The Fire Chief shall be authorized to implement rules and regulations for the use of the lock box system.
(f) No Person other than the Fire Chief or his or her designee shall have access to the master key for the lock box
system.
(g) Any person who owns or operates a structure which is subject to this section who violates there terms hereof
shall be guilty of a municipal infraction and shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-8 of the Code
for any violation of this section, provided that the minimum fine for a conviction for a violation of this section
shall be $100.00. Any person found guilty shall also be subject to an abatement order or similar remedial order
for a court having jurisdiction over the enforcement proceeding. Each day of violation shall constitutea separate
offence.
(Ordinance 477, effective 11/3/2004)
Article VIII. Maryland State Fire Prevention Code.
§ 9-65. Maryland State Fire Prevention Code Applicable To Single Family and Two Family
Dwellings.
The provisions of the Maryland State Fire Prevention Code, authorized by Maryland Annotated Code Public Safety
Article Section 6-206 and as published in the Code of Maryland RegulationsTitle 29.06.01 et seq., as the same may
be from time to time amended, shall apply to all single family and two family dwellings within the Town.
(Ordinance 517 effective 10/7/2007)
§ 9-66. New Construction
All single family and two family dwellings constructed pursuant to a building permit issued after the effective date
of this ordinance (October 7, 2007) shall comply with the provisions of the Maryland State Fire Prevention Code,
authorized by Maryland Annotated Code Public Safety Article Section 6-201 and as published in the Code of
Maryland Regulations Title 29.06.01 et seq., as the same may be from time to time amended. (Ordinance 517
effective 10/7/2007)
§ 9-67. Existing Dwelling
Regardless of the time of construction, if an existing single family or two family dwelling is destroyed or
demolished, any replacement dwelling(s) shall conform to the State Fire Prevention Code.” (Ordinance 519 effective
12/23/2007)
§ 9-68. Maintenance
Any interior automatic fire sprinkler system installed in a single or two family dwelling in the Town shall be
installed and maintained in accordance with the most recent versions of Standard 13D, “ Installation of Sprinkler
Systems in One and Two Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes”, as promugulated by the National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA), and as modified and adopted by the Maryland State Fire Prevention Code.
(Ordinance 517 effective 10/7/2007)
§ 9-69. Enforcement
To the extent permitted by law, the provisions of this article may be enforced by either the Town Code Enforcement
Official or the State Fire Marshal, or their respective designees. (Ordinance 517 effective 10/7/2007)
CHAPTER 9A FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
Ordinance 626 effective 7/22/2013, historical reference 120, 160 and 212)
Article I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 9A-1.1 Findings
The Federal Emergency Management Agency has identified special flood hazard areas within
the boundaries of the Town of Easton. Special flood hazard areas are subject to periodic
inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of
commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and
relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and
general welfare. Structures that are inadequately elevated, improperly floodproofed, or otherwise
unprotected from flood damage also contribute to flood losses.
The Town of Easton, by resolution, agreed to meet the requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program and was accepted for participation in the program on September 28, 1984. As
of that date, the initial effective date of the Town of Easton Flood Insurance Rate Map, all
development and new construction as defined herein, are to be compliant with these regulations.
(Ordinance 626 effective 7/22/2013)
§ 9A-1.2 Statutory Authorization
The Maryland General Assembly, in Land Use Article, Title 4, General Development
Regulations and Zoning (Annotated Code of Maryland), has established as policy of the State
that the orderly development and use of land and structures requires comprehensive regulation
through the implementation of planning and zoning control, and that planning and zoning
controls shall be implemented by local government in order to, among other purposes, secure the
public safety, promote health and general welfare, and promote the conservation of natural
resources. Therefore, the Town of Easton does hereby adopt the following floodplain
management regulations. (Ordinance 626 effective 7/22/2013)
§ 9A-1.3 Statement of Purpose
It is the purpose of these regulations to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and
to:
(A) Protect human life, health and welfare;
(B) Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or
minimize flood damage in the future;
(C) Minimize flooding of water supply and sanitary sewage disposal systems;
(D) Maintain natural drainage;
(E) Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental units and its
residents, by discouraging unwise design and construction of development in areas subject to
flooding;
(F) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(G) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(H) Minimize damage to public facilities and other utilities such as water and gas mains,
electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges;
(I) Reinforce that those who build in and occupy special flood hazard areas should assume
responsibility for their actions;
(J) Minimize the impact of development on adjacent properties within and near flood-prone
areas;
(K) Provide that the flood storage and conveyance functions of floodplains are maintained;
(L) Minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial functions of
floodplains;
(M) Prevent floodplain uses that are either hazardous or environmentally incompatible; and
(N) Meet community participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as
set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 C.F.R. Section 59.22. (Ordinance 626
effective 7/22/2013)
§ 9A-1.4 Areas to Which These Regulations Apply
These regulations shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the Town
of Easton, and identified in Section 1.5. (Ordinance 626 effective 7/22/2013)
§ 9A-1.5 Basis for Establishing Special Flood Hazard Areas and BFEs
(A) For the purposes of these regulations, the minimum basis for establishing special flood
hazard areas and base flood elevations is the Flood Insurance Study for Talbot County,
Maryland and Incorporated Areas dated August 5, 2013, or the most recent revision thereof,
and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and all subsequent amendments and
revisions to the FIRMs. The FIS and FIRMs are retained on file and available to the public at
the Town of Easton Town Hall.
(B) Where field surveyed topography or digital topography indicates that ground elevations
are below the closest applicable base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special
flood hazard on the FIRM, the area shall be considered as special flood hazard area.
(C) To establish base flood elevations in special flood hazard areas that do not have such
elevations shown on the FIRM, the Floodplain Administrator may provide the best available
data for base flood elevations, may require the applicant to obtain available information from
Federal, State or other sources, or may require the applicant to establish special flood hazard
areas and base flood elevations as set forth in Section 3.3, Section 3.4, and Section 3.5 of
these regulations. (Ordinance 626 effective 7/22/2013)
§ 9A-1.6 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
These regulations are not intended to repeal or abrogate any existing regulations and ordinances,
including subdivision regulations, zoning ordinances, building codes, or any existing easements,
covenants, or deed restrictions. In the event of a conflict between these regulations and any other
ordinance, the more restrictive shall govern. (Ordinance 626 effective 7/22/2013)
§ 9A-1.7 Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of these regulations, all provisions shall be:
(A) Considered as minimum requirements;
(B) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and,
(C) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes.
Notes referencing publications of the Federal Emergency Management Agency refer to the most
recent edition of those publications, are intended only as guidance, and do not bind or alter the
authority of the Floodplain Administrator to interpret and apply these regulations. (Ordinance
626 effective 7/22/2013)
§ 9A-1.8 Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
The degree of flood protection required by these regulations is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can
and will occur, and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. These
regulations do not imply that land outside of the special flood hazard areas or uses that are
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage.
These regulations shall not create liability on the part of the Town of Easton, any officer or
employee thereof, the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) or the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), for any flood damage that results from reliance on
these regulations or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ordinance 626
effective 7/22/2013)
§ 9A-1.9 Severability
Should any section or provision of these regulations be declared by the courts to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the regulations as a
whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ordinance 626 effective 7/22/2013)
Article II: DEFINITIONS
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in these regulations shall be interpreted to
have the meaning they have in common usage and to give these regulations the most reasonable
application. (Ordinance 626 effective 7/22/2013)
Accessory Structure: A building or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily
incidental and subordinate to, the principal structure. For the purposes of these regulations, an
accessory structure shall be used solely for parking of vehicles and limited storage.
Agreement to Submit an Elevation Certificate: A form on which the applicant for a permit to
construct a building or structure, to construct certain horizontal additions, to place or replace a
manufactured home, to substantially improve a building, structure, or manufactured home,
agrees to have an Elevation Certificate prepared by a licensed professional engineer or licensed
professional surveyor, as specified by the Floodplain Administrator, and to submit the certificate:
(1) Upon placement of the lowest floor and prior to further vertical construction; and
(2) Prior to the final inspection and issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy.
Alteration of a Watercourse: For the purpose of these regulations, alteration of a watercourse
includes, but is not limited to widening, deepening or relocating the channel, including
excavation or filling of the channel. Alteration of a watercourse does not include construction of
a road, bridge, culvert, dam, or in-stream pond unless the channel is proposed to be realigned or
relocated as part of such construction.
Area of Shallow Flooding: A designated Zone AO on the Flood Insurance Rate Map with a 1-
percent annual chance or greater of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where
velocity flow may be evident; such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Base Building: The building to which an addition is being added. This term is used in provisions
relating to additions.
Base Flood: The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year; the base flood also is referred to as the 1-percent annual chance (100-year) flood.
Base Flood Elevation: The water surface elevation of the base flood in relation to the datum
specified on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map. In areas of shallow flooding, the base
flood elevation is the highest adjacent natural grade elevation plus the depth number specified in
feet on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, or at least four (4) feet if the depth number is not
specified.
Basement: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Building Code(s): The effective Maryland Building Performance Standards (COMAR 05.02.07),
including the building code, residential code, and existing building code.
Community: A political subdivision of the State of Maryland (county, city or town) that has
authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations within its jurisdictional
boundaries.
Critical and Essential Facilities: Buildings and other structures that are intended to remain
operational in the event of extreme environmental loading from flood, wind, snow or
earthquakes. [Note: See Maryland Building Performance Standards, Sec. 1602 and Table
1604.5.] Critical and essential facilities typically include hospitals, fire stations, police stations,
storage of critical records, facilities that handle or store hazardous materials, and similar
facilities.
Declaration of Land Restriction (Nonconversion Agreement): A form signed by the owner to
agree not to convert or modify in any manner that is inconsistent with the terms of the permit and
these regulations, certain enclosures below the lowest floor of elevated buildings and certain
accessory structures. The form requires the owner to record it on the property deed to inform
future owners of the restrictions.
Development: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not
limited to buildings or other structures, placement of manufactured homes, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
Elevation Certificate: FEMA Form 81-31, on which surveyed elevations and other data
pertinent to a property and a building are identified and which shall be completed by a licensed
professional land surveyor or a licensed professional engineer, as specified by the Floodplain
Administrator. When used to document the height above grade of buildings in special flood
hazard areas for which base flood elevation data are not available, the Elevation Certificate shall
be completed in accordance with the instructions issued by FEMA. [Note: FEMA Form 81-31
and instructions are available online at http://www.fema.gov/library/viewRecord.do?id=1383.]
Enclosure Below the Lowest Floor: An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure that is located
below an elevated building, is surrounded by walls on all sides, and is usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, provided that such
enclosure is built in accordance with the applicable design requirements specified in these
regulations. Also see “Lowest Floor.”
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA): The Federal agency with the overall
responsibility for administering the National Flood Insurance Program.
Flood or Flooding: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters, and/or
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood Damage-Resistant Materials: Any construction material that is capable of withstanding
direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining any damage that requires more
than cosmetic repair. [Note: See NFIP Technical Bulletin #2, “Flood Damage-Resistant Materials
Requirements.”]
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): An official map on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has delineated special flood hazard areas to indicate the magnitude and
nature of flood hazards, to designate applicable flood zones, and to delineate floodways, if
applicable. FIRMs that have been prepared in digital format or converted to digital format are
referred to as Digital FIRMs (DFIRM).
Flood Insurance Study (FIS): The official report in which the Federal Emergency Management
Agency has provided flood profiles, floodway information, and the water surface elevations.
Flood Opening: A flood opening (non-engineered) is an opening that is used to meet the
prescriptive requirement of 1 square inch of net open area for every square foot of enclosed area.
An engineered flood opening is an opening that is designed and certified by a licensed
professional engineer or licensed architect as meeting certain performance characteristics,
including providing automatic entry and exit of floodwaters; the certification requirement may be
satisfied by an individual certification or issuance of an Evaluation Report by the ICC Evaluation
Service, Inc. [Note: See NFIP Technical Bulletin #1, “Openings in Foundation Walls and Walls
of Enclosures.”]
Flood Protection Elevation: The base flood elevation plus two (2) feet of freeboard. Freeboard
is a factor of safety that compensates for uncertainty in factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such
as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams, climate change, and the
hydrologic effect of urbanization in a watershed.
Flood Protection Setback: A distance measured perpendicular to the top of bank of a
watercourse that delineates an area to be left undisturbed to minimize future flood damage and to
recognize the potential for bank erosion. Along nontidal waters of the State, the flood protection
setback is:
(1) 100 feet, if the watercourse has special flood hazard areas shown on the FIRM, except
where the setback extends beyond the boundary of the flood hazard area; or
(2) 50 feet, if the watercourse does not have special flood hazard areas shown on the FIRM.
Flood Zone: A designation for areas that are shown on Flood Insurance Rate Maps:
(1) Zone A: Special flood hazard areas subject to inundation by the 1-percent annual chance
(100-year) flood; base flood elevations are not determined.
(2) Zone AE and Zone A1-30: Special flood hazard areas subject to inundation by the 1-
percent annual chance (100-year) flood; base flood elevations are determined; floodways may
or may not be determined. In areas subject to tidal flooding, the Limit of Moderate Wave
Action may or may not be delineated.
(3) Zone AH and Zone AO: Areas of shallow flooding, with flood depths of 1 to 3 feet
(usually areas of ponding or sheet flow on sloping terrain), with or without BFEs or
designated flood depths.
(4) Zone B and Zone X (shaded): Areas subject to inundation by the 0.2-percent annual
chance (500-year) flood; areas subject to the 1-percent annual chance (100-year) flood with
average depths of less than 1 foot or with contributing drainage area less than 1 square mile;
and areas protected from the base flood by levees.
(5) Zone C and Zone X (unshaded): Areas outside of Zones designated A, AE, A1-30, AO,
VE, V1-30, B, and X (shaded).
(6) Zone VE and Zone V1-30: Special flood hazard areas subject to inundation by the 1-
percent annual chance (100-year) flood and subject to high velocity wave action (also see
coastal high hazard area).
Floodplain: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see
definition of “Flood” or “Flooding”).
Floodproofing or Floodproofed: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to buildings or structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real
estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents, such
that the buildings or structures are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. [Note: State regulations at COMAR
26.17.04.11(B)(7) do not allow new nonresidential buildings in nontidal waters of the State to be
floodproofed.]
Floodproofing Certificate: FEMA Form 81-65 that is to be completed, signed and sealed by a
licensed professional engineer or licensed architect to certify that the design of floodproofing and
proposed methods of construction are in accordance with the applicable requirements of Section
5.5(B) of these regulations. [Note: FEMA Form 81-65 is available online at
http://www.fema.gov/library/viewRecord.do?id=1600.]
Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to pass the base flood discharge such that the cumulative increase in the water
surface elevation of the base flood discharge is no more than a designated height. When shown
on a FIRM, the floodway is referred to as the “designated floodway.”
Functionally Dependent Use: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is
located or carried out in close proximity to water; the term includes only docking facilities, port
facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship
building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.
Highest Adjacent Grade: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to
construction, next to the proposed foundation of a structure.
Historic Structure: Any structure that is:
(1) Individually listed in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listings on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by
the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on the Maryland Inventory of Historic Properties maintained by the
Maryland Historical Trust; or
(4) Individually listed on the inventory of historic places maintained by Town of Easton
whose historic preservation program has been certified by the Maryland Historical Trust or
the Secretary of the Interior.
Hydrologic and Hydraulic Engineering Analyses: Analyses performed by a licensed
professional engineer, in accordance with standard engineering practices that are accepted by the
Maryland Department of the Environment (Nontidal Wetlands & Waterways) and FEMA, used
to determine the base flood, other frequency floods, flood elevations, floodway information and
boundaries, and flood profiles.
Letter of Map Change (LOMC): A Letter of Map Change is an official FEMA determination,
by letter, that amends or revises an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance
Study. Letters of Map Change include:
Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA): An amendment based on technical data showing that a
property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends
the current effective Flood Insurance Rate Map and establishes that a specific property or
structure is not located in a special flood hazard area.
Letter of Map Revision (LOMR): A revision based on technical data that may show changes to
flood zones, flood elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features. A
Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F), is a determination that a structure or parcel of
land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer exposed
to flooding associated with the base flood. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must
have been permitted and placed in accordance with the community’s floodplain management
regulations.
Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment as to whether a
proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements
for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not
revise the effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance Study; upon submission and
approval of certified as-built documentation, a Letter of Map Revision may be issued by FEMA,
to revise the effective FIRM.
Licensed: As used in these regulations, licensed refers to professionals who are authorized to
practice in the State of Maryland by issuance of licenses by the Maryland Board of Architects,
Maryland Board of Professional Engineers, Maryland Board of Professional Land Surveyors, and
the Maryland Real Estate Appraisers and Home Inspectors Commission.
Lowest Floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) of a building or
structure; the floor of an enclosure below the lowest floor is not the lowest floor provided the
enclosure is constructed in accordance with these regulations. The lowest floor of a manufactured
home is the bottom of the lowest horizontal supporting member (longitudinal chassis frame
beam).
Manufactured Home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities. The term manufactured home does not include a recreational
vehicle.
Market Value: The price at which a property will change hands between a willing buyer and a
willing seller, neither party being under compulsion to buy or sell and both having reasonable
knowledge of relevant facts. For the purposes of these regulations, the market value of a building
is determined by a licensed real estate appraiser or the most recent, full phased-in assessment
value of the building (improvement) determined by the Maryland Department of Assessments
and Taxation.
Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE): A principal department of the State of
Maryland that is charged with, among other responsibilities, the coordination of the National
Flood Insurance Program in Maryland (NFIP State Coordinator) and the administration of
regulatory programs for development and construction that occur within the waters of the State,
including nontidal wetlands, nontidal waters and floodplains, and State and private tidal wetlands
(Tidal Wetlands). Unless otherwise specified, “MDE” refers to the Department’s Wetlands and
Waterways Program.
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP): The program authorized by the U.S. Congress in
42 U.S.C. §§4001 - 4129. The NFIP makes flood insurance coverage available in communities
that agree to adopt and enforce minimum regulatory requirements for development in areas prone
to flooding (see definition of “Special Flood Hazard Area”).
New Construction: Structures, including additions and improvements, and the placement of
manufactured homes, for which the start of construction commenced on or after September 28,
1984, the initial effective date of the Town of Easton Flood Insurance Rate Map, including any
subsequent improvements, alterations, modifications, and additions to such structures.
NFIP State Coordinator: See Maryland Department of the Environment.
Nontidal Waters of the State: See “Waters of the State.” As used in these regulations, “nontidal
waters of the State” refers to any stream or body of water within the State that is subject to State
regulation, including the “100-year frequency floodplain of free-flowing waters.” COMAR
26.17.04 states that “the landward boundaries of any tidal waters shall be deemed coterminous
with the wetlands boundary maps adopted pursuant to Environment Article, §16-301, Annotated
Code of Maryland.” Therefore, the boundary between the tidal and nontidal waters of the State is
the tidal wetlands boundary.
Person: An individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, or any other
entity, including State and local governments and agencies.
Recreational Vehicle: A vehicle that is built on a single chassis, 400 square feet or less when
measured at the largest horizontal projection, designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a light duty truck, and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA): The land in the floodplain subject to a one-percent or
greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are designated by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in Flood Insurance Studies and on Flood Insurance
Rate Maps as Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-30, and A99. The term includes areas shown on other
flood maps that are identified in Section 1.5.
Start of Construction: The date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was
within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of
piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
structures, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For substantial improvements, the actual start of construction means the first alteration
of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
Structure: That which is built or constructed; specifically, a walled and roofed building,
including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
Substantial Damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a building or structure whereby the
cost of restoring the building or structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed
50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the damage occurred. Also used
as “substantially damaged” structures.
Substantial Improvement: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of
a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the
building or structure before the start of construction of the improvement. The term includes
structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a building or structure to correct existing violations of
State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the
local code enforcement official prior to submission of an application for a permit and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(2) Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure’s continued designation as a historic structure.
Temporary Structure: A structure installed, used, or erected for a period of less than 180 days.
Variance: A grant of relief from the strict application of one or more requirements of these
regulations.
Violation: Any construction or development in a special flood hazard area that is being
performed without an issued permit. The failure of a building, structure, or other development for
which a permit is issued to be fully compliant with these regulations and the conditions of the
issued permit. A building, structure, or other development without the required design
certifications, the Elevation Certificate, or other evidence of compliance required is presumed to
be a violation until such time as the required documentation is provided.
Watercourse: The channel, including channel banks and bed, of nontidal waters of the State.
Waters of the State: [See Environment Article, Title 5, Subtitle 1, Annotated Code of
Maryland.] Waters of the State include:
(1) Both surface and underground waters within the boundaries of the State subject to its
jurisdiction;
(2) That portion of the Atlantic Ocean within the boundaries of the State;
(3) The Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries;
(4) All ponds, lakes, rivers, streams, public ditches, tax ditches, and public drainage systems
within the State, other than those designed and used to collect, convey, or dispose of sanitary
sewage; and
(5) The floodplain of free-flowing waters determined by MDE on the basis of the 100-year
flood frequency.
Article III: ADMINISTRATION
§ 9A-3.1 Designation of the Floodplain Administrator
The Easton Town Planner is hereby appointed to administer and implement these regulations and
is referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator may:
(A) Delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations to qualified technical
personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and other employees.
(B) Enter into a written agreement or written contract with another Maryland community or
private sector entity to administer specific provisions of these regulations. Administration of
any part of these regulations by another entity shall not relieve the community of its
responsibilities pursuant to the participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Program as set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 C.F.R. Section 59.22.
(Ordinance 626 effective 7/22/2013)
§ 9A-3.2 Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include but are not limited
to:
(A) Review applications for permits to determine whether proposed activities will be located
in flood hazard areas.
(B) Interpret floodplain boundaries and provide available base flood elevation and flood
hazard information.
(C) Review applications to determine whether proposed activities will be reasonably safe
from flooding and require new construction and substantial improvements to meet the
requirements of these regulations.
(D) Review applications to determine whether all necessary permits have been obtained from
the Federal, State or local agencies from which prior or concurrent approval is required; in
particular, permits from MDE for any construction, reconstruction, repair, or alteration of a
dam, reservoir, or waterway obstruction (including bridges, culverts, structures), any
alteration of a watercourse, or any change of the course, current, or cross section of a stream
or body of water, including any change to the 100-year frequency floodplain of free-flowing
nontidal waters of the State.
(E) Verify that applicants proposing an alteration of a watercourse have notified adjacent
communities and MDE (NFIP State Coordinator), and have submitted copies of such
notifications to FEMA.
(F) Approve applications and issue permits to develop in flood hazard areas if the provisions
of these regulations have been met, or disapprove applications if the provisions of these
regulations have not been met.
(G) Inspect or cause to be inspected, buildings, structures, and other development for which
permits have been issued to determine compliance with these regulations or to determine if
non-compliance has occurred or violations have been committed.
(H) Review Elevation Certificates and require incomplete or deficient certificates to be
corrected.
(I) Submit to FEMA, or require applicants to submit to FEMA, data and information
necessary to maintain FIRMs, including hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses
prepared by or for the Town of Easton, within six months after such data and information
becomes available if the analyses indicate changes in base flood elevations.
(J) Maintain and permanently keep records that are necessary for the administration of these
regulations, including:
(1) Flood Insurance Studies, Flood Insurance Rate Maps (including historic studies and
maps and current effective studies and maps) and Letters of Map Change; and
(2) Documentation supporting issuance and denial of permits, Elevation Certificates,
documentation of the elevation (in relation to the datum on the FIRM) to which structures
have been floodproofed, other required design certifications, variances, and records of
enforcement actions taken to correct violations of these regulations.
(K) Enforce the provisions of these regulations, investigate violations, issue notices of
violations or stop work orders, and require permit holders to take corrective action.
(L) Advise the Easton Board of Zoning Appeals regarding the intent of these regulations and,
for each application for a variance, prepare a staff report and recommendation.
(M) Administer the requirements related to proposed work on existing buildings:
(1) Make determinations as to whether buildings and structures that are located in flood
hazard areas and that are damaged by any cause have been substantially damaged.
(2) Make reasonable efforts to notify owners of substantially damaged structures of the
need to obtain a permit to repair, rehabilitate, or reconstruct, and prohibit the noncompliant
repair of substantially damaged buildings except for temporary emergency
protective measures necessary to secure a property or stabilize a building or structure to
prevent additional damage.
(N) Undertake, as determined appropriate by the Floodplain Administrator due to the
circumstances, other actions which may include but are not limited to: issuing press releases,
public service announcements, and other public information materials related to permit
requests and repair of damaged structures; coordinating with other Federal, State, and local
agencies to assist with substantial damage determinations; providing owners of damaged
structures information related to the proper repair of damaged structures in special flood
hazard areas; and assisting property owners with documentation necessary to file claims for
Increased Cost of Compliance coverage under NFIP flood insurance policies.
(O) Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency when the corporate boundaries of
the Town of Easton have been modified and:
(1) Provide a map that clearly delineates the new corporate boundaries or the new area
for which the authority to regulate pursuant to these regulations has either been assumed
or relinquished through annexation; and
(2) If the FIRM for any annexed area includes special flood hazard areas that have flood
zones that have regulatory requirements that are not set forth in these regulations, prepare
amendments to these regulations to adopt the FIRM and appropriate requirements, and
submit the amendments to the governing body for adoption; such adoption shall take
place within six months of the date of annexation and a copy of the amended regulations
shall be provided to MDE (NFIP State Coordinator) and FEMA.
(P) Upon the request of FEMA, complete and submit a report concerning participation in the
NFIP which may request information regarding the number of buildings in the SFHA,
number of permits issued for development in the SFHA, and number of variances issued for
development in the SFHA. (Ordinance 626 effective 7/22/2013)
§ 9A-3.3 Use and Interpretation of FIRMs
The Floodplain Administrator shall make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location
of special flood hazard areas, floodplain boundaries, and floodway boundaries. The following
shall apply to the use and interpretation of FIRMs and data:
(A) Where field surveyed topography indicates that ground elevations:
(1) Are below the base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood
hazard area on a FIRM, the area shall be considered as special flood hazard area and
subject to the requirements of these regulations;
(2) Are above the base flood elevation, the area shall be regulated as special flood hazard
area unless the applicant obtains a Letter of Map Change that removes the area from the
special flood hazard area.
(B) In FEMA-identified special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and floodway
data have not been identified and in areas where FEMA has not identified special flood
hazard areas, any other flood hazard data available from a Federal, State, or other source
shall be reviewed and reasonably used.
(C) Base flood elevations and designated floodway boundaries on FIRMs and in FISs shall
take precedence over base flood elevations and floodway boundaries by any other sources if
such sources show reduced floodway widths and/or lower base flood elevations.
(D) Other sources of data shall be reasonably used if such sources show increased base flood
elevations and/or larger floodway areas than are shown on FIRMs and in FISs.
(E) If a Preliminary Flood Insurance Rate Map and/or a Preliminary Flood Insurance Study
has been provided by FEMA:
(1) Upon the issuance of a Letter of Final Determination by FEMA, the preliminary flood
hazard data shall be used and shall replace the flood hazard data previously provided
from FEMA for the purposes of administering these regulations.
(2) Prior to the issuance of a Letter of Final Determination by FEMA, the use of
preliminary flood hazard data shall be deemed the best available data pursuant to Section
1.5(C) and used where no base flood elevations and/or floodway areas are provided on
the effective FIRM.
(3) Prior to issuance of a Letter of Final Determination by FEMA, the use of preliminary
flood hazard data is permitted where the preliminary base flood elevations or floodway
areas exceed the base flood elevations and/or designated floodway widths in existing
flood hazard data provided by FEMA. Such preliminary data may be subject to change
and/or appeal to FEMA. (Ordinance 626 effective 7/22/2013)
§ 9A-3.4 Permits Required and Expiration
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to begin any development or construction which is
wholly within, partially within, or in contact with any flood hazard area established in
Section 1.5, including but not limited to: filling; grading; construction of new structures; the
substantial improvement of buildings or structures, including repair of substantial damage;
placement or replacement of manufactured homes, including substantial improvement or
repair of substantial damage of manufactured homes; erecting or installing a temporary
structure, or alteration of a watercourse, until a permit is obtained from the Town of Easton.
No such permit shall be issued until the requirements of these regulations have been met.
(B) In addition to the permits required in paragraph (A), applicants for permits in nontidal
waters of the State are advised to contact MDE. Unless waived by MDE, pursuant to Code of
Maryland Regulations 26.17.04, Construction on Nontidal Waters and Floodplains, MDE
regulates the “100-year frequency floodplain of free-flowing waters,” also referred to as
nontidal waters of the State. To determine the 100-year frequency floodplain, hydrologic
calculations are based on the ultimate development of the watershed, assuming existing
zoning. The resulting flood hazard areas delineated using the results of such calculations may
be different than the special flood hazard areas established in Section 1.5 of these
regulations.
(C) A permit is valid provided the actual start of work is within 180 days of the date of
permit issuance. Requests for extensions shall be submitted in writing and justifiable cause
demonstrated. The Floodplain Administrator may grant, in writing, one or more extensions of
time, for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each and provided there has been no
amendment or revision to the basis for establishing special flood hazard areas and BFEs set
forth in Section 1.5. (Ordinance 626 effective 7/22/2013)
§ 9A-3.5 Application Required
Application for a permit shall be made by the owner of the property or the owner’s authorized
agent (herein referred to as the applicant) prior to the start of any work. The application shall be
on a form furnished for that purpose.
(A) Application Contents
At a minimum, applications shall include:
(1) Site plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and existing and
proposed topography of the area in question, and the location of existing and proposed
structures, excavation, filling, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and other proposed
activities.
(2) Elevation of the existing natural ground where buildings or structures are proposed,
referenced to the datum on the FIRM.
(3) Delineation of flood hazard areas, designated floodway boundaries, flood zones, base
flood elevations, and flood protection setbacks. Base flood elevations shall be used to
delineate the boundary of flood hazard areas and such delineations shall prevail over the
boundary of SFHAs shown on FIRMs.
(4) Where floodways are not delineated or base flood elevations are not shown on the
FIRMs, the Floodplain Administrator has the authority to require the applicant to use
information provided by the Floodplain Administrator, information that is available from
Federal, State, or other sources, or to determine such information using accepted
engineering practices or methods approved by the Floodplain Administrator. [Note: See
“Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas: A Guide for
Obtaining and Developing Base (100-Year) Flood Elevations” (FEMA 265).]
(5) Determination of the base flood elevations, for development proposals and
subdivision proposals, each with at least 5 lots or at least 5 acres, whichever is the lesser,
in special flood hazard areas where base flood elevations are not shown on the FIRM; if
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses are submitted, such analyses shall be
performed in accordance with the requirements and specifications of MDE and FEMA.
(6) Hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses for proposals in special flood hazard
areas where FEMA has provided base flood elevations but has not delineated a floodway;
such analyses shall demonstrate that the cumulative effect of proposed development,
when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot or a lower increase if
required by MDE.
(7) For encroachments in floodways, an evaluation of alternatives to such encroachments,
including different uses of the site or portion of the site within the floodway, and
minimization of such encroachment.
(8) If fill is proposed to be placed for a purpose other than to elevate structures, the
applicant shall indicate the intended purpose for the fill.
(9) For proposed buildings and structures, including substantial improvement and repair
of substantial damage, and placement and replacement of manufactured homes, including
substantial improvement and repair of substantial damage:
(a) The proposed elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, referenced to the
datum on the FIRM and a signed Agreement to Submit an Elevation Certificate.
(b) The signed Declaration of Land Restriction (Nonconversion Agreement) that shall
be recorded on the property deed prior to issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy, if
the application includes an enclosure below the lowest floor or a crawl/underfloor
space that is more than four (4) feet in height.
(c) A written evaluation of alternative methods considered to elevate structures and
manufactured homes, if the location is in nontidal waters of the State and fill is
proposed to achieve the elevation required in Section 5.4(A) or Section 5.5(A).
(10) For accessory structures that are 300 square feet or larger in area (footprint) that are
below the base flood elevation, a Declaration of Land Restriction (Nonconversion
Agreement) shall be recorded on the property deed prior to issuance of the Certificate of
Occupancy.
(11) For temporary structures and temporary storage, specification of the duration of the
temporary use.
(12) For proposed work on existing buildings, structure, and manufactured homes,
including any improvement, addition, repairs, alterations, rehabilitation, or
reconstruction, sufficient information to determine if the work constitutes substantial
improvement or repair of substantial damage, including but not limited to:
(a) If the existing building or structure was constructed after September 28, 1984,
evidence that the work will not alter any aspect of the building or structure that was
required for compliance with the floodplain management requirements in effect at the
time the building or structure was permitted.
(b) If the proposed work is a horizontal addition, a description of the addition and
whether it will be independently supported or structurally connected to the base
building and the nature of all other modifications to the base building, if any.
(c) Documentation of the market value of the building or structure before the
improvement or, if the work is repair of damage, before the damage occurred.
(d) Documentation of the actual cash value of all proposed work, including the actual
cash value of all work necessary to repair and restore damage to the before-damaged
condition, regardless of the amount of work that will be performed. The value of
work performed by the owner or volunteers shall be valued at market labor rates; the
value of donated or discounted materials shall be valued at market rates.
(13) Certifications and/or technical analyses prepared or conducted by a licensed
professional engineer or licensed architect, as appropriate, including:
(a) The determination of the base flood elevations or hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering analyses prepared by a licensed professional engineer that are required
by the Floodplain Administrator or are required by these regulations in: Section 4.2
for certain subdivisions and development; Section 5.3(A) for development in
designated floodways; Section 5.3(C) for development in flood hazard areas with base
flood elevations but no designated floodways; and Section 5.3(E) for deliberate
alteration or relocation of watercourses.
(b) The Floodproofing Certificate for nonresidential structures that are floodproofed
as required in Section 5.5(B).
(c) Certification that engineered flood openings are designed to meet the minimum
requirements of Section 5.4(C)(3) to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces.
(14) For nonresidential structures that are proposed with floodproofing, an operations and
maintenance plan as specified in Section 5.5(B)(3).
(15) Such other material and information as may be requested by the Floodplain
Administrator and necessary to determine conformance with these regulations.
(B) New Technical Data
(1) The applicant may seek a Letter of Map Change by submitting new technical data to
FEMA, such as base maps, topography, and engineering analyses to support revision of
floodplain and floodway boundaries and/or base flood elevations. Such submissions shall
be prepared in a format acceptable to FEMA and any fees shall be the sole responsibility
of the applicant. A copy of the submittal shall be attached to the application for a permit.
(2) If the applicant submits new technical data to support any change in floodplain and
designated floodway boundaries and/or base flood elevations but has not sought a Letter
of Map Change from FEMA, the applicant shall submit such data to FEMA as soon as
practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information becomes
available. Such submissions shall be prepared in a format acceptable to FEMA and any
fees shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant. (Ordinance 626 effective 7/22/2013)
§ 9A-3.6 Review of Application
The Floodplain Administrator shall:
(A) Review applications for development in special flood hazard areas to determine the
completeness of information submitted. The applicant shall be notified of incompleteness or
additional information that is required to support the application.
(B) Notify applicants that permits from MDE and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and
other State and Federal authorities may be required.
(C) Review all permit applications to assure that all necessary permits have been received
from the Federal, State or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining such permits, including permits issued by:
(1) The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act
and Section 404 of the Clean Water Act;
(2) MDE pursuant to COMAR 26.23 (Nontidal Wetlands) and Section 401 of the Clean
Water Act;
(3) MDE for construction on nontidal waters of the State pursuant to COMAR 26.17.04;
and
(4) MDE pursuant to COMAR 26.24 (Tidal Wetlands).
(D) Review applications for compliance with these regulations after all information required
in Section 3.5 of these regulations or identified and required by the Floodplain Administrator
has been received. (Ordinance 626 effective 7/22/2013)
§ 9A-3.7 Inspections
The Floodplain Administrator shall make periodic inspections of development permitted in
special flood hazard areas, at appropriate times throughout the period of construction in order to
monitor compliance. Such inspections may include:
(A) Stake-out inspection, to determine location on the site relative to the flood hazard area
and designated floodway.
(B) Foundation inspection, upon placement of the lowest floor and prior to further vertical
construction, to collect information or certification of the elevation of the lowest floor.
(C) Inspection of enclosures below the lowest floor, including crawl/underfloor spaces, to
determine compliance with applicable provisions.
(D) Utility inspection, upon installation of specified equipment and appliances, to determine
appropriate location with respect to the base flood elevation.
(E) Final inspection prior to issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. (Ordinance 626
effective 7/22/2013)
§ 9A-3.8 Submissions Required Prior to Final Inspection
Pursuant to the Agreement to Submit an Elevation Certificate submitted with the application as
required in Section 3.5(A)(9), the permittee shall have an Elevation Certificate prepared and
submitted prior to final inspection and issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for elevated
structures and manufactured homes, including new structures and manufactured homes,
substantially-improved structures and manufactured homes, and additions to structures and
manufactured homes. (Ordinance 626 effective 7/22/2013)
Article IV: REQUIREMENTS IN ALL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
§ 9A-4.1 Application of Requirements
The general requirements of this section apply to all development proposed within all special
flood hazard areas identified in Section 1.5. (Ordinance 626 effective 7/22/2013)
§ 9A-4.2 Subdivision Proposals and Development Proposals
(A) In all flood zones:
(1) Subdivision proposals and development proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage and are subject to all applicable standards in these regulations.
(2) Subdivision proposals and development proposals shall have utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize
flood damage.
(3) Subdivision proposals and development proposals shall have adequate drainage paths
provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards and to guide floodwaters around and away
from proposed structures.
(4) Subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 5 lots or at least
5 acres, whichever is the lesser, that are wholly or partially in flood hazard areas where
base flood elevation data are not provided by the Floodplain Administrator or available
from other sources, shall be supported by determinations of base flood elevations as
required in Section 3.5 of these regulations.
(5) Subdivision access roads shall have the driving surface at or above the base flood
elevation.
(B) In special flood hazard areas of nontidal waters of the State:
(1) Subdivision proposals shall be laid out such that proposed building pads are located
outside of the special flood hazard area and any portion of platted lots that include land
areas that are below the base flood elevation shall be used for other purposes, deed
restricted, or otherwise protected to preserve it as open space.
(2) Subdivision access roads shall have the driving surface at or above the base flood
elevation. (Ordinance 626 effective 7/22/2013)
§ 9A-4.3 Protection of Water Supply and Sanitary Sewage Systems
(A) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems.
(B) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into systems and discharges from systems into
floodwaters.
(C) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to or contamination
from them during conditions of flooding. (Ordinance 626 effective 7/22/2013)
§ 9A-4.4 Buildings and Structures
New buildings and structures (including the placement and replacement of manufactured homes)
and substantial improvement of existing structures (including manufactured homes) that are
located, in whole or in part, in any special flood hazard area shall:
(A) Be designed (or modified) and constructed to safely support flood loads. The
construction shall provide a complete load path capable of transferring all loads from their
point of origin through the load-resisting elements to the foundation. Structures shall be
designed, connected and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or permanent lateral movement
due to structural loads and stresses, including hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads and the
effects of buoyancy, from flooding equal to the flood protection elevation or the elevation
required by these regulations or the building code, whichever is higher.
(B) Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
(C) Use flood damage-resistant materials below the elevation of the lowest floor required in
Section 5.4(A) or Section 5.5(A).
(D) Have electrical systems, equipment and components, and mechanical, heating,
ventilating, air conditioning, and plumbing appliances, plumbing fixtures, duct systems, and
other service equipment located at or above the elevation of the lowest floor required in
Section 5.4(A) or Section 5.5(A). Electrical wiring systems are permitted to be located below
elevation of the lowest floor provided they conform to the provisions of the electrical part of
the building code for wet locations. If replaced as part of a substantial improvement,
electrical systems, equipment and components, and heating, ventilation, air conditioning, and
plumbing appliances, plumbing fixtures, duct systems, and other service equipment shall
meet the requirements of this section.
(E) As an alternative to paragraph (D), electrical systems, equipment and components, and
heating, ventilating, air conditioning, and plumbing appliances, plumbing fixtures, duct
systems, and other service equipment are permitted to be located below the elevation of the
lowest floor provided they are designed and installed to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components and to resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
stresses, including the effects of buoyancy, during the occurrence of flooding to that
elevation.
(F) Have the electric panelboard elevated at least three (3) feet above the BFE.
(G) Comply with the specific requirements of Section 5.0.
(H) Comply with the requirements of the most restrictive designation if located on a site that
has more than one flood zone designation (A Zone, designated floodway). (Ordinance 626
effective 7/22/2013)
§ 9A-4.5 Placement of Fill
(A) Disposal of fill, including but not limited to earthen soils, rock, rubble, construction
debris, woody debris, and trash, shall not be permitted in special flood hazard areas.
(B) Fill proposed to be placed to elevate structures in flood hazard areas shall comply with
the floodways requirements in Section 5.3(A), Section 5.3(B), and Section 5.3(C) and the
limitations of Section 5.4(B). (Ordinance 626 effective 7/22/2013)
§ 9A-4.6 Historic Structures
Repair, alteration, addition, rehabilitation, or other improvement of historic structures shall be
subject to the requirements of these regulations if the proposed work is determined to be a
substantial improvement. The term substantial improvement does not include any alteration of a
historic structure, provided that a determination is made that the proposed work will not preclude
the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure. The Floodplain Administrator may
require documentation of a structure’s continued eligibility and designation as a historic
structure. (Ordinance 626 effective 7/22/2013)
§ 9A-4.7 Manufactured Homes
(A) New manufactured homes shall not be placed or installed in floodways.
(B) For the purpose of these regulations, the lowest floor of a manufactured home is the
bottom of the lowest horizontal supporting member (longitudinal chassis frame beam).
(C) New manufactured homes located outside of floodways, replacement manufactured
homes in any flood hazard areas, and substantial improvement (including repair of
substantial damage) of existing manufactured homes in all flood hazard area, shall:
(1) Be elevated on a permanent, reinforced foundation in accordance with Section 5.0;
(2) Be installed in accordance with the anchor and tie-down requirements of the building
code or the manufacturer’s written installation instructions and specifications; and
(3) Have enclosures below the lowest floor of the elevated manufactured home, if any,
including enclosures that are surrounded by rigid skirting or other material that is
attached to the frame or foundation, that comply with the requirements of Section 5.0.
[Note: See “Protecting Manufactured Homes from Floods and Other Hazards: A Multi-
Hazard Foundation and Installation Guide” (FEMA P-85).] (Ordinance 626 effective
7/22/2013)
§ 9A-4.8 Recreational Vehicles
Recreational vehicles shall:
(A) Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in Section 4.7; or
(B) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(C) Be on a site for less than 180 consecutive days. (Ordinance 626 effective 7/22/2013)
§ 9A-4.9 Critical and Essential Facilities
Critical and essential facilities shall be elevated to the higher of elevation required by these
regulations plus one (1) foot, the elevation required by the building code, or the elevation of the
0.2 percent chance (500-year) flood. (Ordinance 626 effective 7/22/2013)
§ 9A-4.10 Temporary Structures and Temporary Storage
In addition to the application requirements of Section 3.5, applications for the placement or
erection of temporary structures and the temporary storage of any goods, materials, and
equipment, shall specify the duration of the temporary use. Temporary structures and temporary
storage in floodways shall meet the limitations of Section 5.3(A) of these regulations. In addition:
(A) Temporary structures shall:
(1) Be designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement
resulting from hydrodynamic loads and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the base
flood;
(2) Have electric service installed in compliance with the electric code; and
(3) Comply with all other requirements of the applicable State and local permit
authorities.
(B) Temporary storage shall not include hazardous materials. (Ordinance 626 effective
7/22/2013)
§ 9A-4.11 Gas or Liquid Storage Tanks
(A) Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse
or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy,
during conditions of the base flood.
(B) Above-ground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to a supporting structure and
elevated to or above the base flood elevation, or shall be anchored or otherwise designed and
constructed to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic
and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the base flood.
(C) In flood hazard areas, tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be:
(1) At or above the base flood elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the
inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tanks during conditions of the base
flood; and
(2) Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic
loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the base flood. (Ordinance
626 effective 7/22/2013)
§ 9A-4.12 Functionally Dependent Uses
Applications for functionally dependent uses that do not conform to the requirements of these
regulations shall be approved only by variances issued pursuant to Section 6.0. If approved,
functionally dependent uses shall be protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the
base flood, including measures to allow floodwaters to enter and exit, use of flood damageresistant
materials, and elevation of electric service and equipment to the extent practical given
the use of the building. (Ordinance 626 effective 7/22/2013)
Article V: REQUIREMENTS IN FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
§ 9A-5.1 General Requirements
In addition to the general requirements of Section 4.0, the requirements of this section shall:
(A) Apply in flood hazard areas, including special flood hazard areas along nontidal waters
of the State.
(B) Apply to all development, new construction, substantial improvements (including repair
of substantial damage), and placement, replacement, and substantial improvement (including
repair of substantial damage) of manufactured homes. (Ordinance 626 effective 7/22/2013)
§ 9A-5.2 Flood Protection Setbacks
Within areas defined by flood protection setbacks along nontidal waters of the State:
(A) No new buildings, structures, or other development shall be permitted unless the
applicant demonstrates that the site cannot be developed without such encroachment into the
flood protection setback and the encroachment is the minimum necessary after consideration
of varying other siting standards such as side, front, and back lot line setbacks.
(B) Disturbance of natural vegetation shall be minimized and any disturbance allowed shall
be vegetatively stabilized.
(C) Public works and temporary construction may be permitted. (Ordinance 626 effective
7/22/2013)
§ 9A-5.3 Development that Affects Flood-Carrying Capacity of Nontidal Waters of the
State
(A) Development in Designated Floodways
For proposed development that will encroach into a designated floodway, Section 3.5(A)(7)
requires the applicant to submit an evaluation of alternatives to such encroachment, including
different uses of the site or the portion of the site within the floodway, and minimization of
such encroachment. This requirement does not apply to fences that do not block the flow of
floodwaters or trap debris.
Proposed development in a designated floodway may be permitted only if:
(1) The applicant has been issued a permit by MDE; and
(2) The applicant has developed hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses and
technical data prepared by a licensed professional engineer reflecting such changes, and
the analyses, which shall be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator, demonstrate that
the proposed activity will not result in any increase in the base flood elevation; or
(3) If the analyses demonstrate that the proposed activities will result in an increase in the
base flood elevation, the applicant has obtained a Conditional Letter of Map Revision or
Letter of Map Revision from FEMA. Submittal requirements and fees shall be the
responsibility of the applicant.
(B) Development that Includes the Placement of Fill in Nontidal Waters of the State
For proposed development that includes the placement of fill in nontidal waters of the State,
other than development that is subject to paragraph (D), a hydraulically-equivalent volume of
excavation is required. Such excavations shall be designed to drain freely.
(C) Development in Areas with Base Flood Elevations but No Designated Floodways
For development in special flood hazard areas of nontidal waters of the State with base flood
elevations but no designated floodways:
(1) The applicant shall develop hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses and
technical data reflecting the proposed activity and shall submit such technical data to the
Floodplain Administrator as required in Section 3.5(A)(6). The analyses shall be prepared
by a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a Conditional
Letter of Map Revision or Letter of Map Revision. Submittal requirements and fees shall
be the responsibility of the applicant.
(2) The proposed development may be permitted if the applicant has received a permit by
MDE and if the analyses demonstrate that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and potential flood hazard area
encroachments will not increase the base flood elevation more than 1.0 foot at any point.
(D) Construction of Roads, Bridges, Culverts, Dams and In-Stream Ponds
Construction of roads, bridges, culverts, dams, and in-stream ponds in nontidal waters of the
State shall not be approved unless they comply with this section and the applicant has
received a permit from MDE.
(E) Alteration of a Watercourse
For any proposed development that involves alteration of a watercourse not subject to
paragraph (C), unless waived by MDE, the applicant shall develop hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering analyses and technical data reflecting such changes, including the floodway
analysis required in Section 3.5(A), and submit such technical data to the Floodplain
Administrator and to FEMA. The analyses shall be prepared by a licensed professional
engineer in a format required by MDE and by FEMA for a Conditional Letter of Map
Revision or Letter of Map Revision. Submittal requirements and fees shall be the
responsibility of the applicant.
Alteration of a watercourse may be permitted only upon submission, by the applicant, of the
following:
(1) A description of the extent to which the watercourse will be altered or relocated;
(2) A certification by a licensed professional engineer that the flood-carrying capacity of
the watercourse will not be diminished;
(3) Evidence that adjacent communities, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and MDE
have been notified of the proposal, and evidence that such notifications have been
submitted to FEMA; and
(4) Evidence that the applicant shall be responsible for providing the necessary
maintenance for the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood
carrying capacity will not be diminished. The Floodplain Administrator may require the
applicant to enter into an agreement with Town of Easton specifying the maintenance
responsibilities; if an agreement is required, the permit shall be conditioned to require
that the agreement be recorded on the deed of the property which shall be binding on
future owners. (Ordinance 626 effective 7/22/2013)
§ 9A-5.4 Residential Structures and Residential Portions of Mixed Use Structures
New residential structures and residential portions of mixed use structures, and substantial
improvement (including repair of substantial damage) of existing residential structures and
residential portions of mixed use structures shall comply with the applicable requirements of
Section 4.0 and this section. See Section 5.6 for requirements for horizontal additions.
(A) Elevation Requirements
(1) Lowest floors shall be elevated to or above the flood protection elevation.
(2) In areas of shallow flooding (Zone AO), the lowest floor (including basement) shall
be elevated at least as high above the highest adjacent grade as the depth number
specified in feet on the FIRM plus two (2) feet, or at least four (4) feet if a depth number
is not specified.
(3) Enclosures below the lowest floor shall meet the requirements of paragraph (C).
(B) Limitations on Use of Fill to Elevate Structures
Unless otherwise restricted by these regulations, especially by the limitations in Section
5.3(A), Section 5.3(B), and Section 5.3(C), fill placed for the purpose of raising the ground
level to support a building or structure shall:
(1) Consist of earthen soil or rock materials only.
(2) Extend laterally from the building footprint to provide for adequate access as a
function of use; the Floodplain Administrator may seek advice from the State Fire
Marshal’s Office and/or the local fire services agency;
(3) Comply with the requirements of the building code and be placed and compacted to
provide for stability under conditions of rising and falling floodwaters and resistance to
erosion, scour, and settling;
(4) Be sloped no steeper than one (1) vertical to two (2) horizontal, unless approved by
the Floodplain Administrator;
(5) Be protected from erosion associated with expected velocities during the occurrence
of the base flood; unless approved by the Floodplain Administrator, fill slopes shall be
protected by vegetation if the expected velocity is less than five feet per second, and by
other means if the expected velocity is five feet per second or more; and
(6) Be designed with provisions for adequate drainage and no adverse effect on adjacent
properties.
(C) Enclosures Below the Lowest Floor
(1) Enclosures below the lowest floor shall be used solely for parking of vehicles,
building access, crawl/underfloor spaces, or limited storage.
(2) Enclosures below the lowest floor shall be constructed using flood damage-resistant
materials.
(3) Enclosures below the lowest floor shall be provided with flood openings which shall
meet the following criteria: [Note: See NFIP Technical Bulletin #1, “Openings in
Foundation Walls and Walls of Enclosures Below Elevated Buildings.”]
(a) There shall be a minimum of two flood openings on different sides of each
enclosed area; if a building has more than one enclosure below the lowest floor, each
such enclosure shall have flood openings on exterior walls.
(b) The total net area of all flood openings shall be at least 1 square inch for each
square foot of enclosed area (non-engineered flood openings), or the flood openings
shall be engineered flood openings that are designed and certified by a licensed
professional engineer to automatically allow entry and exit of floodwaters; the
certification requirement may be satisfied by an individual certification or an
Evaluation Report issued by the ICC Evaluation Service, Inc.
(c) The bottom of each flood opening shall be 1 foot or less above the higher of the
interior floor or grade, or the exterior grade, immediately below the opening.
(d) Any louvers, screens or other covers for the flood openings shall allow the
automatic flow of floodwaters into and out of the enclosed area.
(e) If installed in doors, flood openings that meet requirements of paragraphs (a)
through (d), are acceptable; however, doors without installed flood openings do not
meet the requirements of this section. (Ordinance 626 effective 7/22/2013)
§ 9A-5.5 Nonresidential Structures and Nonresidential Portions of Mixed Use Structures
New nonresidential structures and nonresidential portions of mixed use structures, and
substantial improvement (including repair of substantial damage) of existing nonresidential
structures and nonresidential portions of mixed use structures shall comply with the applicable
requirements of Section 4.0 and the requirements of this section. See Section 5.6 for requirements
for horizontal additions.
(A) Elevation Requirements
Elevated structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the flood protection
elevation; or
(2) In areas of shallow flooding (Zone AO), have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated at least as high above the highest adjacent grade as the depth number specified
in feet on the FIRM plus two (2) feet, or at least four (4) feet if a depth number is not
specified; and
(3) Have enclosures below the lowest floor, if any, that comply with the requirements of
Section 5.4(C); or
(4) If proposed to be elevated on fill, meet the limitations on fill in Section 5.4(B).
(B) Floodproofing Requirements
(1) Floodproofing of new nonresidential buildings is not allowed in nontidal waters of
the State (COMAR 26.17.04.11(B)(7)).
(2) Floodproofing for substantial improvement of nonresidential buildings is allowed in
nontidal waters of the State.
(3) If floodproofing is proposed, structures shall:
(a) Be designed to be dry floodproofed such that the building or structure is
watertight with walls and floors substantially impermeable to the passage of water to
the level of the flood protection elevation plus 1.0 foot, or
(b) If located in an area of shallow flooding (Zone AO), be dry floodproofed at least
as high above the highest adjacent grade as the depth number specified on the FIRM
plus three (3) feet, or at least five (5) feet if a depth number is not specified; and
(c) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyancy;
(d) Have floodproofing measures that are designed taking into consideration the
nature of flood-related hazards; frequency, depth and duration of flooding; rate of rise
and fall of floodwater; soil characteristics; flood-borne debris; at least 12 hours of
flood warning time from a credible source; and time necessary to implement any
measures that require human intervention;
(e) Have at least one door above the applicable flood elevation that allows human
ingress and egress during conditions of flooding;
(f) Have an operations and maintenance plan that is filed with local emergency
management officials and that specifies the owner/occupant’s responsibilities to
monitor flood potential; the location of any shields, doors, closures, tools, or other
goods that are required for implementation; maintenance of such goods; methods of
installation; and periodic inspection; and
(g) Be certified by a licensed professional engineer or licensed architect, through
execution of a Floodproofing Certificate that states that the design and methods of
construction meet the requirements of this section. The Floodproofing Certificate
shall be submitted with the construction drawings as required in Section 3.5(A)(13).
(Ordinance 626 effective 7/22/2013)
§ 9A-5.6 Horizontal Additions
(A) A horizontal addition proposed for a building or structure that was constructed after the
date specified in Section 1.1 shall comply with the applicable requirements of Section 4.0 and
this section.
(B) In nontidal waters of the State that are subject to the regulatory authority of MDE, all
horizontal additions shall comply with the applicable requirements of Section 4.0 and this
section and:
(1) If the addition is structurally connected to the base building, the requirements of
paragraph (C) apply.
(2) If the addition has an independent foundation and is not structurally connected to the
base building and the common wall with the base building is modified by no more than a
doorway, the base building is not required to be brought into compliance.
(C) For horizontal additions that are structurally connected to the base building:
(1) If the addition combined with other proposed repairs, alterations, or modifications of
the base building constitutes substantial improvement, the base building and the addition
shall comply with the applicable requirements of Section 4.0 and this section.
(2) If the addition constitutes substantial improvement, the base building and the addition
shall comply with all of the applicable requirements of Section 4.0 and this section.
(D) For horizontal additions with independent foundations that are not structurally connected
to the base building and the common wall with the base building is modified by no more than
a doorway, the base building is not required to be brought into compliance. (Ordinance 626
effective 7/22/2013)
§ 9A-5.7 Accessory Structures
(A) Accessory structures shall be limited to no more than 300 square feet in floor area.
(B) Accessory structures shall comply with the elevation requirements and other
requirements of Section 5.4, the floodproofing requirements of Section 5.5(B), or shall:
(1) Be useable only for parking of vehicles or limited storage;
(2) Be constructed with flood damage-resistant materials below the base flood elevation;
(3) Be constructed and placed to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
(4) Be anchored to prevent flotation;
(5) Have electrical service and mechanical equipment elevated to or above the base flood
elevation; and
(6) Have flood openings that meet the requirements of Section 5.4(C). (Ordinance 626
effective 7/22/2013)
Article VI: VARIANCES
§ 9A-6.1 General
The Easton Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the power to consider and authorize or deny
variances from the strict application of the requirements of these regulations. A variance shall be
approved only if it is determined to not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to
special conditions of the lot or parcel, a literal enforcement of the provisions of these regulations,
an unnecessary hardship would result.
Upon consideration of the purposes of these regulations, the individual circumstances, and the
considerations and limitations of this section, the Easton Board of Zoning Appeals may attach
such conditions to variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of these regulations.
The Easton Board of Zoning Appeals shall notify, in writing, any applicant to whom a variance
is granted to construct or substantially improve a building or structure with its lowest floor below
the elevation required by these regulations that the variance is to the floodplain management
requirements of these regulations only, and that the cost of Federal flood insurance will be
commensurate with the increased risk, with rates up to $25 per $100 of insurance coverage.
A record of all variance actions, including justification for issuance shall be maintained pursuant
to Section 3.2(J) of these regulations.
All provisions contained in the Town of Easton Zoning Ordinance governing the Easton Board of
Zoning Appeals with respect to members, provisions for alternates, quorum, Chairman, term of
office, etc. shall apply to variances sought pursuant to this Chapter. (Ordinance 626 effective
7/22/2013)
§ 9A-6.2 Application for a Variance
(A) The owner of property, or the owner’s authorized agent, for which a variance is sought
shall submit an application for a variance to the Floodplain Administrator.
(B) At a minimum, the application shall contain the following information: name, address,
and telephone number of the applicant and property owner; legal description of the property;
parcel map; description of the existing use; description of the proposed use; site map showing
the location of flood hazard areas, designated floodway boundaries, flood zones, base flood
elevations, and flood protection setbacks; description of the variance sought; and reason for
the variance request. Variance applications shall specifically address each of the
considerations in Section 6.3.
(C) If the application is for a variance to allow the lowest floor of a building or structure
below the applicable minimum elevation required by these regulations, the application shall
include a statement signed by the owner that, if granted, the conditions of the variance shall
be recorded on the deed of the property.
(D) If the application is for a variance for a historic structure pursuant to Section 4.6 of these
regulations, the application shall contain documentation that the proposed work does not
preclude the structure’s continued eligibility and designation as a historic structure. The
documentation shall be obtained from a source that is authorized to make such
determinations (see definition of “Historic Structure”). (Ordinance 626 effective 7/22/2013)
§ 9A-6.3 Considerations for Variances
The Floodplain Administrator shall request comments on variance applications from MDE
(NFIP State Coordinator) and shall provide such comments to the Easton Board of Zoning
Appeals.
In considering variance applications, the Easton Board of Zoning Appeals shall consider and
make findings of fact on all evaluations, all relevant factors, requirements specified in other
sections of these regulations, and the following factors:
(A) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others.
(B) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
(C) The susceptibility of the proposed development and its contents (if applicable) to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
(D) The importance of the services to the community provided by the proposed development.
(E) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to, or
are subject to less, flooding or erosion damage.
(F) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable, or if the facility is
a functionally dependent use.
(G) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development.
(H) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area.
(I) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for passenger vehicles and
emergency vehicles.
(J) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the
floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site.
(K) The costs of providing government services during and after flood conditions, including
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and
water systems, and streets and bridges.
(L) The comments provided by MDE (NFIP State Coordinator). (Ordinance 626 effective
7/22/2013)
§ 9A-6.4 Limitations for Granting Variances
The Easton Board of Zoning Appeals shall make an affirmative decision on a variance request
only upon:
(A) A showing of good and sufficient cause.
(B) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship
due to the physical characteristics of the property. Increased cost or inconvenience of meeting
the requirements of these regulations does not constitute an exceptional hardship to the
applicant.
(C) A determination that the granting of a variance for development within any designated
floodway, or flood hazard area with base flood elevations but no designated floodway, will
not result in increased flood heights beyond that which is allowed in these regulations.
(D) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in additional threats to
public safety; extraordinary public expense, nuisances, fraud or victimization of the public, or
conflict with existing local laws.
(E) A determination that the building, structure or other development is protected by methods
to minimize flood damages.
(F) A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief, considering
the flood hazard. (Ordinance 626 effective 7/22/2013)
Article VII: ENFORCEMENT
§ 9A-7.1 Compliance Required
(A) No building, structure or development shall hereafter be located, erected, constructed,
reconstructed, improved, repaired, extended, converted, enlarged or altered without full
compliance with these regulations and all other applicable regulations.
(B) Failure to obtain a permit shall be a violation of these regulations and shall be subject to
penalties in accordance with Section 7.3.
(C) Permits issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the Floodplain
Administrator authorize only the specific activities set forth in such approved plans and
applications or amendments thereto. Use, arrangement, or construction of such specific
activities that are contrary to that authorization shall be deemed a violation of these
regulations. (Ordinance 626 effective 7/22/2013)
§ 9A-7.2 Notice of Violation and Stop Work Order
If the Floodplain Administrator determines that there has been a violation of any provision of
these regulations, the Floodplain Administrator shall give notice of such violation to the owner,
the owner’s authorized agent, and the person responsible for such violation, and may issue a stop
work order. The notice of violation or stop work order shall be in writing and shall:
(A) Include a list of violations, referring to the section or sections of these regulations that
have been violated;
(B) Order remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of these
regulations;
(C) Specify a reasonable period of time to correct the violation;
(D) Advise the recipients of the right to appeal; and
(E) Be served in person; or
(F) Be posted in a conspicuous place in or on the property and sent by registered or certified
mail to the last known mailing address, residence, or place of business of the recipients.
(Ordinance 626 effective 7/22/2013)
§ 9A-7.3 Violations and Penalties
Violations of these regulations or failure to comply with the requirements of these regulations or
any conditions attached to a permit or variance shall constitute a Municipal Infraction. Any
person responsible for a violation shall comply with the notice of violation or stop work order
Failure to comply shall subject the person to a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 on each occurrence.
The Town may also seek injunctive relief or request abatement by a court of competent
jurisdiction. Each day a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing
herein contained shall prevent the Town of Easton from taking such other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ordinance 626 effective 7/22/2013)
Article VIII: SUBSEQUENT AMENDMENTS AND EFFECTIVE DATE
§ 9A-8.1 Subsequent Amendments
All ordinances or parts of ordinances that are inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance
are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency. This ordinance shall be amended as
required by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, 44 Code of Federal Regulations. All
subsequent amendments to this ordinance are subject to the approval of the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and the Maryland Department of the Environment. (Ordinance 626
effective 7/22/2013)
§ 9A-8.2 Effective Date
Adopted this 1st day of July, 2013 and to be effective on the 22nd day of July, 2013. (Ordinance
626 effective 7/22/2013)
CHAPTER 10 FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
Article I – Sidewalk Cafes
§ 10-1. Definitions
§ 10-2. Applicability; Other Town Ordinances
§ 10-3. Permit
§ 10-4. Standards
§ 10-5. Hours of Operation
§ 10-6. Alcoholic Beverages
§ 10-7. Furniture
§ 10-8. Insurance and Indemnification
§ 10-9. Prohibitions
§ 10-10. Violations
Article I – Sidewalk Cafes
Sec. 10-1 Definitions
For the purpose of this chapter:
(1) “ Sidewalk Café” means any area situated on a public sidewalk where food, refreshments, and alcoholic
beverages are sold by a restaurant, delicatessen, ice cream shop or coffe shop (hereinafter “operating
establishments”) for public consumption at tables or counters located on the public sidewalk fronting the
operating establishment.
(2) “Street fixtures” means a physical object located within a public sidewalk. Examples of street fixtures are
streetlights, trees and any surrounding landscaped area, planters, benches, signs and parking meters.
(Ordinance 474 effective 9/30/2004)
Sec. 10-2. Applicability; Other Town Ordinances.
Sidewalk cafes shall operate only as authorized pursuant to this chapter. The provisions of this chapter shall apply
to sidewalk cafes even if the adjacent street is temporary closed. This chapter does not apply to food and beverage
consessions permitted by the Town in conjunction with festivals and other public events. The provisions of Section
18-10 of the Town Code pertaining to the consumption of alcoholic beverages in public places shall not apply to
sidewalk cafes which are authorized by this chapter. (Ordinance 474 effective 9/30/2004)
Sec. 10-3 Permit.
(1) An application for a sidewalk café permit shall be mede to the Town Clerk on forms provided by the Town
Clerk. The application shall include a scale drawing depicting the sidewalk abutting the business, the
location of all street fixtures and the locations of the proposed tables and chairs. The application shall be
made b the operating establishment.
(2) A sidwwalk café permit shall be for one year from July 1st in each year until the following June 30th. The
holder of the permit shall pay an annual fee as established by resolution of the Town Council. The annual
fee shall be paid with the original permit application and with any request for renewal of the permit. Until
shuch time as a separate fee is established by the Town Council, the annual fee shall be two hundred
dollars.
(3) A sidewalk café permit shall specify the location of tables and chairs, whether or not tables and chairs must
be removed at the close of business and other conditions consistent with this chapter to protect the public
health, safety and welfare.
(Ordinance 474 effective 9/30/2004)
Sec. 10-4 Standards
(1) No part of a sidewalk café area shall encroach upon any part of the sidewalk frontage of any adjacent
premises, right-of way or alley.
(2) A Sidewalk Café must leave a minimum six-foot unobstructed passageway for pedestrians along the length
of the café. The passageway shall be measured form the outer edge of the chair or table to the inner edge
any street fixture on the sidewalk in front of the operating establishment. For operating establishments
adjacent to sidewalks less than ten feet wide at the location of the proposed sidewalk café, the Town Clerk,
with the consent of the Town Engineer, may reduce the obstructed passageway to not less than that
required by federal or state law or regulation or four feet in width, whichever is greater.
(3) A sidewalk café shall comply with all building, health, safety, fire, zoning and environmental standards
applicable to such uses.
(Ordinance 474 effective 9/30/2004)
Sec. 10-5 Hour of operation.
Service at a sidewalk café shall end by 11:00 PM. The café area shall be cleared of all other furniture(except any
furniture approved to remain in the café areaovernight pursuant to the permit), debris and obstructions to the
sidewalk no later than midnight. (Ordinance 474 effective 9/30/2004)
Sec. 10-6 Alcoholic Beverages.
An operating establishment shall not sell, serve, or allow consumption of alcoholic beverages on its sidewalk café
without obtaining the required license from the alcoholic beverage control board. Alcoholic beverages shall be
served on the sidewalk café only in conjunction with the service of food. Notwithstanding any contrary of different
hours of operation in its alcoholic beverage license, an operating establishment shall not sell, serve of allow
consumption of alcoholic beverages on its sidewalk café after the sidewalk café’s closing time. (Ordinance 474
effective 9/30/2004)
Sec. 10-7 Furniture.
Except as explicitly stated in the permit, all sidewalk café furniture shall be readily moveable and shall be stored
indoors when not in use. No permanent structures or improvements shall be installed on any sidewalk or other
public property. (Ordinance 474 effective 9/30/2004)
Sec. 10-8 Insurance and Indemnification.
The holder of a sidewalk café permit shall fully insure, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Town of Easton
and in their capacity as such, the officers, agents, and employees thereof from and against any and all claims and
damages in any whay arising out of or through the acts or omissions of the permit holderor its employees in the
construction, operation, maintenance, use, placement or condition of the sidewalk café. An applicant for sidewalk
café shall provide proof of such insurance before a permit may be issued or renewed under this chapter. (Ordinance
474 effective 9/30/2004)
Sec. 10-9 Prohibitions.
The following are prohibited in the café area: cooking of food; unshielded trash or refuse storage; advertisements
(exclusive of menus intended to be readfrom café); outdoor entertainment, music speakers, or public address
systems; exclusively carry-out transations. (Ordinance 474 effective 9/30/2004)
Sec. 10-10 Violations.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced bt y the Town’s code enforcement officials. A person who
continues to violate this chapter after written request to take corrective action is guilty of a municipal infraction and
shall be fined one hundred dollars for the first offense and two hundred dollars for each subsequent offense plus
costs. In addition, the Town Council may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter upon a second
or subsequent infraction under this section in any twelve month period. (Ordinance 474 effective 9/30/2004)

CHAPTER 11 MINIMUM PROPERTY MAINTENANCE STANDARDS
§ 11-1. Chapter Title
§ 11-2. General References
Article I – Property Maintenance Code
§ 11-3. Adoption of Standards
§ 11-4. State of Maryland – Minimum Livability Code
§ 11-5. Incorporated by Reference
§ 11-6. Administrative Waivers
§ 11-7. Reserved
Article II – Garbage and Refuse
§ 11-8. Definitions
§ 11-9. Receptacles required - Specifications
§ 11-10. Papers, magazines or other light materials
§ 11-11. Receptacles - Sanitary condition
§ 11-12. Pre-collection practices
§ 11-13. Accumulation of refuse and/or recyclable materials
§ 11-14. Depositing in public places prohibited
§ 11-15. Burning matter liable to cause nauseating smoke or vapor
§ 11-16. Periodic inspection of premises
§ 11-16.1 Control of rubbish, refuse, garbage, recyclable materials and waste
§ 11-16.2 Setting out rubbish, waste or recyclable materials for collection
§ 11-17 Garbage, Refuse and Recyclable Materials – Administrative History
§ 11-18. Unlawful activities
§ 11-19. Violation and penalties
Article III – Refuse and Recycling Disposal Charges
§ 11-20. Refuse disposal fee imposed
§ 11-21. Refuse disposal fee for single family properties
§ 11-22. Refuse disposal fee for multi-family properties
§ 11-23. Refuse disposal fee for commercial and industrial properties
§ 11-24. Adjustments to refuse disposal fee for commercial and industrial properties
§ 11-25. Recycling
§ 11-25(a). Recycling Transitional Provisions
§ 11-25 (b). Commercil Property Recycling
§ 11-26. Manner of collection; personal obligation of property owner; unpaid refuse disposal fee or recycling
fee to constitute lien on real property
§ 11-27. Appeal from determination of the Town Engineer ot the designee of the Town Manager
§ 11-28. Refuse Disposal Charges and Recycling Charges– Administrative History
§ 11-1. Chapter Title. That this chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Minimum Property Maintenance
Standards” of the Town of Easton, Maryland. (Ordinance 526 effective 3/24/2008)
§ 11-2. General References. That this chapter shall reference Health and Sanitation – Chapter 12, Litter and Control –
Chapter 16 and Rat Control – Chapter 21 of the Code of the Town of Easton and the Minimum Livability Code –
05.02.03 of the Code of Maryland Regulations. (Ordinance 526 effective 3/24/2008)
Article I – Property Maintenance Code
§ 11-3. Adoption of Standards. The International Property Maintenance Code, as published by the International
Code Council, is hereby adopted as the minimum standard for property maintenance in the Town of Easton,
Maryland. (Ordinance 628 effective October 7th 2013, historical reference 301, 371, 404, 449 and 526)
§ 11-4. State of Maryland –Minimum Livability Code. The Code of Maryland Regulations, COMAR
05.02.03.03(2) states that the provisions of the Minimum Livability Code found therein do not apply to housing located
in a political subdivision that has adopted a local housing code containing provisions that substantially conform to the
provisions of COMAR 05.02.03; and
The Minimum Property Maintenance Code set forth herein substantially conforms to those provisions, and it is
therefore intended that the adoption of this code shall have the effect of making COMAR 05.02.03 inapplicable in
the Town of Easton, except to the extent that the application of those regulations would be more restrictive than the
provisions of this code. (Ordinance 526 effective 3/24/2008)
§ 11-5 Incorporation by Reference.
§ 11-5.1 International Property Maintenance Code 2009. The International Property Maintenance Code 2009
second printing, with the modifications found in §11-5.2 of this article, are incorporated by reference.
(Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010, historical reference 19, 58, 81, 153, 301, 371, 404, 449 and 526)
§ 11-5.2 International Property Maintenance Code 2009 Amendments. Amendments for the International
Property Maintenance Code 2009 are as follows: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010)
§ 11-5.2.1 Chapter 1. Scope and Administration. Delete Section 101.1 Title and replace with the
following: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010, historical reference 58, 301, 404, 449 and 526)
101.1 Title. The International Property Maintenance Code 2009 shall be known and may be cited as
the Town of Easton, Property Maintenance Code. It is referenced within as this code.
§ 11-5.2.2 Chapter 1. Scope and Administration. Add Section 101.1 Additional Scope. (Ordinance 569
effective March 22nd 2010)
101.2.1 Additional Scope. In addition to any fire safety requirements contained in the International
Property Maintenance Code, the State fire safety laws, Public Safety Article, Title 9, Annotated Code
of Maryland, and the State Fire Prevention Code, COMAR 29.06.01, may contain additional fire safety
requirements. The State Fire Prevention Code is enforced by the State Fire Marshal or authorized fire
official.
§ 11-5.2.3 Chapter 1. Scope and Administration. Delete Section 102.3 Application of other codes and
replace with the following: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010, historical reference 526)
102.3 Application of other codes. Application of other codes for repairs, additions or alterations to a
structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of
the International Building Code, International Residential Code and the International Existing
Buildings Code. Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provision of
the Town of Easton Building Code and or Zoning Ordinance.
§ 11-5.2.4 Chapter 1. Scope and Administration. Delete Section 102.6 Historic Buildings and replace with
the following: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010, historical reference 526)
102.6 Historic buildings. The provisions of this code shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or
structures designated as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the code
official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare. All structures locate within
the Historic District shall meet the minimum requirements under Chapter 1 and Chapter 3, Sections
301, 302, 303, 307, and 308 to maintain the historic value of the structure and premise. All notices and
orders under Section 107, will require the property owner to appear before the Historic District
Commission.
§ 11-5.2.5 Chapter 1. Scope and Administration. Delete Section 103 Department of Property Maintenance
Inspection, and replace with the following: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010, historical reference
58, 301, 404, 449 and 526)
SECTION 103
OFFICE OF CODE ENFORCEMENT
103.1 General. The office of Code Enforcement shall be responsible for the enforcement of the
provisions of this code. The official in charge thereof shall be known as the code official.
103.2 Liability. The Code Enforcement official, officers or employees charged with the enforcement
of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally, and is
hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of
an act required or permitted in the discharge of official duties.
103.3 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the office of Code Enforcement in
carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be in accordance with the adopted Schedule of
Fees as established by the Town Council, which may be revised from time to time by resolution of the
Town Council.
§ 11-5.2.6 Chapter 1. Scope and Administration. Delete Section 104.6 Department records and replace
with the following: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010, historical reference 526)
104.6 Office records. The code official shall keep official records of all business and activities of the
office specified in the provisions of this code. Such records shall be retained in the official records for
the period required for retention of public record.
§ 11-5.2.7 Chapter 1. Scope and Administration. Delete Section 106.3 Prosecution of violation and replace
with the following: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010, historical reference 526)
106.3 Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order
served in accordance with Section 107 shall be deemed guilty of a municipal infraction and shall be
subjected to the penalties set forth in Section 1-8 of the Easton Town Code, and the violation shall be
deemed a strict liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with, the code official shall
institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to
require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the
provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the
Town of Easton on such premises shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is
located and shall be a lien upon such real estate collectible in the same manner in which real estate
taxes are collected, or the Town may collect it by such other action at law as they deem appropriate.
§ 11-5.2.8 Chapter 1. Scope and Administration. Delete Section 106.4 Violation penalties and replace with
the following: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010, historical reference 19, 58, 301, 404, 449 and
526)
106.4 Violation penalties. Any person, who shall violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply
therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be guilty of a municipal infraction and shall be
subjected to the penalties set forth in Section 1-8 of the Easton Town Code. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 11-5.2.9 Chapter 1. Scope and Administration. Delete Section 106.5 Abatement of violation and replace
with the following: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010, historical reference 526)
106.5 Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the
Easton Town Council from instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to
prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct,
business or utilization of the building, structure or premises.
§ 11-5.2.10 Chapter 1. Scope and Administration. Delete Section 108.2 Closing of vacant structures and
replace with the following: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010)
108.2 Closing of vacant structures. If the structure is vacant and unfit for human habitation and
occupancy, and is not in danger of structural collapse, the code official is authorized to post a placard
of condemnation on the premises and order the structure closed up so as not to be an attractive
nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time specified in the order, the
code official shall cause the premises to be closed and secured through any available public agency or
by contract or arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real
estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate and collectible in the
same manner in which real estate taxes are collected, or the Town may collect it by such other action at
law as they deem appropriate.
§ 11-5.2.11 Chapter 1. Scope and Administration. Delete Section 109.3 Closing streets and replace with
the following: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010, historical reference 526)
109.3 Closing streets. When necessary for public safety, the office of Code Enforcement shall
temporarily close structures and close, or order the Easton Police Department to close, sidewalks,
streets, public ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized.
§ 11-5.2.12 Chapter 1. Scope and Administration. Delete Section 109.5 Cost of emergency repairs and
replace with the following: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010, historical reference 526)
109.5 Costs of emergency repairs. Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be
paid by the Town of Easton. The cost of such emergency repairs shall be charged against the real estate
upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate collectible in the same
manner in which real estate taxes are collected, or the Town may collect it by such other action at law
as they deem appropriate.
§ 11-5.2.13 Chapter 1. Scope and Administration. Delete Section 110.3 Failure to comply and replace with
the following: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010)
110.3 Failure to comply. If the owner of a premises fails to comply with a demolition order within
the time prescribed, the code official shall cause the structure to be demolished and removed, either
through an available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and the cost of
such demolition and removal shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is
located and shall be a lien upon such real estate collectible in the same manner in which real estate
taxes are collected, or the Town may collect it by such other action at law as they deem appropriate.
§ 11-5.2.14 Chapter 1. Scope and Administration. Delete Section 110.4 Salvaged materials. (Ordinance
569 effective March 22nd 2010, historical reference 526)
§ 11-5.2.15 Chapter 1. Scope and Administration. Delete Section 111 Means of Appeals. (Ordinance 569
effective March 22nd 2010, historical reference 526)
§ 11-5.2.16 Chapter 21. Definitions. Delete Section 201.3 Terms defined in other codes and replace with
the following: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010, historical reference 526)
201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code, and are defined in the
International; Building, Residential, Existing Building, Plumbing, Fuel Gas, Mechanical Codes or the
National Electrical Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as stated in those codes.
§ 11-5.2.17 Chapter 2. Definitions. Amend Section 202 General definitions and add the following
definitions: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010, historical reference 58, 404, 449 and 526)
CELLAR. That portion of a building that is partly or completely below grade, that is not suitable as
living space and is usually used for storage
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING. Multi-family dwelling is any dwelling or part thereof containing
three or more dwelling units.
WELFARE. Concerns welfare of the community, or an individual. Any violation or condition that
could adversely affect property values or the quality of living in the community.
§ 11-5.2.18 Chapter 3. General Regulations. Add Section 301.2.1 Transfer of responsibility: (Ordinance
569 effective March 22nd 2010, historical reference 58 and 526)
301.2.1 Transfer of responsibility. A contract effective as between owner and operator, operator and
occupant or owner and occupant, with regard to compliance hereunder shall not relieve any party of
their direct responsibility under this code.
§ 11-5.2.19 Chapter 3. General Regulations. Delete Section 302.2 Grading and drainage and its exception
and replace with the following: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010, historical reference 404, 449
and 526)
302.2 Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the erosion of
soil and to prevent the accumulation of water thereon, or within any structure located thereon.
Exception: Approved retention areas and reservoirs.
§ 11-5.2.20 Chapter 3. General Regulations. Delete Section 302.4 Weeds and replace with the following:
(Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010, historical reference 81, 153 and 526)
302.4 Weeds. All premises, exterior property and any space abutting the same between the property
line and the curb or edge of pavement, shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess
of 10 inches in height. All invasive plants are prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual
plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs.
Exceptions:
1. Cultivated Flower Beds, provided they are properly tended.
2. Vegetable Gardens, provided they are properly tended.
3. Forests, provided they are maintained free of invasive plants.
4. Meadows, provided they are mowed around the perimeter in accordance with 302.4. and
1/3 is mowed in strips annually to prevent woody growth.
5. Agricultural Fields provided they are harvested seasonally.
6. Shoreline Buffers, provided they are properly tended.
302.4.1 Weeds maintenance; duty to remove. The owner or agent shall have the duty to control
such weeds and eliminate such invasive plants.
302.4.2 Failure to remove weeds. In the event that any owner or agent having charge of a property
shall fail, for a period of five (5) days after written notice, to keep the premises clear of weeds and
invasive plants, the office of Code Enforcement shall have authority to have the condition remedied
by; any duly authorized employee of the Town of Easton or contractor hired by the Town of Easton
and shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation and control such weeds and eliminate
such invasive plants thereon. Any cost or expense incurred by the town shall be paid by the owner
or agent responsible for the property, or shall constitute a lien upon the real property where the
work is done collectible in the same manner in which real estate taxes are collected, or the Town
may collect it by such other action at law as they deem appropriate..
§ 11-5.2.21 Chapter 3. General Regulations. Delete Section 302.8 Motor vehicles and its exception and
replace with the following: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010, historical reference 404, 449 and
526)
302.8 Motor vehicles. Except as provided for in other regulations, not more than one currently
unregistered or uninspected motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises. All
unregistered vehicles must be covered with a car cover designed for such purposes and must be parked
on an improved surface; i.e. pavement, gravel, or concrete driveway or parking area.
Exceptions: Automotive Factories, Automotive Sales and Motor Vehicle Repair Garages
provided the motor vehicles are parked on an improved surface; i.e. pavement, gravel, or concrete
driveway or parking area.
302.8.1 Major overhaul, bodywork and painting. No vehicles shall at any time be in a state of
major overhaul (disassembly and or disrepair), or in the process of body work (being stripped and
or dismantled). Panting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an approved spray
booth.
Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul, including body
work, provided that such work is performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area
designed and approved for such purpose.
§ 11-5.2.22 Chapter 3. General Regulations. Delete Section 304.3 Premises identification and replace with
the following: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010, historical reference 449 and 526)
304.3 Premises identification. Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to
be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall
contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers
shall be a minimum of 3 inches high with a minimum stroke width of 0.375 inch. Rear entrance
identification shall be provided on all non-residential structures.
§ 11-5.2.23 Chapter 3. General Regulations. Delete Section 304.6 Exterior walls and replace with the
following: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010, historical reference 58, 404, 449 and 526)
304.6 Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, loose or rotting materials;
and maintained (clean), weatherproof and properly surface coated to prevent deterioration.
§ 11-5.2.24 Chapter 3. General Regulations. Move Section 304.12 Handrails and guards to a new section
as follows: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010)
307.2 Loads and Maintenance. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of
supporting the loads as prescribed in the International Building and Residential Codes and shall be
maintained in good condition.
§ 11-5.2.25 Chapter 3. General Regulations. Delete 304.13 Windows, skylight and door frames and
replace with the following: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010, historical reference 58, 404, 449 and
526)
304.13 Window, skylight, door and their frames. Every window, skylight, door and their frame(s)
shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weather tight.
§ 11-5.2.26 Chapter 3. General Regulations. Delete Section 304.14 Insect screens and its exception and
replace with the following: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010, historical reference 449 and 526)
304.14 Insect screens. During the period from April 1 to November 1, every door, window and other
outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas
or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed,
manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less
than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every screen door used for insect control shall have a
self-closing device in good working condition.
Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or
insect repellent fans, are employed.
§ 11-5.2.27 Chapter 3. General Regulations. Delete Section 305.6 Interior doors and replace with the
following: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010, historical reference 526)
305.6 Interior doors. Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame and shall be
capable of being opened and closed by being properly and securely attached to jambs, headers or
tracks as intended by the manufacturer of the attachment hardware. Keyed locksets are prohibited on
sleeping spaces within any single dwelling unit, for one and two families unless approved by the office
of Code Enforcement as a Rooming House or Unit.
§ 11-5.2.28 Chapter 3. General Regulations. Add Section 305.7 Utilities: (Ordinance 569 effective March
22nd 2010, historical reference 58 and 526)
305.7 Utilities. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service equipment or utility which is
required by this code to be removed, shut off or discontinued for any occupied structure, except for
such temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in progress, or
during temporary emergencies.
§ 11-5.2.29 Chapter 3. General Regulations. Delete Section 307.1 Handrails and guardrails and its
exception and replace with the following: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010)
307.1 General. Every exterior and interior stairway having more than three risers shall have a handrail
on one side of the stairway and every open portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or
other walking surface which is more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below shall
have guards. Handrails shall not be less than 34 inches (762 mm) high or more than 38 inches (1067
mm) high measured vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the finished floor of the landing
or walking surfaces. Guards shall not be less than 36 inches (762 mm) high above the floor of the
landing, balcony, porch, deck, or ramp or other walking surface.
Exception: Guards shall not be required where exempted by the adopted building code.
§ 11-5.2.30 Chapter 3. General Regulations. Delete Section 308.2.2 Refrigerators and replace with the
following: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010, historical reference 526)
308.2.2 Refrigerators. Refrigerators and similar equipment not in operation shall not be discarded or
abandoned on premises. Disposal of this equipment shall include the removal of the doors prior to
placing such item for disposal outside the structure.
§ 11-5.2.31 Chapter 4. Light, Ventilation and Occupancy Limitations. Delete Section 402.1 Habitable
spaces and its exception and replace with the following: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010,
historical reference 58 and 526)
402.1 Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one window of approved size facing
directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total glazed area for every habitable space shall be
8 percent of the floor area of such room. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure face a window
of any room and such obstructions are located less than 3 feet (914 mm) from the window and extend
to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such window shall not be deemed to face directly to the
outdoors nor to a court and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window
area for the room.
Exception 1: Where natural light for rooms or spaces without exterior glazing areas is provided
through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least 8
percent of the floor area of the interior room or space, but not less than 25 square feet (2.33 m2).
The exterior glazing area shall be based on the total floor area being served.
Exception 2: A skylight-type window shall be considered as a window for natural light for rooms
or spaces other than living, sleeping or cooking.
§ 11-5.2.32 Chapter 4. Light, Ventilation and Occupancy Limitations. Delete Section 403.1 Habitable
spaces and its exception and replace with the following: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010,
historical reference 58 and 526)
403.1 Habitable spaces, common halls and stairways. Every habitable space shall have at least one
open able window. The total open able area of the window in every room shall be equal to at least 45
percent of the minimum glazed area required in Section 402.1. Common halls and stairways in every
two-family dwelling, multi-family dwelling and rooming house shall be adequately ventilated.
Exception: Where rooms and spaces without openings to the outdoors are ventilated through an
adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least 8 percent of the
floor area of the interior room or space, but not less than 25 square feet (2.33 m2). The ventilation
openings to the outdoors shall be based on a total floor area being ventilated.
§ 11-5.2.33 Chapter 4. Light, Ventilation and Occupancy Limitations. Delete Section 404.4 Bedroom and
living room requirements and its subsections 404.4.1 thru 404.4.5 and replace with the following:
(Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010, historical reference 58 and 526)
404.4 Habitable space requirements. Every habitable space shall comply with the requirements of
Sections 404.4.1 through 404.4.6.
404.4.1 Habitable area. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 190 square feet of habitable
floor area for the first occupant, and at least 100 square feet of additional habitable floor area for
each additional occupant.
404.4.2 Habitable living and sleeping spaces. Every living space shall contain at least 120 square
feet (11.2 m2) and every sleeping space shall contain at least 70 square feet and every space
occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of
floor area for each occupant.
404.4.3 Access from sleeping spaces. Sleeping spaces shall not constitute the only means of
access to other sleeping spaces or other habitable spaces and shall not serve as the only means of
egress from other habitable spaces.
Exception: Units that contain fewer than two sleeping spaces.
404.4.4 Water closet accessibility. Every sleeping space shall have access to at least one water
closet and one lavatory without passing through another sleeping space. Every sleeping space in a
dwelling unit shall have access to at least one water closet and lavatory located in the same story
as the sleeping spaces or an adjacent story without going outside the dwelling.
404.4.5 Prohibited occupancy. Eating, cooking and non-habitable spaces shall not be used for
sleeping purposes. Cellars and basements shall not be used for habitable space.
Exception: No basement shall be used for habitable space unless:
1.The floors and walls are substantially watertight.
2.The total light, ventilation and occupancy limitations are in accordance with this chapter.
3.The required minimum window area of every habitable space is entirely above the grade
of the ground adjoining such window area, not including stairwells or access ways.
404.4.6 Other requirements. Habitable space shall comply with the applicable provisions of this
code including, but not limited to, the light, ventilation, room area, ceiling height and room width
requirements of this chapter; the plumbing facilities and water-heating facilities requirements of
Chapter 5; the heating facilities and electrical receptacle requirements of Chapter 6; and the smoke
detector and emergency escape requirements of Chapter 7.
§ 11-5.2.34 Chapter 4. Light, Ventilation and Occupancy Limitations. Add Section 404.5.1 Notice of
maximum occupancy: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010, historical reference 58 and 526)
404.5.1 Notice of maximum occupancy. Every owner or operator shall advise the occupant in
writing either by insertion in the lease between the parties or otherwise of the maximum number of
occupants permitted in the occupied premises under the provisions herein.
§ 11-5.2.35 Chapter 4. Light, Ventilation and Occupancy Limitations. Add Section 404.7.1 Cooking
equipment: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010, historical reference 58 and 526)
404.7.1 Cooking equipment. Every piece of cooking equipment shall be so constructed and
installed that it will function safely and effectively and shall be maintained in sound working
condition.
§ 11-5.2.36 Chapter 4. Light, Ventilation and Occupancy Limitations. Add Section 404.7.2 Portable
cooking equipment: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010, historical reference 58 and 526)
404.7.2 Portable cooking equipment. Portable cooking equipment employing flame and cooking
equipment using gasoline or kerosene as fuel for cooking are prohibited.
§ 11-5.2.37 Chapter 5. Plumbing Facilities and Fixture Requirements. Add Section 502.1.1 Two family
dwellings and subsections 502.1.1.1 thru 502.1.1.3: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010, historical
reference 19, 58 and 526)
502.1.1 Two family dwellings. The occupants may share a single water closet, lavatory, bathtub
or shower provided:
502.1.1.1 Neither of the two dwelling units contains more than two habitable spaces;
however, for the purpose of this subsection, a kitchen with not more than 60 square feet of
floor area is not counted as a habitable space.
502.1.1.2 The habitable space of each of such dwelling units aggregates not more than 250
square feet.
502.1.1.3 The water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower are within a room, separate from
the habitable rooms, which affords privacy and which is accessible to the occupants of each
dwelling unit without going through the dwelling unit of another person or outside the
dwelling.
§ 11-5.2.38 Chapter 5. Plumbing Facilities and Fixture Requirements. Delete Section 502.2 Rooming
houses and replace with the following: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010, historical reference 19
and 526)
502.2 Rooming houses. At least one water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower shall be supplied for
each four rooming units and or each six occupants. In a rooming house in which rooms are let only to
males, flush urinals may be substituted in accordance with the International Plumbing Code. No such
facilities located in a basement or cellar shall count in computing the number of facilities required by
this subsection except when approved by the Building Inspection Division.
§ 11-5.2.39 Chapter 6. Mechanical and Electrical Requirements. Delete Section 602.2 Residential
occupancies and its exception and replace with the following: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010,
historical reference 526)
602.2 Residential occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of
maintaining a room temperature of 70°F in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms based on
the winter outdoor design temperature of 10°F. Cooking appliances shall not be used to provide space
heating to meet the requirements of this section. Gas heaters and portable heating equipment
employing a flame and heating equipment using gasoline or kerosene do not meet the standards of this
chapter and are prohibited.
§ 11-5.2.40 Chapter 6.Mechanical and Electrical Requirements. Delete Section 602.3 Heat supply and its
exceptions and replace with the following: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010, historical reference
301, 404, 449 and 526)
602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more
dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants
thereof shall supply heat during the period from September 1 to May 1 to maintain a temperature of not
less than 70°F in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms.
Exceptions: When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design temperature for the
locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be required provided that the
heating system is operating at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature of
10°F.
§ 11-5.2.41 Chapter 6. Mechanical and Electrical Requirements. Delete Section 602.4 Occupied work
spaces and its exceptions and replace with the following: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010,
historical reference 404, 449 and 526)
602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat during the
period from September 1 to May 1 to maintain a temperature of not less than 70°F during the period
the spaces are occupied.
Exceptions:
1. Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions.
2. Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities.
§ 11-5.2.42 Chapter 6. Mechanical and Electrical Requirements. Add Section 605.4
Site lighting: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010, historical reference 371 and 526)
605.4 Site lighting. All exterior sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking areas and similar
areas shall be illuminated at night to a minimum level of 2 lux (0.2 foot candles) on pavement or other
surface area. Tests for proper illumination shall be conducted in accordance with standards established
by the Illuminating Engineering Society. This subsection shall not apply to one and two-family
dwellings.
§ 11-5.2.43 Chapter 7. Fire Safety Requirements. Delete Section 702.1 General and replace with the
following: (Ordinance 628 effective October 7th 2013, historical reference 526 and 569)
702.1 General. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided from any point in
a building or structure to the public way. Means of egress shall comply with the International Building
and Residential Codes except as provided herein.
702.1.1 Stairway. Stairways in one and two family dwellings constructed prior to February 27th
1984, shall be permitted to continue without change, provided they meet all of the following
provisions;
1. Stairways shall not be less than 27 inches (914 mm) in clear width
2. The minimum headroom in all parts of the stairway shall not be less than 6 feet 8 inches
(2032 mm) measured vertically from the sloped line adjoining the tread nosing or from the
floor surface of the landing or platform on that portion of the stairway
3. Vertical rise of the stairway shall not be greater than 12 feet (3658 mm)
4. The maximum riser height shall be 8-1/4 inches (210 mm)
5. The minimum tread depth shall be 9 inches (229 mm)
§ 11-5.2.44 Chapter 7. Fire Safety Requirements. Delete Section 702.2 Aisles and replace with the
following: (Ordinance 569 effective March 22nd 2010, historical reference 526)
702.2 Aisles. The required width of aisles in accordance with the International Building Code shall be
unobstructed.
§ 11-5.2.45 Chapter 7. Fire Safety Requirements. Delete Section 702.4 Emergency Escape Openings and
replace with the following: (Ordinance 628 effective October 7th 2013)
702.4 Emergency Escape and Rescue Openings. Required emergency escape and rescue openings
shall be maintained in accordance with the International Building and Residential Code. The
following exceptions for one and two family dwellings shall be permitted to continue without change.
Exceptions.
1. Openings constructed prior to February 27th 1984 which have not undergone any
alteration, renovation or construction project.
2. Basements constructed prior to October 1st 2009 that do not contain sleeping spaces.
3. Basements used only to house mechanical equipment and not exceeding a total floor area
of 200 square feet (18.58 m2).
4. Habitable attics constructed prior to March 22nd 2010 that do not contain sleeping spaces.
702.4.1 Replacement Windows. Openings in one and two family dwellings constructed prior to
February 27, 1984 shall be subject to the following:
702.4.1.1 Operating style. Replacement windows are permitted to be of the same operating style
as the existing window or a style that provides for an equal or greater window opening area than
the existing window.
702.4.1.2 Emergency Escape and Rescue Openings. Where windows are required to be
emergency escape and rescue openings, replacement windows shall be exempt from the net clear
opening dimension obtainable by the normal operation, minimum sill height and window wells,
provided the replacement window meets all of the following conditions:
1. The replacement window is the manufacturer’s largest standard size window that will fit
within the existing frame or existing rough opening; and
2. The minimum net clear opening of the frame provides 5.0 square feet (0.465 m2) on the
grade floor and 5.7 square feet (0.530 m2) for all other levels; and
3. The replacement of the window is not part of a change of use or occupancy.
§ 11-5.2.46 Chapter 7. Fire Safety Requirements. Delete Section 704.1 General and replace with the
following: (Ordinance 628 effective October 7th 2013, historical reference 526 and 569)
704.1 General. All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress or
control a fire or any combination thereof shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times in
accordance with the International Building or Residential Codes.
§ 11-5.2.47 Chapter 7. Fire Safety Requirements. Delete Section 704.1.1 Automatic sprinkler systems and
replace with the following: (Ordinance 628 effective October 7th 2013, historical reference 526 and 569)
704.1.1 Automatic sprinkler systems. Inspection, testing and maintenance of automatic sprinkler
systems shall be in accordance with installation standard; NFPA 13, NFPA 13R or NFPA 13D.
§ 11-5.2.48 Chapter 7. Fire Safety Requirements. Delete Section 704.2 Smoke alarms and replace with the
following: (Ordinance 628 effective October 7th 2013, historical reference 526 and 569)
704.2 Smoke alarms. Single or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed and maintained in
Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not regulated in Group R occupancies, regardless of occupant
load at all of the following locations:
1. On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of
bedrooms.
2. In each room used for sleeping purposes.
3. In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements and cellars but not including crawl
spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units with split levels and without an
intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall
suffice for the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one full story
below the upper level.
Single or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in other groups in accordance with the
International Building Code.
§ 11-5.2.49 Appendix A Boarding Standard. Delete Appendix A Boarding Standard. (Ordinance 628
effective October 7th 2013, historical reference 569)
§ 11-6 Administrative Waivers. (Ordinance 627 effective October 7th 2013)
§ 11-6.1 Administrative Waiver Process. The Code Official may grant administrative waivers of the provisions
of the minimum standards for property maintenance in the Town of Easton, Maryland, subject to the limitations
provided in § 11-6.3, if the following are satisfied:
1. Application for an administrative waiver is applied for by the property owner in the approved form;
2. Adequate written notice of the waiver application is afforded to the tenant of the unit and a copy
shall be provided to the Code Official.
3. The tenant is afforded an opportunity to comment on the application either in writing or in person;
and
4. The waiver would not threaten the health or safety of a tenant.
§ 11-6.1.1 Administrative Waiver Fee. There shall be no fee assessed for the filing of an administrative
waiver with the Code Official for properties which are appropriately licensed at the time of application. A
fee may be applicable to any administrative waiver application for property owners who have, in the twelve
(12) month period immediately preceding the administrative waiver request, operated a rental property
without the required rental license and whose property was the subject of any action by any department of
the Town of Easton to cause the previously unlicensed property to become properly licensed. The Town
Council may establish the fee by resolution as part of the Town’s Schedule of Fees.
§ 11-6.2 Duration of Waiver. Any administrative waiver granted pursuant to this § 11-6 shall be valid for the
duration of the tenancy during which it was granted and for the owner for which it was granted. The administrative
waiver shall be continued for future tenancies if the tenant executes a written document evidencing that he or she
has been notified of the administrative waiver and does not object to the continuation of the administrative waiver.
If the tenant does object to the continuation of the waiver, then the Code Official shall afford the tenant the
opportunity to be heard and decide the administrative waiver on its merits. It shall be the responsibility of the
property owner to notify each new tenant of the administrative waiver and provide a copy to the Code Official.
It shall also be the responsibility of the property owner to notify the Town of a change in tenancy or a change in
ownership. In addition, each year, the property owner shall include the name, contact information, and waiver
form for the then current tenant with the rental application for that particular unit.
§ 11-6.3 Limitations on Waivers. Administrative Waivers for ceiling heights, stairways and hardship shall be
subject to the following limitations and provisions:
§ 11-6.3.1 Minimum Ceiling Height – Administrative Waiver. The Code Official may grant an
administrative waiver for one and two family dwellings to allow ceilings constructed prior to January 21st
1963, to continue without change, provided they meet all of the following provisions;
1. Having a minimum floor area, with a clear ceiling height between 6 feet 8
inches (2032 mm) and 7 feet (2134 mm) in accordance with the following
table.
2. Beams,
girders, ducts and similar obstructions do not project below 6 feet 8 inches (2032 mm).
3. Functioning hard wired or sealed long lasting battery operated smoke detectors are supplied in
each area.
4. Carbon monoxide detectors are supplied in each area, if fuel-fired appliances are installed in the
dwelling and/or if there is an attached garage.
5. Code compliant emergency escape and rescue openings are provided if the area is for sleeping.
§ 11-6.3.2 Stairway – Administrative Waiver. The Code Official may grant an administrative waiver for
one and two family dwellings to allow stairways constructed prior to February 27th 1984, to continue without
change, provided they meet all of the following provisions;
1. Sufficient width and height exist for a person to traverse the means of egress
2. The stairway has dimensional uniformity in the treads and risers along the walk line
3. Adequate hand and guard rails are provided
4. The stairway does not constitute a distinct hazard to life.
§ 11-6.3.3 Hardship – Administrative Waiver. In addition to the waivers provided in sections 11-6.3.1
and 11-6.3.2, the Code Official may grant an administrative waiver for one and two family dwellings of
Sections 303.2, 307, 402.1, 402.2, 403.1, 404.2, 404.4.1, 404.4.3, 404.6, and 702.4 of the Minimum Livability
Code if a literal enforcement of the provisions of the minimum livability code would result in hardship to the
property owner. A waiver under this section may only be granted to the extent necessary to remove the
hardship and if the Code Official finds that at least one of the following circumstances exist:
1. The safety protections provided by the particular section at issue are adequately satisfied by other
means; or
2. The alterations or repairs required by the code are technically infeasible; or
3. The costs to make the alteration or repair required are disproportionate to the assessed, appraised
or calculated value of the dwelling; or
4. The increase in safety protections provided are minor when compared to the feasibility or costs to
make the alteration.
§11-6.4 Additional Waiver Provisions.
§11-6.4.1 Conditions. The Code Official may impose such conditions on the granting of a waiver as he
or she deems necessary to protect the health and safety of the tenant.
§11-6.4.2 Alterations and Renovations. Any alterations or renovations shall first comply with the
provisions of the Maryland Building Rehabilitation Code. Alterations and renovations that do not
comply with the Maryland Building Rehabilitation Code and the minimum livability code shall not be
initiated.
TABLE
MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE WAIVER
Space Ceiling
Type
Minimum Area in Square Feet
1-2
occupants
3-5
occupants
6 or more
occupants
Living
Flat
or
Sloped
120 120 150
Dining 70 80 100
Kitchen 70 80 100
Bedroom 70 or 100 150, 200 or 250 300*
For SI: 1 square foot = 0.093 m2
Maximum occupants per bedroom shall be limited to six
§11-6.4.3 Board of Appeals. If the Code Official elects not to grant a waiver of the provisions for minimum
ceiling height, stairways or hardship, then the property owner may apply for a waiver to the Board of Appeals
pursuant to § 2-26.2 of the Town Code. The fee, if any, for filing with the Board of Appeals shall be
established in the Schedule of Fees. The Board of Appeals shall have the power to grant a waiver for the
ceiling height, stairways and hardships that comply with the provisions and requirements of § 11-6 of the
Town Code and subject to the limitations set forth in § 11-6.3. For the purpose of waiver applications, the
Board of Appeals shall have two additional members (for a total of five). Such additional members shall be
Town residents appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Town Council. The additional members shall
be appointed for terms of three years each. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term.
§ 11-7 Reserved.
Article II – Garbage, Refuse and Recycling
§ 11-8 Definitions.
For purpose of this Article II and III of this Chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following definitions
shall apply.
Ashes. The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, or other combustible materials.
Garbage. Unwanted organic refuse, largely foods, either unconsumed or spoiled, (excepting ensilage in silos or
properly drained stacks) organic wastes from the processing of foods containing natural moisture and a minimum
of free liquids.
Recyclable Materials. Any and all materials that can be separated, collected, processed and returned to the
manufacturing stream in the form of raw materials or products. The Town shall designate those items that are
suitable for collection by the Town and/or its subcontractor.
Refuse. All solid waste and includes garbage, rubbish, and ashes.
Waste. All unwanted materials, including liquid and solid waste materials.
(Ordinance 589 effective 3/13/2012, historical reference 37 and 526)
§ 11-9. Receptacles required - Specifications.
The following shall be deemed approved receptacles that will be emptied and returned to the premises.
(A) For ashes. Ashes shall be placed until collected in metal, water-tight containers equipped with handles and a
tight fitting metal cover, with a capacity of not less than 15 nor more than 26 gallons.
(B) For garbage and refuse. All garbage and refuse shall be placed and stored until collected in rust-resistant,
tight, non-absorbent and easily washable receptacles which are covered with close-fitting lids. These receptacles
must be of adequate capacity and must be provided in sufficient number to hold all garbage and refuse that
accumulates between collections.
(C) For rubbish. All rubbish, except for large articles, shall be stored in containers suitable for collection purposes.
(D) For recycling. Recyclable materials shall be placed in any bin, box, container, structure or device designated
and authorized by the Town as suitable for collection.
(Ordinance 589 effective 3/13/2012, historical reference 8, 37 and 526)
§ 11-10. Papers, magazines or other light materials.
Papers, magazines, or other light materials liable to be blown about shall be bundled, tied, sacked, or otherwise
properly secured and they shall be so packed that they can be easily handled by collectors. (Ordinance 526 effective
3/24/2008, historical reference 519 aka E-34)
§ 11-11. Receptacles - Sanitary condition.
All receptacles shall be washed occasionally and treated with a disinfectant if necessary to prevent a nuisance.
(Ordinance 526 effective 3/24/2008, historical reference 37)
§ 11-12. Precollection practices.
(A) Garbage, ashes and rubbish shall each be placed and maintained in separate containers.
(B) All ashes shall be cool and kept dry.
(C) All recyclable materials must be separated from all other garbage and refuse and placed in Town designated
recycling receptacles. There shall be no food residue in recyclables.
(Ordinance 589 effective 3/13/2012, historical reference 526)
§ 11-13. Accumulation of refuse and/or recyclable materials.
No refuse and/or recyclable materials shall be allowed to accumulate on any premise or vacant lot except in
approved containers, and then only for the purpose of being collected. (Ordinance 589 effective 3/13/2012,
historical reference 37 and 526)
§ 11-14. Depositing in public places prohibited.
No house refuse, rubbish, filth, offal, garbage, dead animal or part thereof, decaying vegetable matter or organic
waste substance of any kind shall be deposited on any street or public place within the corporate limits of the town.
(Ordinance 526 effective 3/24/2008, historical reference 37, 519 aka E-34)
§ 11-15. Burning matter liable to cause nauseating smoke or vapor.
No dead animals, garbage, offal, or putrescible matter or any kind or any other matter liable to produce nauseating
or offensive smoke or vapors of any kind shall be burned within the town limits except in approved devices.
(Ordinance 526 effective 3/24/2008, historical reference 519 aka E-34)
§ 11-16. Periodic inspection of premises.
All premises within the corporate limits of the town shall be inspected periodically for compliance with the
requirements of this chapter by the Building Department. (Ordinance 526 effective 3/24/2008, historical reference
37)
§ 11-16.1. Control of rubbish, refuse, garbage, recyclable materials and waste.
If the Building Department determines that garbage, refuse, rubbish, recyclable materials or other waste has
accumulated on private property within the town to such an extent that the accumulation presents an immediate
threat to the public health, safety, or welfare, the Building Department shall order, by certified or registered mail,
return receipt requested, the owner of the property to remove all such rubbish, garbage, refuse, recyclable
materials and other waste within five days of the date of the order. If, after the expiration of the five-day period,
the refuse, garbage, rubbish, recyclable materials and other waste is not removed from the property, the Building
Department shall arrange for the removal of the material by employees of the town or by other persons. Any cost
or expense incurred thereby shall be payable by the property owner and shall constitute a lien upon the real
property where the work is done. (Ordinance 589 effective 3/13/2012, historical reference 94 and 526)
§ 11-16.2. Setting out rubbish, waste or recyclable materials for collection.
No refuse, waste, or recyclable materials shall be set out for collection prior to 5:00 p.m. on the day preceding the
regular collection day for such refuse, waste or recyclable materials. (Ordinance 589 effective 3/13/2012,
historical reference 8, 208 and 526)
§ 11-17. Garbage, Refuse, and Recyclable Materials – Administrative History.
Ordinance Number 589 passed by the Town of Easton Council on 2/22/2012
Ordinance Number 526 passed by the Town of Easton Council on 3/3/2008
Ordinance Number 208 passed by the Town of Easton Council on 11/7/1991
Ordinance Number 94, passed by the Town of Easton Council on 7/21/80
Ordinance Number 37, Liber No. 7 passed by the Town of Easton Council on 11/20/1951
Code 1941 Article IV • 26
§ 11-18. Unlawful activities.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any refuse and/or recycling receptacles or to remove their covers
or any contents thereof, except the occupants of the premises on which the receptacles are placed or their duly
authorized agents or the duly authorized employees or agents of the Town of Easton.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place refuse and/or recyclable materials on the
property of another.
(C) It shall be unlawful for a person who is neither a Town resident nor a Town business owner to place their
refuse and/or recycling for collection in the Town incorporated limits.
(Ordinance 589 effective 3/13/2012)
§ 11-19. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of Article II or III of this Chapter shall be guilty of a
municipal infraction. (Ordinance 589 effective 3/13/2012)
Article III – Refuse and Recycling Disposal Charges
§ 11-20. Refuse disposal fee imposed.
The Town of Easton shall impose a fee upon all properties from which refuse is collected by the Town for disposal.
The amount of the fee for each property shall be set by Resolution of the Town Council and shall be used to offset
the costs of disposing of refuse at the Mid-Shore Regional Landfill, or at such other facilities as the Town may
dispose of refuse in the future. All monies raised by the fees shall be accounted for separately by the Finance Officer
and shall be used only for the purposes of paying tipping fees or similar charges imposed by the Mid-Shore Regional
Landfill or other landfill utilized by the Town. If the imposition of the fees provided for herein results in a surplus in
a given year, the surplus shall be accumulated and used to reduce the amount of the fees imposed in future years.
(Ordinance 589 effective 3/13/2012, historical reference 200, 293 and 256)
§ 11-21. Refuse disposal fee for single family properties.
An annual refuse disposal fee is imposed against each property in the Town improved by a single family dwelling.
The annual fee shall be set by Resolution of the Town Council. (Ordinance 589 effective 3/13/2012, historical
reference 200 and 526)
§ 11-22. Refuse disposal fee for multi-family properties.
An annual refuse disposal fee is imposed against each property in the Town of Easton improved by for multi-family
housing projects. The annual fee shall be calculated according to the number of dwelling units located upon the
property. The term "multi-family housing" includes, but is not limited to residential condominiums, apartment
complexes and duplexes. The annual fee per dwelling unit shall be set by Resolution of the Town Council.
(Ordinance 589 effective 3/13/2012, historical reference 200 and 526)
§ 11-23. Refuse disposal fee for commercial and industrial properties.
An annual refuse disposal fee is imposed against all properties in the Town used for industrial or commercial
purposes where the Town collects and disposes of refuse for the occupants of the property. The refuse disposal fee
for commercial and industrial properties shall be calculated by the volume of refuse generated annually be
businesses located upon the property and a commercial property shall be the "commercial refuse unit" which shall
equal one hundred and four (104) cubic yards of uncompressed refuse per year. The annual fee per commercial
refuse unit shall be set by Resolution of the Town Council. (Ordinance 589 effective 3/13/2012, historical reference
200 and 526)
§ 11-24. Adjustments to refuse disposal fee for commercial and industrial properties.
The Town Engineer or the staff member designated by the Town Manager shall have the authority to determine how
many commercial refuse units should be charged to each commercial or industrial property. The basic rate shall be
one (1) commercial refuse unit per property. In the event that the amount of refuse generated by a commercial or
industrial property exceeds one (1) commercial refuse unit, the Town Engineer or the designee of the Town
Manager may increase the number of commercial refuse units attributed to the property. (Ordinance 589 effective
3/13/2012, historical reference 200 and 526)
§11-25. Recycling.
All property owners and residents of the Town must recycle and all recyclable materials must be separated from all
other refuse and placed at the curb on the designated collection day. An annual recycling fee is imposed against all
properties in the Town improved by a single family dwelling and/or multi-family housing. The term “multi-family
housing” includes, but is not limited to residential condominiums, apartment complexes and duplexes. The annual
fee per dwelling unit shall be set by Resolution of the Town Council. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
business, or company not authorized by the Town to collect recyclable materials from single family dwellings and/or
multi-family housing. (Ordinance 589 effective 3/13/2012)
§11-25 (a) Recycling Transitional Provisions
Any property which would have an annual recycling fee assessed pursuant to §11-25 which has a contract with a
recycling contractor at the time of adoption of §11-25, may file a request for automatic abatement of the annual
recycling fee with the Finance Officer within a period of six months following adoption although no automatic
abatement shall be allowed after the first full fiscal year following the date of adoption of §11-25. Any such
request shall be in writing on forms prescribed by the Finance Officer and must include a copy of the contract
with that recycling contractor. Additionally, that contract must be valid until at least December 31, 2012 in order
to be eligible for the automatic abatement of the annual recycling fee. No automatic abatement of the annual
recycling fee will be authorized or allowed by the Finance Officer effective with the fiscal year beginning July 1,
2013. (Ordinance 589 effective 3/13/2012)
§11-25 (b) Commercial Property Recycling
The Town Council may assess an annual recycling fee on any commercial property which is served by the Town
of Easton Public Works Department for Municipal Solid Waste collection if the Town of Easton, or the authorized
subcontractor thereof, is actually engaged in the recycling of recyclable material pursuant to the applicable
standards of the Public Works Department. The annual fee for any commercial property will be set by Resolution
of the Town Council. Any commercial property for which the annual recycling fee is assessed must separate all
recyclable materials from all other refuse and place the recyclable material for collection in a manner prescribed
by the Town of Easton Public Works Department. No annual recycling fee shall be assessed or collected by the
Town of Easton on any commercial property for which the Town of Easton, or it’s authorized subcontractors do
not perform recycling activities. (Ordinance 589 effective 3/13/2012)
§ 11-26. Manner of collection; personal obligation of property owner; unpaid refuse disposal fee or recycling fee
to constitute lien on real property.
The refuse disposal fee and recycling fee shall be billed to the owner of each parcel of real property within the Town
as to which the fee is applicable on an annual basis. The refuse disposal fee and recycling fee shall be due and
payable thirty (30) days after the date of mailing of the statement to the owner of the property. An unpaid, overdue
refuse disposal fee and/or recycling fee shall bear interest at the rate of one and one-half per cent per month until
paid. An unpaid refuse disposal fee and/or recycling fee shall constitute a personal obligation of a property owner
and shall be a lien against all real and personal property of the owner located within the Town, collectible in the
same manner as real estate taxes. (Ordinance 589 effective 3/13/2012, historical reference 200 and 526)
§ 11-27. Appeal from determination of the Town Engineer or the designee of the Town Manager.
Any property owner who believes that the Town Engineer or the designee of the Town Manager has erred in the
interpretation or application of the provisions of this Article in determining:
(1) Whether a refuse disposal fee and/or recycling fee should be charged against the property; or
(2) The amount of such fee may request a review of such determination by the Town Engineer or the designee of
the Town Manager. The Town Engineer or designee shall review the matter, adjust the fee if he believes an
adjustment is appropriate, and issue a written response to the property owner. If the property owner is not satisfied
by the Town Engineer's or designee’s determination, he may appeal the determination to Town Council. Any such
appeal must be filed with the Town Office not less than thirty (30) days after the date of the determination by the
Town Engineer or designee. Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the Town Council shall schedule a hearing upon
the appeal and shall provide all interested parties with an opportunity to be heard. The Town Council shall issue a
written determination of the issue or issues raised by the appeal. The written determination may take the form of
an excerpt of the Town Council's minutes. Any party to the appeal before the Town Council may appeal the
decision of the Town Council to the Circuit Court for Talbot County in the manner provided by the Maryland
Rules of Civil Procedure for administrative appeals.
(Ordinance 589 effective 3/13/2012, historical reference 200 and 526)
§ 11-28. Refuse Disposal Charges and Recycling Charges – Administrative History.
Ordinance Number 589 passed by the Town of Easton Council on 2/22/2012
Ordinance Number 526 passed by the Town of Easton Council on 3/3/2008
Ordinance Number 502 passed by the Town of Easton Council on 6/19/2006.
Ordinance Number 293 passed by the Town of Easton Council on 2/1/1995.
Ordinance Number 200, passed by the Town of Easton Council on 6/27/1991
CHAPTER 12 HEALTH AND SANITATION
RESERVED.
CHAPTER 13 HOUSING
§ 13-1. Chapter Title
§ 13-2. General References
Article I – Affordable Housing Fund
§ 13-3. Establishment
§ 13-4. Source of Revenue
§ 13-5. Administration
§ 13-6. Administration Expenses
§ 13-7. Use of the Easton Affordable Housing Fund
§ 13-8. Designation of Administrator; Terms
§ 13-9. Other duties of the Administrator
§ 13-10. Affordable Housing Fund – Administrative History
Article II – Notice and Property Affidavit
§ 13-11. Notice
§ 13-12. Property Affidavit
§ 13-13. Failure to Comply
Article III – Registration of Non-Owner Occupied Residential Property
§ 13-14. Registration
§ 13-1. Chapter Title.
That this chapter shall be known and may be cited as “Housing” of the Town of Easton, Maryland. (Ordinance 526
effective 3/24/2008)
§ 13-2. General References.
Reserved for the future references to the Code of the Town of Easton and the Code of Maryland Regulations.
(Ordinance 526 effective 3/24/2008)
Article I: Affordable Housing Fund
§ 13-3. Establishment.
The Easton Affordable Housing Fund is hereby established as a separate segregated account under the name of the
Easton Affordable Housing Fund, held by the Town to address the purposes set forth in this Ordinance. (Ordinance
526 effective 3/24/2008, historical reference 483)
§ 13-4 Source of Revenue.
The Easton Affordable Housing Fund shall be funded through revenues derived from the collection of payments in
lieu of construction of affordable housing units including incremental units as provided for elsewhere in this chapter,
from repayment of funds loaned from this fund, from commercial linkage fees provided for elsewhere in this
chapter, from gifts, donations or grants, from interest earned by this fund, and from appropriations from the General
Fund or other funds, as the Council may from time to time establish or approve. (Ordinance 526 effective 3/24/2008,
historical reference 483)
§ 13-5. Administration.
a. The Easton Affordable Housing Fund shall be administered by an Administrator (the “Administrator”).
b. The Administrator shall hold and account for the Easton Affordable Housing Fund. The Town Council may
utilize a separate, independent entity to invest the proceeds of the Affordable Housing Fund. The investment of
the Easton Affordable Housing Fund shall be in accordance with the Town’s investment policies. It is the
intention of the Town Council that the Affordable Housing Fund be a dedicated fund for the purposes set out
herein. Therefore, any assets remaining in the Affordable Housing Fund at the end of any fiscal year shall be
carried into the next fiscal year, including all interest and income earned, as well as any repayments or forfeitures
of loans and/or grants.
(Ordinance 526 effective 3/24/2008, historical reference 483)
§ 13-6. Administration Expenses.
Administrative costs of the Easton Affordable Housing Fund may be paid from the annual housing fund assets or
from other revenue sources as designated by the Town Council as part of the annual budget process. (Ordinance 526
effective 3/24/2008, historical reference 483)
§ 13-7. Use of the Easton Affordable Housing Fund.
The Easton Affordable Housing Fund shall be used to increase affordable housing opportunities for residents of the
Town. These activities may include, but are not limited to, the following purposes: to acquire or construct rental or
owner-occupied dwelling units for persons of low to moderate income; to repair or rehabilitate existing rental or
owner-occupied housing; to preserve housing opportunities for persons of low and moderate incomes, including
home repair grants or loans and grants or loans to make homes accessible to individuals with disabilities; to sponsor
programs to prevent homelessness; to provide funds to match other local, State or federal housing assistance
programs; to provide settlement costs, down payment and loan write down assistance for qualified homeowners
within the Town; to provide counseling and education as to affordable housing options for Town residents; and to
pay the actual staffing and operational costs associated with the activities of the Affordable Housing Fund.
(Ordinance 526 effective 3/24/2008, historical reference 483)
§ 13-8. Designation of Administrator; Appointment; Terms.
a. The Administrator shall be a Board designated as the “Easton Affordable Housing Board.” The board shall
consist of seven persons appointed by the Mayor, subject to the advice and consent of the Council. The
membership of the board shall reflect the economic and ethnic composition of the Town and shall include
persons with specific expertise with regard to housing issues. At least three of the members of the board shall be
residents of the Town. Members of the board shall serve terms of three years. The initial terms shall be
staggered so as to provide for continuity of membership. Members are eligible for reappointment. On an annual
basis, the board shall select one of its members to serve as chair.
b. The Town Clerk shall serve as temporary Administrator of the Fund until the members of the Board are
appointed. If at any time in the future, due to the death or resignation of a majority of its members, the Board is
unable to discharge its duties; the Town Clerk shall serve as temporary Administrator until the Board is able to
resume its functions.
(Ordinance 526 effective 3/24/2008, historical reference 483)
§ 13-9. Other Duties of the Administrator.
The Administrator shall:
a. Develop an annual or biennial plan for using the assets of the Affordable Housing Fund to increase housing
opportunities within the Town which plan shall be submitted to the Mayor and Town Council for its approval by
resolution;
b. Once the plan has been approved, to disburse funds from the Affordable Housing Fund in accordance with the
plan;
c. Periodically to revise the plan on at least a biennial basis;
d. Recommend to the Mayor and Council qualified, independent entities to receive and process applications for
funding on behalf of the Administrator; to assist in the formulation of the plan or to otherwise assist in the
administration of the Affordable Housing Fund and
e. Perform such other duties as the Mayor and Council may direct by resolution.
(Ordinance 526 effective 3/24/2008, historical reference 483)
§ 13-10. Affordable Housing Fund - Administrative History.
Ordinance Number 483 passed by the Town of Easton Council on 4/18/2005, Established an Affordable Housing
Fund. (Ordinance 526 effective 3/24/2008, historical reference 483)
Article II: Notice and Property Affidavit
§ 13-11 Notice. A notice in substantially the form set forth in Exhibit A shall be included with all real estate contracts
involving property located in the Town of Easton. (Ordinance 629 effective October 7th 2013)
§ 13-12 Property Affidavit. Upon any transfer of real property by any means, the grantee shall sign a Property
Affidavit that shall be substantially the form set forth in Exhibit B. Within 15 days of propery transfer, such form shall
be delivered to the Town of Easton office. (Ordinance 629 effective October 7th 2013)
§ 13-13 Failure to Comply. Failure to comply with § 13-11 or 13-12 above regarding the Notice and Property Affidavit
Form shall not prevent the recording of any documents, nor shall it have any effect on the title to real estate property or
any deed, mortgage or deed of trust concerning said property. (Ordinance 629 effective October 7th 2013)
Article III: Registration of Non-Owner Occupied Residential Property
§ 13-14 Registration. The owners of all non-owner occupied residential property within the Town of Easton shall
be required to fill out a Property Affidavit similar to the one provided for in §13-12 on an annual basis as a
mechanism to register the actual use of the property. No fee shall be required as part of the registration. (Ordinance
680 effective September 27th 2016)
CHAPTER 14 LICENSES AND PERMITS
§ 14-1. Chapter Title
§ 14-2. General References
Article I – License Administration
§ 14-3. License required
§ 14-4. License Issuance
§ 14-5. License Fees
§ 14-6. Display of License
§ 14-7. Transferability
§ 14-8. License Period and Renewal
§ 14-9. Notice of Violation
§ 14-10. Penalties for Violation
§ 14-11. Correction of Violation
§ 14-12. Suspension, Revocation and Appeals
§ 14-12.1. Violation Basis
§ 14-12.2. Compliant Basis
§ 14-12.3. Appeal
§ 14-13. License Administrative History
Article II – Housing License
§ 14-14. Housing License
§ 14-14.1. Special Provision for Immediate Family Member
§ 14-14.2. Exceptions
§ 14-14.3. Exceptions for Owner Occupied
§ 14-15. License Application
§ 14-16. Rental Housing License
§ 14-17. Dwelling, Dwelling Unit and Rooming Unit Inspection
§ 14-18. Rental Housing License – Administration
§ 14-18.1 Rental Housing Re-inspection
§ 14-19. Additional Provisions for Short Term Housing
§ 14-19.1. Principal Residence
§ 14-19.1.1. Contact Information
§ 14-19.1.2. Contact Information Availability
§ 14-19.1.3. Notification
§ 14-19.1.4. Notification Information
§ 14-19.2. One Occupancy
§ 14-19.3. No Commercial Food Sales
§ 14-19.4. Insurance
§ 14-19.5. Accommodations Tax
§ 14-20. Rental Housing License – Administrative History
Article III: Electrical License
§ 14-21. Electrical Services.
§ 14-21.1 Talbot County Electricians:
§ 14-21.2 Public Utility Company:
§ 14-21.3 Property Maintenance Employee:
§ 14-21.4 Property Owner:
§ 14-22. Electrical License – Board of Electrical Examiners of Talbot County.
§ 14-22.1 Talbot County Provisions.
§ 14-22.2 Town of Easton Provisions.
§ 14-22.3 Appeals of the Town of Easton Electrical Code.
§ 14-22.3.1 Town of Easton Reporting.
§ 14-23. Electrical License – Administration.
§ 14-24. Electrical License - Administrative History.
Article IV: Plumbing License.
§ 14-25. Plumbing Work - Licensed Plumber Required.
§ 14-26. Plumbing License - Application; Fees.
§ 14-27. Plumbing Bond; Indemnification of Town.
§ 14-28. Compliance with Code.
§ 14-29. Plumbing License – Administration.
Article V: Gas Fitters License.
§ 14-30 Installation - Registration Required.
§ 14-31 Information for Registration.
§ 14-31.1 Individuals.
§ 14-31.2 Corporation.
§ 14-32. Gas Fitters License – Administration.
§ 14-1. Chapter Title. That this chapter shall be known and may be cited as “Licenses” of the Town of Easton,
Maryland. (Ordinance 536 effective October 14th 2008)
§ 14-2. General References. That this chapter shall reference General Provisions – Chapter 1, Animals and Foul –
Chapter 4, Bicycles and Similar Devices – Chapter 5, Offenses – Miscellaneous – Chapter 18, Peddlers – Chapter 19,
Pinball Machines – Chapter 19A, Plumbing – Chapter 20, Solid Fuel – Chapter 23, and Zoning – Chapter 28 of the Code
of the Town of Easton. (Ordinance 536 effective October 14th 2008, historical reference 9)
Article I: License Administration
§ 14-3. License required. No person, firm or corporation shall engage in any occupation or business subject to a license
fee under this Code without having first taken out a proper license. (Ordinance 536 effective 10-14-2008, historical
reference 9)
§ 14-4. License Issuance. All licenses shall be prepared and issued by the town clerk unless otherwise specifically
provided. (Ordinance 536 effective 10-14-2008, historical reference 9)
§ 14-5. License Fees. No license shall be issued by the Town until the fee required therefore has been paid by the
applicant. The Town Council is hereby authorized to enact a resolution establishing a fee schedule for fees pertaining to
the administration of this chapter. Any unpaid license fee shall be subject to interest and penalties as periodically
established by the Town Council for unpaid sums due to the Town of Easton. (Ordinance 536 effective 10-14-2008,
historical reference 9, 519 aka E-34)
§ 14-6 Display of License. Licenses issued under this chapter shall be available at reasonable times for examination by
an authorized agent of the Town of Easton. (Ordinance 536 effective 10-14-2008)
§ 14-7. Transferability. Except as otherwise provided in this Code or the ordinance or statute under which it is issued,
no license issued by the town clerk shall be transferable. (Ordinance 536 effective 10-14-2008, historical reference 519
aka E-34)
§ 14-8. License Period and Renewal. The license year shall begin on the first day of April of each and every year. All
licenses issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall expire on the last day of March, following the date of issue, but
if the licensee shall be in default because of any violation of the provision of this Code, the License shall forthwith cease
and terminate, and the fee for any unexpired portion of the term thereof shall be forfeited to the Town. Application for
renewals shall be made at least sixty (60) days prior to the expiration date. (Ordinance 536 effective 10-14-2008,
historical reference 9)
§ 14-9. Notice of Violations. Whenever the Town of Easton determines that there has been a violation of this chapter or
has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be given, providing written notification of the violation.
The notice shall contain an order for correction and a time period within which the violation is to be corrected.
Noncompliance shall result in penalties and or revocation of license. (Ordinance 536 effective 10-14-2008)
§ 14-10. Penalties for Violation. Any person, who shall violate a provision of this chapter, or fail to comply therewith,
or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be guilty of a municipal infraction and shall be subjected to the penalties
set forth in Section 1-8 of the Easton Town Code. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served
shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ordinance 536 effective 10-14-2008, historical reference 9)
§ 14-11. Correction of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the Easton Town
Council from instituting appropriate action; to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, or
business, or to prevent illegal occupancy or utilization of a building, structure or premises. (Ordinance 536 effective 10-
14-2008)
§ 14-12. Suspension, Revocation and Appeals.
§ 14-12.1. Violation Basis. The Town of Easton shall, in writing, suspend or revoke a license issued under the
provisions of this chapter; if a license holder, after the passage of the time period ordered by the notice described in
the section for Notice of Violations, fails to eliminate the violation. Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in
addition to, and not in substitution for, such other penalties as may be provided for said violations elsewhere in the
Town Charter and Code or by State law. (Ordinance 680 effective 9-27-2016, historical reference 519 aka E-34 and
536)
§ 14-12.2. Compliant Basis. Any license or permit issued by the Town may be suspended by the Town upon
proper complaint and sufficient evidence to sustain such compliant and after the permittee or license has an
opportunity to present evidence. Notice of such suspension shall be promptly communicated to the holder of such
license or permit by mailing such notice to the applicant at the address set out in the application for such license or
permit. (Ordinance 680 effective 9-27-2016, historical reference 519 aka E-34 and 536)
§ 14-12.3. Appeals. The board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals of suspensions or revocations made
pursuant to this chapter. Such appeals shall be filled within thirty (30) days of such suspension or revocation by
filing a notice of appeal with the Board of Appeals and specifying the grounds for the appeal. For the purposes of
this chapter, the Board of Appeals established in the Town of Easton Zoning Ordinance. All provisions governing
the Board of Appeals with respect to members, provisions of alternates, quorum, procedures, chairman, term of
office, etc. shall be applicable to appeals from this chapter. (Ordinance 680 effective 9-27-2016)
§ 14-13. License Administrative History
Ordinance Number 9, passed by the Town of Easton Council on 12/11/1940, establishing license requirement
Ordinance Number 519 (E-34), passed by the Town of Easton Council on 4/17/1967, Adopting The Code of the Town of
Easton, 1967 (Ordinance 536 effective 10-14-2008)
Article II: Housing License
§ 14-14. Housing License. It shall be unlawful for any person to let for occupancy or allow the occupancy of any
dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or part thereof, whether for use on a nightly, weekly, monthly, or yearly basis,
within the Town of Easton without having first obtained a license for said unit as hereinafter provided.
§ 14-14.1 Special Provisions for Immediate Family Member: When a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or
part thereof is occupied by an immediate family member of the owner or the owner’s spouse (parents, children,
grandparents, grandchildren, sibling, aunt, uncle, or first cousins. Includes: adopted, half, and step family
members), a rental license shall not be required. The Code Official shall determine the appropriate information
required in order to determine compliance with this section.
§ 14-14.2 Exceptions: The requirement for a license shall not apply to the following uses as those uses are defined
in the Town’s Zoning Ordinance, which is Chapter 28 of the Town Code: Assisted Living Facilities, Bed and
Breakfast Inns, Homeless Shelters, Hospice facilities, Hotels, Motels, Nursing Homes, Overnight Care Facilities,
Patient Hostels, and similar uses.
§ 14-14.3 Exception for Owner Occupied: The requirement for a license shall not apply to occupancy of a
dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit occupied solely by the owner as the owner’s primary residence or as a
secondary/vacation home, including invitees and guests during the owner’s occupancy, provided that there is no
tenancy, soliciting or advertising for the purpose of Short Term Housing.
(Ordinance 523 effective 3/28/2008, Ordinance 536 effective 10/14/2008 Ordinance 680 effective 9/27/2016, historical
reference 301, 518)
§ 14-15. License Application. The legal owner of record shall make written application to the Town of Easton for a
rental unit license upon such form or forms as the Town shall from time to time designate. Such application shall be
submitted together with a non-refundable rental license fee. Upon receipt of a completed application for a license, the
Code Enforcement Office is authorized to examine or cause to be examined buildings, structures and sites for which an
application has been filed. A rental license application may be denied by the Code Enforcement Office if the premises,
dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, thereof is not in conformance with the Minimum Property Maintenance
Standards or the Building Code under which the structure was constructed. (Ordinance 523 effective 3/28/2008 and
Ordinance 536 effective 10-14-2008, historical reference 301, 518)
§ 14-16. Rental Housing License. The Code Enforcement Office upon review and approval of an application, shall
issue a non-transferable "Rental Housing License" indicating that a license has been duly issued for the premises,
dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, accompanied by a Certificate of Occupancy which shall expire at the same
time as the license. A certificate of occupancy shall contain the following: (Ordinance 523 effective 3/28/2008 and
Ordinance 536 effective 10-14-2008, historical reference 301, 518)
1. The rental housing license number.
2. The name and address of the owner.
3. The number of rental units licensed.
4. The address of the structure.
5. The edition of the International Property Maintenance Code governing inspections.
6. The use and occupancy classification, as available.
7. The type of construction, as available.
8. The maximum occupant load, as available.
9. The presence of an automatic sprinkler system.
10. Any special stipulations and conditions.
11. The name of the building official.
12. The expiration date.
§ 14-17. Dwelling, Dwelling Unit and Rooming Unit Inspection. All Rental Housing Licenses shall be subject to
periodic inspection by the Code Enforcement Office, to determine if they are in conformance with the Minimum
Property Maintenance Standards or the Building Code under which the structure was constructed. Permission for such
inspections, without the necessity for obtaining any further permission or judicial warrant, is a condition of any license.
Each unit shall be inspected at least one time during the license period or as the Code Enforcement Office deems
necessary. Failure to allow entry for an inspection or to forbid entry for such inspection shall constitute a violation of the
provisions of this article.
Exception: The Code Enforcement Office may elect to utilize a statically valid random sample for multi-unit
properties with more than thirty (30) units which have full time management on site as long as the sampling is
designed with a 95% probability that significant violations, as defined by the Code Enforcement Office, would
be detected if present. When the statistically valid random sample for multi-unit properties with more than
thirty (30) units is elected by the Code Enforcement Office and significant violations, as defined by the Code
Enforcement Office, are detected, the Code Enforcement Office is authorized to perform any additional
inspections deemed necessary by that department.
(Ordinance 523 effective 3/28/2008 and Ordinance 536 effective 10-14-2008, historical reference 301, 518)
§ 14-18. Rental Housing License – Administration. All rental housing licenses are regulated by the License
Administration under Article I of Chapter 14 and Article 1 of Chapter 11. (Ordinance 536 effective 10-14-2008,
historical reference 301, 518)
§ 14-18.1 Rental Housing Re-inspection. The Code Enforcement Office shall re-inspect the premises on the last
day of the time period to confirm that the violations have been corrected. Noncompliance shall result in additional
re-inspections fees, penalties and or revocation of license. (Ordinance 536 effective 10-14-2008, historical reference
301, 518)
§ 14-19. Additional provisions for Short Term Housing. All occupancies made for a period of less than four (4)
months shall be subject to the following additional provisions:
§ 14-19.1 Principal Residence. The structure in which the Short Term housing takes place shall be the principal
residence of the owner of the property, or an outbuilding located on the same property provided said outbuilding
satisfies all Building, Fire, and Safety Codes and Regulations for use in this manner. (Ordinance 680 effective
9/27/2016)
§ 14-19.1.1 Contact Information. The owner shall provide personal contact information (name, address,
telephone number and e-mail address) to be contacted 24 hours a day for any complaints or problems. If the
owner of the property does not remain in Talbot County during the rental period, the owner must provide
contact information for an agent that can be contacted 24 hours a day regarding any problems or issues. The
named agent must have a principal residence within Talbot County. (Ordinance 680 effective 9/27/2016)
§ 14-19.1.2 Contact Information Availability. Upon request by any neighbor or other person who may be
affected by the short-term housing, the Code Enforcement Office may provide the property owner’s and/or
agent’s name and contact information. (Ordinance 680 effective 9/27/2016)
§ 14-19.1.3 Notification. In addition to providing the information to the Town of Easton, the owner shall
provide the contact information to all properties within 400 feet of the owner’s property by certified mail, return
receipt requested, and regular mail on at least an annual basis. (Ordinance 680 effective 9/27/2016)
§ 14-19.1.4 Notification Information. The property owner or agent shall provide proof of the notifications to
the Code Enforcement Office with their housing license application. (Ordinance 680 effective 9/27/2016)
§ 14-19.2 One Occupancy. Multiple occupancies of the same property at the same time shall be prohibited. Only
one lease of the property shall be permitted at any one time. (Ordinance 680 effective 9/27/2016)
§ 14-19.3 No Commercial Food Sales. There shall be no commercial food sales or preparation. Meals
provided by the owner for guests shall be limited to continental breakfast items. Nothing herein shall limit the
guests’ ability to prepare their own food on the property. (Ordinance 680 effective 9/27/2016)
§ 14-19.4 Insurance. The property owner shall maintain property and liability insurance with an insurer who
is aware of the owner’s short term housing exposure and that will respond in the event of a covered loss with
liability limits of at least Five Hundred Thousand Dollars ($500,000.00) and shall provide proof of said
insurance at the time of application for a license. (Ordinance 680 effective 9/27/2016)
§ 14-19.5 Accommodations Tax. Short Term Housing shall be required to pay all applicable
Accommodations Taxes. (Ordinance 680 effective 9/27/2016)
§ 14-20. Rental Housing License - Administrative History
Ordinance Number 309, passed by the Town of Easton Council on 4/17/1995, establishing a Rental Housing
Licensing and Inspection Program.
Ordinance Number 444, passed by the Town of Easton Council on 5/20/2002, amending Section 13A-5 License
Renewal.
Ordinance Number 518, no action taken, Updating Rental Housing Licensing
Ordinance Number 523, passed by the Town of Easton Council on 4/7/2008, updating the Rental Housing Licensing
and Inspection Program.
(Ordinance 536 effective 10-14-2008)
Article III: Electrical License
§ 14-21. Electrical Services. It shall be unlawful for any person to provide, attempt to provide or offer to provide
electrical services, within the Town of Easton without having complied with one of the provisions hereinafter
provided: (Ordinance 547 effective July 1st 2009)
§ 14-21.1 Talbot County Electricians: Any person who holds a current license issued by the Board of
Electrical Examiners of Talbot County as a “Master Electrician”, “Electrician General”, or an “Electrician
Limited” may provide services, as allowed by the license, in the Town of Easton, so long as such license is
maintained current.
Inclusion: While a Talbot County license is in effect, it authorizes the licensee to provide electrical services
and any person listed as an employee if: the employee provides electrical services while under the control and
supervision of the licensee; and the licensee is responsible for the electrical services that the individual
provides.
(Ordinance 547 effective July 1st 2009)
§ 14-21.2 Public Utility Company: A public utility company, shall not require a license, while the company is
engaging in the business of providing electrical services to a facility of the company that: is regulated by the
Public Service Commission; and is located on any premises, roadway, or right-of-way in which the company has
a lawful interest.
Inclusion: An employee of a public utility company shall not require a license, while the employee provides
electrical services to a facility of the company that: is regulated by the Public Service Commission; and is
located on any premises, roadway, or right-of-way in which the company has a lawful interest.
(Ordinance 547 effective July 1st 2009)
§ 14-21.3 Property Maintenance Employee: An employee of a private company shall not require a license,
while engaged in maintenance and repairs of electrical equipment on the premises of their employer.
(Ordinance 547 effective July 1st 2009)
§ 14-21.4 Property Owner: Any person performing electrical work in a single-family dwelling provided that
person is a bona fide owner and said owner personally purchases and installs all equipment and materials in
connection with the installation therewith, shall not require a license. (Ordinance 547 effective July 1st 2009)
§ 14-22. Electrical License – Board of Electrical Examiners of Talbot County. The Town authorizes and
designates the Board of Electrical Examiners of Talbot County to be the Board of Electrical Examiners of the Town
of Easton and enables the board with the following authorities: (Ordinance 547 effective July 1st 2009)
§ 14-22.1 Talbot County Provisions. The provisions governing the Board of Electrical Examiners of Talbot
County with respect to: members, provisions for alternates, quorum, procedure, chairman, term of office,
appeals, and like matters, as prescribed in, Electrical Standards Chapter 56, of the Talbot County Code, shall be
within the authority of the board. (Ordinance 547 effective July 1st 2009)
§ 14-22.2 Town of Easton Provisions. The board shall have the authority to assess violations and penalties as
prescribed in, General Provisions Chapter 1, Building Codes and Department Chapter 6 and Licenses Chapter
14 of the Town of Easton Code. (Ordinance 547 effective July 1st 2009)
§ 14-22.3 Appeals of the Town of Easton Electrical Code. The board shall have the authority to hear and
decide on all appeals of orders, decisions or determinations relative to the application and interpretation of the
Town of Easton’s Electrical Code and Electrical Licensing. (Ordinance 547 effective July 1st 2009)
§ 14-22.3.1 Town of Easton Reporting. The Town of Easton shall report to the board upon any
modification to its local codes or upon the adoption of updated versions of its local codes. Upon any violation
of the Town of Easton’s Electrical Code and Electrical Licensing the Town of Easton shall inform the board
of the violation; location and responsible parties. (Ordinance 547 effective July 1st 2009)
§ 14-23. Electrical License – Administration. All electrical licenses are regulated by the License Administration
under Article I of Chapter 14. (Ordinance 547 effective July 1st 2009)
§ 14-24. Electrical License - Administrative History.
Ordinance Number 16 passed by the Town of Easton Council on 2/1/1941, establishing a section for an Electrical
Code.
Ordinance Number 90 passed by the Town of Easton Council on 2/18/1980, amending Section 21 of Chapter 6:
Building Code for Electrical Installations.
Ordinance Number 115, passed by the Town of Easton Council on 2/6/1984, repealed Section 21 of Chapter 6
Building Code on 2/27/1984.
(Ordinance 547 effective July 1st 2009)
Article IV: Plumbing License.
§ 14-25. Plumbing Work - Licensed Plumber Required. All plumbing work in the Town shall be done by or
under the personal supervision of a licensed plumber of the State of Maryland who shall, in addition, be licensed by
the Town. (Ordinance 605 effective July 1st 2012 and Ordinance 12 effective 1/1/1941)
§ 14-26. Plumbing License - Application; Fees. Each application for a plumbers license from the Town of Easton
shall be made upon a form obtained from the Town Clerk who shall, if the qualifications set forth in this chapter are
complied with, and upon receipt of payment of a fee, issue said license. No license shall be issued for less than a full
year's fee. (Ordinance 605 effective July 1st 2012, Ordinance 104 effective 3/15/1982 and Ordinance 12 effective
1/1/1941)
§ 14-27. Plumbing Bond; Indemnification of Town. Every person, firm or corporation applying for a license to
carry on the business of plumbing in the Town shall file a certificate of liability insurance or furnish a bond in the
sum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence or accident, whereby the applicant shall indemnify and
save harmless the Town from all suits and actions brought against the
Town or any officer of the Town for any injury or damage received or sustained by any person in consequence of or
resulting from any negligence of work performed by, or materials used by, said applicant, their servants or agents.
(Ordinance 605 effective July 1st 2012, Ordinance 12 effective 1/1/1941 and 1967 Code by Ordinance 519 aka E-34
effective 5/7/1967)
§ 14-28. Compliance with Code. Every plumber licensed by the Town shall comply with the provisions of this
Code in all plumbing done within the limits of the Town. (Ordinance 605 effective July 1st 2012 and Ordinance 12
effective 1/1/1941)
§ 14-29. Plumbing License – Administration. All plumbing licenses are regulated by the License
Administration under Article I of Chapter 14. (Ordinance 605 effective July 1st 2012)
Article V: Gas Fitters License.
§ 14-30 Installation - Registration Required. All persons, firms or corporations who install any gas piping or
appliance or other installation for use in connection with tank gas, bottled gas, or any other container used in
dispensing any form of liquefied petroleum gas within the corporate limits of the Town shall register with said Town
or its designated agent. (Ordinance 603 effective July 1st 2012 and Ordinance 54 effective March 15th 1962,
historical reference 21)
§ 14-31 Information for Registration. Registration shall cover the following information which shall be always
kept current: (Ordinance 603 effective July 1st 2012 and Ordinance 54 effective March 15th 1962, historical
reference 21)
§ 14-31.1 Individuals. Must file the following information: The name and address of the person or persons
owning and operating the business, the name under which the business, trades if different from that of its
individual owner, and the name of the proper person to be contacted with regard to any matters in connection
with any gas installations made within the corporate limits of the Town. (Ordinance 603 effective July 1st 2012
and Ordinance 54 effective March 15th 1962, historical reference 21)
§ 14-31.2 Corporation. Must file the following information: The proper legal name of the corporation, the
State of incorporation, the address of its principal office, the name and address of its president, the name and
address of its resident agent within the State of Maryland, the name and address of its local manager and a
corporate authorization permitting civil suits or criminal proceedings filed on behalf of the Town to be served
upon said local manager, or any other person whom the corporation may wish to designate, and the name and
address of the proper person to be notified in the event of any emergency involving any of the company's
equipment or installations (Ordinance 603 effective July 1st 2012 and Ordinance 54 effective March 15th 1962)
§ 14-32. Gas Fitters License – Administration. All gas fitters licenses are regulated by the License Administration
under Article I of Chapter 14. (Ordinance 603 effective July 1st 2012)
Chapter 15
Reserved for future use
CHAPTER 16 LITTER CONTROL LAW
§ 16-1. Short title.
§ 16-2. Declaration of intent.
§ 16-3. Definition.
§ 16-4. Unlawful activities.
§ 16-5. Penalties.
§ 16-6. Presumption of responsibilities for violation; suspension of licenses.
§ 16-7. Enforcement.
§ 16-8. Receptacles to be provided; notice of provisions of this chapter.
§ 16-9. Disposition of fines.
Sec. 16-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Litter Control Law." (Ordinance 84 effective 7/8/1979)
Sec. 16-2. Declaration of intent.
It is the intention of the Council by this section to provide for uniform prohibition throughout the Town of Easton of
any and all littering on public or private property, and to curb thereby the desecration of the beauty of the Town and
harm to the health, welfare and safety of its citizens caused by individuals who litter. (Ordinance 84 effective
7/8/1979)
Sec. 16-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following words or phrases shall have the
following meanings:
Litter. All rubbish, waste material, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals or other discarded materials of every
kind and description.
Public or Private Property. All sidewalks, parking areas, the right-of-way of any road or highway; and body of water
or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, buildings, refuge or conservation or
recreation areas, any residential business or farm properties, timberlands or forests.
(Ordinance 84 effective 7/8/1979.)
Sec. 16-4. Unlawful activities.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave, or to cause or permit the
dumping, deposit, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in this Town, or any waters
in this Town, unless:
(1) Such property is designated by the Town, State, or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the
disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property;
(2) Such litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed on such property:
(3) Such person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property; or has obtained consent of the owner or
tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a
manner consistent with the public welfare.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to throw, dump, or deposit any trash, junk, or other refuse on any
highway, or to perform any act which constitutes a violation of the State of Maryland's Vehicle Laws or Town of
Easton laws relative to putting trash, glass and other prohibited substances on highways.
(Ordinance 84 effective 7/8/1979)
Sec. 16-5. Penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of Sec. 16-4 is guilty of a municipal infraction and on conviction thereof shall
be punished by:
(A) The levy of a municipal infraction assessment of not more than $200 or by imprisonment, for not more than 30
days, or both such municipal infraction and imprisonment, or, in lieu thereof,
(B) In the sound discretion of any court in which conviction is obtained, any such person may be directed by the
judge of such court to pick up and remove from any sidewalk, parking area, public street or highway or public or
private right-of-way, or public beach or public park, or, with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful
possession of such property, any private property upon which it has been established by competent evidence that he
has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence.
(Ordinance 84 effective 7/8/1979)
Sec. 16-6. Presumption of responsibility for violation; suspension of licenses.
Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in
violation of Sec. 16-4 and if the vehicle, boat, airplane or other conveyance has two or more occupants and it cannot be
determined which occupant is the violator, the owner of the vehicle, boat, airplane or other conveyance, if present, shall
be presumed to be responsible for the violation. In the absence of the owner of the vehicle, boat, airplane, or other
conveyance, the operator shall be presumed to be responsible for the violation. Furthermore, licenses to operate such
conveyances may be suspended for a period not to exceed seven (7) days together with, or in lieu of, penalties provided
in Sec. 16-5. (Ordinance 84 effective 7/8/1979)
Sec. 16-7. Enforcement.
All law-enforcement agencies, offices and officials of this State or any political subdivision thereof, or any enforcement
agency, officer or any official of any commission of this State or any political subdivision thereof, are hereby authorized,
empowered, and directed to enforce compliance with this chapter. (Ordinance 84 effective 7/8/1979)
Sec. 16-8. Receptacles to be provided; notice of provisions of this chapter.
All public authorities and agencies having supervision of properties of this Town or State are authorized, empowered,
and instructed to establish and maintain receptacles for the deposit of litter at appropriate locations where such property
is frequented by the public, and to post signs directing persons to such receptacles and serving notice of the provisions of
this chapter and to otherwise publicize the availability of litter receptacles and the requirements of this chapter.
(Ordinance 84 effective 7/8/1979)
Sec. 16-9. Disposition of fines.
Fines collected for violations of this chapter shall be disbursed to the county or city where the violation occurred, to be
used to defray the expense of establishment and maintenance of receptacles and posting of signs as provided in Sec. 16-
8. (Ordinance 84 effective 7/8/1979)
CHAPTER 17 MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Article I. In General.
§ 17-1. Definitions.
§ 17-2. Obedience to police officers.
§ 17-3. Drivers of all vehicles subject to provisions of chapter.
§ 17-4. Persons propelling pushcarts, riding bicycles or animals.
Article II. Operation of Vehicles.
§ 17-5. Publication of traffic resolutions.
§ 17-6. Emergency traffic regulations.
§ 17-7. Driving while under influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs.
§ 17-8. Driving on one-way streets.
§ 17-9. U-turns.
§ 17-10. Limitations on trucks entering streets.
§ 17-11. Traffic during fires.
Article III. Traffic-Control Devices.
§ 17-12. Council action on traffic controls.
§ 17-13. Presence of traffic controls as notice for enforcement.
§ 17-14. Traffic-control signal legend.
§ 17-15. Stop signs.
Article IV. Stopping, Standing and Parking.
DIVISION I.
§ 17-16. Manner of parking generally.
§ 17-17. Parking so as to obstruct traffic.
§ 17-18. Parking near fire hydrant.
§ 17-19. Parking near intersection.
§ 17-20. Parking on sidewalk.
§ 17-21. Stopping for purposes of washing, repairing or altering.
§ 17-22. Restrictions on truck parking on improved streets.
§ 17-23. No parking areas.
§ 17-24. Parking time limits.
§ 17-25. Nighttime parking limits.
§ 17-26. Meter rates.
§ 17-26.1 Penalty for overtime parking.
§ 17-27. Illegally parked vehicles to be removed.
§ 17-28. Notice to owner that vehicle has been impounded.
§ 17-29. Repossession of impounded vehicles.
DIVISION 2. MUNICIPAL PARKING LOT.
§ 17-30. Regulations.
§ 17-31. Enforcement.
§ 17-32. Violation.
§ 17-33. Removal of illegally parked vehicles.
§ 17-33.1 Fines and penalties.
DIVISION 3. TRAILERS.
§ 17-34. Definition.
§ 17-35. Maximum parking time.
Article V. Snow Emergency Regulations.
§ 17-36. Declaration and effect of Snow Emergency Phase I.
§ 17-37. Declaration and effect of Snow Emergency Phase II.
§ 17-38. Termination of snow emergency.
§ 17-39. Restrictions on placement of snow.
§ 17-40. (Reserved).
Article VI. Night-time Truck Regulations.
§ 17-41. Prohibition in truck movement; permit required.
§ 17-42. Permits.
§ 17-43. Exemptions to Article.
§ 17-44. Penalty
Article VII. Abandoned Motor Vehicles.
§ 17-45. Definitions.
§ 17-46. Prohibition and removal.
Article VIII. Night Time Commercial Refuse Collection.
§ 17-47. Purpose.
§ 17-48. Prohibited Conduct.
§ 17-49. Penalties for Violations.
§ 17-50. Definitions.
§ 17-51. Separability Clause.
Article IX – Residential Parking Districts
§ 17-52. Statement of Purpose
§ 17-53. Establishment of Residential Parking Districts
§ 17-54. Boundaries and Times of Application
§ 17-54. Residential Parking District with Permit; Two Hour Limitation on Parking without Permit
§ 17-55. Qualification for Permits
§ 17-56. Residential Visitor Parking Permit
§ 17-57. School Parking Permit for Districts Two and Three
§ 17-58. Application for Permit; Issuance of Permit
§ 17-59. Regulations
§ 17-60. Display of Permit; Transfer of Permit
§ 17-61. Violations; Penalties
§ 17-62. Other Parking Regulations Unaffected
§ 17-63. Severability
Article I. In General.
Sec. 17-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall, for the purpose of this chapter have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section, except as hereinafter specifically provided:
"Authorized emergency vehicles." Vehicles of the Fire Department, police vehicles, ambulances and emergency
vehicles as are designated or authorized by the Chief of Police.
"Bicycle." Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two tandem wheels either
of which is over twenty inches in diameter, and including any device generally recognized as a bicycle though equipped
with two front or two rear wheels.
"Crosswalks."
(1) That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on
opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs from the edges of the traversable
roadway.
(2) Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or
other markings on the surface.
"Driver." Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
"Intersection." The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the
lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two streets which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the
area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
"Motor vehicle." Every vehicle which is self-propelled or designed for self propulsion except vehicles operated
exclusively on rails.
"Official traffic-control devices." All signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed
or erected by authority of the town or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding
traffic.
(1967 Code by Ordinance 519 aka E-34 effective 5/7/1967)
"Park." Park means to halt a vehicle, whether or not it is occupied, other than temporarily: (i) when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device; or (ii) for the
purposes of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or passengers. (Ordinance 264 effective
1/5/1994)
"Pedestrians." Any person afoot.
"Policeman or police officer." Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of
traffic regulations.
"Sidewalk." That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property
intended for the use of pedestrians.
"Stop." When required, means complete cessation of movement.
"Stop, stopping or standing." When prohibited, means any stopping or standing of a vehicle whether occupied or not,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with directions of a police officer or trafficcontrol
sign or signal.
"Street." The term "street" shall include all avenues, lanes, alleys and highways in the town.
"Traffic." Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances either singly or together while using
any street for the purpose of travel.
"Traffic - control signal." Any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is
alternately directed to stop and to proceed.
(1967 Code by Ordinance 519 aka E-34 effective 5/7/1967)
"Truck". "Any motor vehicle with a registered gross weight of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or greater." (Ordinance
338 effective 3/4/1996, historical reference 264)
"Vehicle." Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported, or drawn upon a street,
except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (1967 Code by Ordinance 519
aka E-34 effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 17-2. Obedience to police officers.
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any police officer invested by law
with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic. (1967 Code by Ordinance 519 aka E-34 effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 17-3. Drivers of all vehicles subject to provisions of chapter.
The provisions of this chapter, applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon the streets, shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles
regardless of ownership, subject to such specific exceptions as are set forth in this chapter, and it shall be unlawful for any
such driver to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. (1967 Code by Ordinance 519 aka E-34 effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 17-4. Persons propelling pushcarts, riding bicycles or animals.
Every person propelling any pushcart or riding an animal or bicycle upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal
shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions of this
chapter which by their nature can have no application. (1967 Code by Ordinance 519 aka E-34 effective 5/7/1967)
Article II. Operation Of Vehicles.
Sec. 17-5. Publication of traffic resolutions.
The council shall publish resolutions affecting traffic regulations in one or more newspapers published in the town in the
same manner as ordinances are published. (Ordinance 3 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 17-6. Emergency traffic regulations.
The chief of police or the police board shall make such temporary additional regulations governing vehicular traffic or
parking of vehicles as he or it may deem necessary in case of emergency, which regulations shall be enforced in the same
manner as are the rules herein set forth, provided signs or notices setting forth the changed regulations are prominently
displayed at each location where such change is effective. (Ordinance 3 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 17-7. Driving while under influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs.
It shall be unlawful for any person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs to drive, steer or
operate any vehicle within the town. (1967 Code by Ordinance 519 aka E-34 effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 17-8. Driving on one-way streets.
On any street or part thereof in the town which has been designated by the council by resolution for travel in one direction
only and on which street or part thereof signs have been placed indicating such designated direction, all vehicles shall
travel in the direction so indicated. (Ordinance 3 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 17-9. U-turns.
Except at such places as may be allowed by posted signs, "U" turns shall be prohibited. (Ordinance 3 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 17-10. Limitations on trucks entering streets.
It shall be unlawful for any truck to enter any street or block in the town on which such truck traffic has been prohibited
by resolution of the town and upon which signs have been posted setting forth such prohibition. (Ordinance 3 effective
1/1/1941)
Sec. 17-11. Traffic during fires.
(a) All traffic in any block of a street in which a fire is in progress shall cease during said fire. (Ordinance 3 effective
1/1/1941)
(b) On any block of a street on which a fire engine house is located, all vehicular traffic, except that of firefighting
equipment, shall be prohibited during the sounding of a fire alarm at such fire engine house. Vehicles carrying active
members of the Easton Volunteer Fire Department, Inc. are excluded from the application of this subsection. (Ordinance
3 effective 1/1/1941)
(c) It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle in front of the entrance to the fire engine house while the fire siren is sounding.
(Ordinance 36 effective10/16/1951)
(d) The passage of any vehicle over a hose line or any traffic movement interfering with firemen or fire apparatus during
a fire is prohibited. (Ordinance 3 effective 1/1/1941)
Article III. Traffic-Control Devices.
Sec. 17-12. Council action on traffic controls.
The council may, from time to time, authorize by resolution the placing of such traffic lights, traffic signs, parking meters
and/or painted lines or painted curbs as it may deem necessary. (Ordinance 3 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 17-13. Presence of traffic controls as notice for enforcement.
The presence of any traffic lights, traffic signs, parking meters and/or painted lines or painted curbs shall constitute due
notice at points so designated for the enforcement of the sections of this chapter applying to same. (Ordinance 3 effective
1/1/1941)
Sec. 17-14. Traffic-control signal legend.
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting the words "Go", "Caution", or "Stop", or
exhibiting different colored lights successively one at a time, the following colors only shall be used and such terms
and lights shall indicated as follows:
(a) Green alone or "go."
(1) Vehicles facing the signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place
prohibits either such turn. All vehicles shall yield the right of way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully
within the intersection at the time such signal is exhibited.
(2) Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the street within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
(b) Amber alone or "caution" when shown following the green or "go" signal.
(1) Vehicles facing the signal shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at the intersection, but if such stop
cannot be made in safety a vehicle may be driven cautiously through the intersection.
(2) Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway, and
any pedestrian then starting to cross shall yield the right of way to all vehicles.
(c) Red alone or "stop."
(1) Vehicles facing the signal shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at such other
point as may be indicated by a clearly visible line and shall remain standing until green or "go" is shown alone.
(2) No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the street unless he can do so safely and without interfering with
any vehicles.
(d) Red with green arrow.
(1) Vehicles facing such signal may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by
such arrow but shall not interfere with other traffic or endanger pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk.
(2) No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he can do so safely and without interfering
with any vehicles.
(e) Any other provisions of this section to the contrary notwithstanding, it shall be lawful for a funeral procession to
continue through an intersection facing a red light; provided, that the first vehicle in such procession has already
entered the intersection before the light has changed from green to red and provided further, that the vehicles in the
procession have their headlights on. While the funeral procession is proceeding through such intersection, it shall be
unlawful for any vehicle not in such procession to enter such intersection although facing the green light.
(1967 Code by Ordinance 519 aka E-34 effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 17-15. Stop signs.
All vehicles when approaching a "stop" sign shall make a complete stop before reaching the intersection so marked, and
said vehicles shall yield the right of way to all vehicles approaching from either right or left. (Ordinance 3 effective
1/1/1941)
Article IV. Stopping, Standing and Parking.
DIVISION 1. IN GENERAL.
Sec. 17-16. Manner of parking generally.
All vehicles, not in motion, shall stand, or be parked with their right side as near the right-hand side of the street as
practicable and not more than twelve (12) inches from any curb, except in streets where traffic is permitted, or may
hereafter be permitted to move in one direction only, in which case they shall stand with their right side as near as
practicable to the right-hand side, or their left side as near as practicable to the left-hand side of said street and not more
than twelve (12) inches from any curb; provided, however, that where a series of three (3) or more lines are painted in a
diagonal direction extending from the curb toward the center of any street, on either one or both sides of said street, parking
of vehicles on the side of said street so marked or painted shall be in the general direction of and between said lines and at
the angle indicated by said lines; and the vehicle shall face the curb with the right-hand front wheel against the curb, and,
in moving away from said parking place the vehicle shall be driven in the direction prescribed for traffic. (Ordinance 263
effective 1/5/1994, historical reference 3)
Sec. 17-17. Parking so as to obstruct traffic.
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on the streets of the town in a manner as to obstruct traffic. (Ordinance 3 effective
1/1/1941)
Sec. 17-18. Parking near fire hydrant.
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any street within 15 feet of a fire plug. (Ordinance 3 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 17-19. Parking near intersection.
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any street within 15 feet of an intersection, unless otherwise indicated by painted
line or symbol. (Ordinance 3 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 17-20. Parking on sidewalk.
It shall be unlawful for any truck or vehicle to stand upon or be driven over, along, or upon any sidewalk in the
town, except at regularly established driveways or entrances from street roadways or private property. (Ordinance 3
effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 17-21. Stopping for purposes of washing, repairing, or altering.
The washing, repairing, or altering of any motor vehicle on any of the public streets, lanes, alleys, and sidewalks
within the corporate limits of the town shall be unlawful, except in those cases where it may be necessary to make
emergency repairs in order to permit the moving of any such vehicle so as to clear the street, lane, alley and
sidewalk of traffic. (Ordinance 10 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 17-22. Restrictions on truck parking on improved streets.
It shall be unlawful for any motor truck to be parked or stand on any of the improved streets of the town for a period
exceeding two (2) hours. (Ordinance 3 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 17-23. No parking areas.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be parked on any street or part thereof in the town, which street or part
thereof has been designated by the council, by resolution, as a "no parking" area and posted by signs setting forth
that fact. (Ordinance 3 effective 1/1/1941)
(B) It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle at or along the curb of any street at any point where the curb is painted or
between lines painted on the street indicating a walkway or driveway. (Ordinance 267 effective 1/28/1994, historical
reference 3)
(C) It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle at or along any area located in the Town, whether publicly or privately
owned, which has been designated by resolution of the Town Council as a "Fire Lane Area", and which has been
posted by signs or designated by markings on the curb setting forth that fact. Notwithstanding the foregoing, it shall
not be unlawful to park a vehicle at or along those portions of a Fire Lane Area posted by a "Parcel Pick-Up Only"
sign so long as the vehicle is parked for parcel pick-up, or by a "Handicapped Parking" signs so long as the vehicle
displays a lawfully issued registration plate for disabled persons or a lawfully issued parking permit for disabled
person.
Before designating an area of property privately owned a Fire Lane Area, the Town shall sent to the last known
address of the owner of the property, by certified mail, return receipt requested, a request that written consent be
given to such a designation. In the event such written consent in not given within thirty (30) days after it has been
requested, the Town Council may proceed to designate the area privately owned a Fire Lane Area after
consideration of the following factors:
(i) whether or not designating the area of property privately owned as a Fire Lane Area is necessary to protect
the safety of persons and property;
(ii) the recommendation of the Town's Fire Board; and
(iii) the recommendation of the Town's Police Board.
(Ordinance 182 effective 9/18/1990)
(D) It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be parked on any street or part thereof in the Town, which street or part
thereof has temporarily been designated for a period of time not to exceed thirty (30) days as a “no parking area” by
the Town’s Chief of Police or his agent and posted setting forth the fact. (Ordinance 266 effective 1/5/1994)
Sec. 17-24. Parking time limits.
(a) Between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and 7:00 P.M. the parking of all vehicles shall be limited in time on those streets
as may be designated by the town council, by resolution, and posted by signs setting forth the limits. (Ordinance
460, effective 10/11/2005, historical reference 3, 85)
(b) No person shall park a vehicle for more than three cumulative hours in any one day in one or more free, time
controlled parking spaces between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and 7:00 P.M. This regulation does not apply to metered
spaces or spaces reserved for permitted parking. (Ordinance 607, effective 6/25/2012, historical reference 3 and 460)
Sec. 17-25. Nighttime parking limits.
Between the hours of 1:00 A.M. and 5:00 A.M. parking of all vehicles shall be limited to one hour on those streets
in the town as may be designated by the council, by resolution, and posted by signs setting forth the limit.
(Ordinance 3 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 17-26. 1 Parking Meter rates.
On-street and off-street parking meter rates for the Town of Easton shall be established from time to time by the
Town Council by resolution. (Ordinance 109 effective 11/7/1982, historical reference 52, 67, 77, 108)
Sec. 17-26.2 Penalty for overtime parking.
The fine for overtime parking shall be at those rates as the town council shall from time to time determine by
resolution. (Ordinance 77 effective 7/8/1977, historical reference 67, 92)
Sec. 17-27. Illegally parked vehicles to be removed.
The members of the town police force are empowered to remove, or cause to be removed, any vehicle which may be
parked contrary to the provisions of this code, and to place the same in some garage within the limits of the Town of
Easton and hold the same until the costs of moving such vehicle and the storage charges theron, shall have been
paid. (Ordinance 3 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 17-28. Notice to owner that vehicle has been impounded.
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to notify the owner, claimant, or other person in charge on an impounded
vehicle as soon as possible of the nature and circumstances of the traffic violation for which or as a result of which
the vehicle was impounded and the procedure for repossessing the same; provided, the vehicle has not already been
released. In the event the person has not been contacted within 12 hours from the time of removal of any vehicle,
then the chief of police shall notify the owner of record of that vehicle by certified mail; provided, that person can be
ascertained, giving the same information as above stated. (1967 Code by Ordinance 519 aka E-34 effective
5/7/1967)
Sec. 17-29. Repossession of impounded vehicles.
The owner of any vehicle impounded under this code or other duly authorized person shall be permitted to repossess
the vehicle up to the time of sale by paying the cost of moving the vehicle and the storage charges thereon. (1967
Code by Ordinance 519 aka E-34 effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 17-29.1 Fines and penalties.
The fines for illegal or unauthorized parking in the Town of Easton shall be those amounts that the Town Council
shall from time to time determine by resolution. (Ordinance 197 effective 5/27/1991, historical reference 52.)
DIVISION 2. MUNICIPAL PARKING LOT.
Sec. 17-30. Regulations.
(A) Parking in the lots shall be available to the public in accordance with the rules and regulations as may not or
hereafter be promulgated by the council, or by the police department. However, the town shall not be responsible or
liable for any loss, damage, or injury which may occur to any person or motor vehicle while on the lot.
(B) Parking in any municipally owned or operated parking lot shall be limited to 24 hours at any one time.
(C) Passenger vehicles and pickup trucks without overhanging loads are permitted, but no unlicensed motor vehicle
and no trucks shall be parked in the lots.
(D) Motor vehicles permitted to park in the lots shall park within the marked lines and against the barriers with care.
(E) The speed limit in the municipally owned or operated parking lots shall be 10 miles per hour.
(F) All vehicles shall exit from the lots by the center lane only.
(G) All keys are to be removed from the locks of the vehicles while parked.
(H) Being rowdy, the throwing of bottles, cans, papers, or other trash is forbidden.
(I) All vehicles using the lots shall obey the traffic signs there placed and shall enter the lanes as directed.
(Ordinance 39 effective 1/20/1953, historical reference 3, 31)
(J) Parking permits shall be available for purchase from the town in those numbers, for these periods of time, and at
such fees as the Council shall by motion provide. Said parking permits shall be permanently affixed and prominently
displayed on the lower right corner of the rear window of the authorized vehicle and shall authorize said vehicle to
be parked at any municipally owned or operated parking lot without payment of parking meter charges. Use of
Parking Permits is not authorized for on-street metered parking. Any vehicle having an Easton Parking Permit
incurring three or more unpaid parking tickets during any six-month period shall result in revocation of said permit
with no refund of fees paid. (Ordinance 69 effective 6/10/1973)
Upon the sale, transfer, or disposal of an authorized vehicle, the Parking Permit shall be surrendered to the Police
Department or destroyed under their supervision. A nominal fee will be charged for the issuance of a replacement
permit covering the unexpired term of the original. (Ordinance 69 effective 6/10/1973)
(K) All motor vehicles parked in a lot owned by the town shall have the front end of the vehicle parked closest to the
meter. (Ordinance 265 effective 1/5/1994)
Sec. 17-31. Enforcement.
The members of the police force of the town shall have the same authority over the traffic in said lots as on the
public streets of the town. (Ordinance 39 effective 1/20/1953)
Sec. 17-32. Violation.
For the purposes of this division, every vehicle parked for more than twenty-four (24) hours shall be deemed to be in
violation, and every twenty-four (24) hour period or fraction thereof shall be considered a separate violation.
(Ordinance 39 effective 1/20/1953)
Sec. 17-33. Removal of illegally parked vehicles.
The members of the police force are empowered to remove or cause to be removed any motor vehicle which violates
the provisions of this division and to place the same in some garage within the limits of the town and hold the same
until the cost of moving the vehicle, the storage charges thereon, and the fine or penalty for violating this division
shall have been paid. (Ordinance 39 effective 1/20/1953)
Sec. 17-33.1 Fines and penalties.
The fines for illegal or unauthorized parking in a municipal parking lot of the Town of Easton shall be those
amounts that the Council of the Town of Easton shall from time to time determine by resolution. (Ordinance 198
effective 5/27/1991, historical reference 95)
DIVISION 3. TRAILERS.
Sec. 17-34. Definition.
1. Trailer means a vehicle that has no motive power and is designed to carry people or property and to be towed by a
motor vehicle. The term trailer includes, but is not limited to: "boat trailers", "camping trailers", "pole trailers",
"semi-trailers", and "travel trailers", as those terms are defined in the Maryland Vehicle Law (Title 11, Annotated
Code of Maryland Transportation Article.)
2. Motor Home means a motor vehicle that is designed and constructed primarily to provide living quarters for
recreational, camping or travel use.
3. Bus means a vehicle that is designed to carry more than ten passengers and is used to carry people, or any other
motor vehicle that is designed and used to carry people for compensation except for a taxicab.
(Ordinance 337 effective 4/4/1996, historical reference 43)
Sec. 17-35. Parking Restrictions.
It shall be unlawful for any trailer, motor home or bus to be parked or stand on any of the public streets of the Town
for a period exceeding two (2) hours. (Ordinance 337 effective 4/4/1996, historical reference 43, 80)
Article V. Snow emergency regulations.
Sec. 17-36. Declaration and effect of snow emergency Phase I.
(A) Whenever the Chief of Police (or, in the absence of the Chief of Police from the town, the most Senior officer of
the Police Department then on duty) and the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works of the town
determine that conditions exist, or shall exist, for a declaration of a Snow Emergency Phase I, (which determination
may be made as a result of the forecast of weather conditions) the Chief of Police, (or, as the case may be, the most
Senior officer of the Police Department then on duty), and the Superintendent of the Public Works shall declare a
Snow Emergency Phase I to be in existence.
(B) During a Snow Emergency Phase I, no motor vehicle shall be permitted to use the streets of the town unless it is
equipped with chains or tires permitted by the state for use during snow emergencies.
(Ordinance 128 effective 12/9/1985, historical reference 61, 111)
Sec. 17-37. Declaration and effect of snow emergency Phase II.
(A) Whenever the most Senior officer of the Police Department then on duty determines that conditions exist, or
shall exist, for a declaration of a Snow Emergency Phase II, (which determination may be made as a result of the
forecast of weather conditions) then the most Senior officer of the Police Department then on duty shall declare that
a Snow Emergency Phase II exists, and the regulations prescribed in this Article shall govern the use of streets
within the town during the duration of the emergency. (Ordinance 673 effective 12/29/2015, historical reference 61,
111 and 128)
(1) The designation of Snow Emergency Phase II shall be automatically implemented without the need for further
action upon accumulation of 2 inches of snow. The Town staff will follow the normally prescribed notification of
the general public of such implementation. (Ordinance 673 effective 12/29/2015)
(B) During a Snow Emergency Phase II:
(1) No motor vehicle shall be permitted to use the streets of the town unless it is equipped with chains or tires
permitted by the state for use during snow emergencies; and
(2) No parking shall be permitted on streets at any metered parking space or in any location designated by "No
Parking During Snow Emergency" signs. If any motor vehicle is parked at such a location at the time a Snow
Emergency Phase II is declared, its owner or operator shall remove the vehicle from its location as quickly as
possible under the circumstances.
(Ordinance 128 effective 12/9/1985, historical reference 61, 111)
The Easton Police Department is authorized to have any vehicle parked in violation of this subsection towed from
the street. The vehicle owner will be liable for any towing costs incurred. The Easton Police Department will
notify the owner of the towed vehicle pursuant to Section 17-28. (Ordinance 382 effective 1/12/1999)
(3) The following snow emergency routes are designated for purposes of a Phase II Snow Emergency:
All of Washington Street: North Easton Parkway to Lee Terrace
Dover Street: Higgins Street to Municipal Lot beyond the District Court Building (West Side)
West Street: Bay Street to Glenwood Avenue
Federal Street: Washington Street to West Street
Harrison Street: Goldsborough Street to South Lane
Goldsborough Street: Washington Street to Aurora Street
Idlewild Avenue: Aurora Street to Washington Street
Glenwood Avenue: North Side of Street Only from Washington Street to the Easton Parkway
(Ordinance 382 effective 1/12/1999)
Sec. 17-38. Termination of snow emergency.
At the termination of a snow emergency (whether Phase I or Phase II), the most Senior officer of the Police Department
then on duty shall declare that the snow emergency no longer exists, and that the snow emergency regulations shall no
longer be in effect until such time as the officials of the town again determine that a snow emergency exists according to
the procedures set forth in Sections 17-36 and 17-37. (Ordinance 673 effective 12/29/2015, historical reference 61, 111
and 128)
Sec. 17-39. Restrictions on placement of snow.
No gasoline station, parking lot or other entity or location shall be permitted to deposit snow from its premises upon the
streets or parking lots of the town with the exception of the Town Public Works Department in the authorized performance
of their duties. (Ordinance 673 effective 12/29/2015, historical reference 61, 111 and 128)
Sec. 17-40. RESERVED.
(Ordinance 128 effective 12/9/1985, historical reference 519 aka E-34, 111)
Article VI. Night-time truck regulations.
Sec. 17-41. Prohibitions in truck movement; permit required.
No motor truck larger than a three-quarter ton truck or one which is generally known as a "pick-up" or "panel" truck shall
use the streets of Easton as a means of passage from one place to another between the hours of 8:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M.
on the following day unless a permit for such movement is obtained prior thereto. (Ordinance 66 effective 9/11/1972)
Sec. 17-42. Permits.
(A) A permit for truck movement during the hours herein prescribed may be obtained from the Easton Police
Department by advising the Department of the location of the truck, the place to which it is desired to move the
truck and by providing the Easton Police Department with such other information as the Chief of Police may deem
necessary.
(B) Upon application for a permit as herein provided, the Police Department will advise the applicant of the route to
be taken. In the event that the same route is to be taken upon regular occasions by the same truck then the Police
Department shall issue the permit which shall be good for a period of one year.
(C) A separate permit shall be issued for each truck and shall be carried in the vehicle during the prohibited hours.
(Ordinance 66 effective 9/11/1972, historical reference 207, 339)
Sec. 17-43. Exemptions to article.
The following streets and vehicles are hereby exempt from this Article.
(A) U.S. Route 50.
(B) The Easton Parkway.
(C) All emergency vehicles which are hereby defined to mean any vehicle owned by a public utility and being used
at the time for emergency service or repairs, as well as any firefighting equipment, ambulances, police cars and auto
tow trucks; and
(D) Any three-quarter ton truck including but not limited to "pick-up" and "panel" trucks.
(Ordinance 66 effective 9/11/1972)
Sec. 17-44. Penalty.
The penalty for violation of this Article shall be a fine not exceeding $25 (twenty-five dollars) for each offense. (Ordinance
66 effective 9/11/1972)
Article VII. Abandoned motor vehicles.
Sec. 17-45. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the terms used herein are defined as follows.
"Abandoned automobile." Any motor vehicle, including automobiles and trucks, located on private property, not
within a completely enclosed structure or building which can be easily secured against potential health and safety
hazards and whose engine or motor or any other essential part is inoperable or has been removed, or whose tires or
any tire has been deflated or its wheel or wheels have been removed.
"Zoning Inspector. The Zoning Inspector of the Town of Easton.
(Ordinance 94 effective 8/11/1980)
Sec. 17-46. Prohibition and removal.
(A) It shall be unlawful to store or deposit an abandoned automobile or part thereof on private property, vacant or
occupied.
(B) If the Zoning Inspector determines that any abandoned automobile or part thereof presents a threat to the public
health, safety, or welfare, the Zoning Inspector shall order by certified mail, return receipt requested, the owner of
the property on which the abandoned automobile or part thereof within five days of the date of the order. If, after the
expiration of the five-day period, the abandoned automobile or part thereof is not removed from the property, the
Zoning Inspector may arrange for the removal of the material by employees of the town or by other persons. Any
cost or expense incurred thereby shall be payable by the property owner and shall constitute a lien upon the real
property upon which the abandoned automobile was located.
(Ordinance 94 effective 8/11/1980)
Article VIII. Night Time Commercial Refuse Collection.
Sec. 17-47. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to reduce the noise associated with the collection of refuse at properties within the Town
during the hours that persons traditionally sleep, so that the residents of the Town will have available to them a period of
relative quiet which they may obtain restful sleep. (Ordinance 383 effective 2/2/1999)
Sec. 17-48. Prohibited Conduct.
(A) A commercial reuse hauler, and an owner, officer employee or agent of a commercial refuse hauler, shall not, at any
time between the hours of 10:00 o’clock p.m. and 6:00 o’clock a.m., local time, commit or cause to be committed upon
any property within the Town, any of the following acts:
1. The deployment or delivery of a dumpster by a motor vehicle; or
2. The loading of a dumpster onto a motor vehicle: or
3. The unloading, emptying or collection or refuse from a dumpster
Each of the above-described prohibited acts, which is committed by the owner, officer, employee or agent of a commercial
refuse hauler, and which is committed with the prior knowledge, consent or authorization of that commercial refuse hauler,
shall be considered to have committed by that commercial refuse hauler.
(B) A person shall not, at any time between the hours of 10:00 o’clock p.m. and 6:00 o’clock a.m., local time, cause,
authorize or permit to be committed upon any property which he/she owns, occupies or operates within the Town, any of
the following acts:
1. The deployment or delivery of a dumpster by a motor vehicle; or
2. The loading of a dumpster onto a motor vehicle; or
3. The unloading, emptying or collection of refuse from a dumpster.
Each of the above-described prohibited acts which is committed by the owner, officer, employee or agent of a nonresidential
property owner, occupant or operator, and which is committed with the prior knowledge, consent or
authorization of that non-residential property owner, occupant or operator, shall be considered to have committed by
that non-residential property owner, occupant or operator.
(Ordinance 383 effective 2/2/1999)
Sec. 17-49. Penalties for Violations.
(A) A violation of any provision of this ordinance shall be a municipal infraction and shall be subject to the penalties set
forth in Section 1-8(b) of the Town Code.
(B) Each instance in which a refuse container is deployed, delivered, loaded or emptied by a commercial refuse hauler,
and each property at which a violation of this ordinance occurs, shall constitute a separate violation.
(C) The violation of each section or provision of this ordinance shall constitute a separate offense.
(D) For the purpose of this section, a subsequent violation of this ordinance shall mean:
1. A violation by the same person on a parcel of real property owned, occupied or operated by a different person on the
same date as a previous violation, and for which subsequent violation the same person is charged as was charged with
the previous violation; or
2. A violation by the same person on the same parcel of real property on a date subsequent to a previous violation, and
for which subsequent violation the same person is charged as was charged with the previous violation; or
3. A violation by the same person on a parcel of real property owned, occupied or operated by a different person on a
date subsequent to a previous violation, and for which subsequent to a previous violation, and for which subsequent
violation the same person is charged as was charged with the previous violation.
(E) Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Town from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent
or remedy any violations of this ordinance, including seeking an abatement order from the District Court or any
other court having jurisdiction, pursuant to Maryland Annotated Code Article 23A §3 or any successor statute. The
Town may also enforce this ordinance by civil action for declaratory judgment and/or injunction, in addition or, as
an alternative to, citing the violator for a municipal infraction. In the case of a civil action for declaratory judgment
and/or injunction, the Town may recover its legal fees and court costs from the violator.
(Ordinance 383 effective 2/2/1999)
Sec. 17-50. Definitions.
Except for those words and terms defined herein, all other words and terms shall have their normal and ordinary
meaning within the context of this ordinance. For the purpose of this ordinance, the following words and terms shall
be defined and interpreted as follows:
(A) The term "commercial refuse hauler" shall mean any person who is in the business of collecting refuse from the
land of another for a fee by means of a dumpster which is loaded onto a truck, or by means of a dumpster which is
emptied into a truck, but shall not include employees of the Town of Easton.
(B) The term "dumpster" shall mean any container used, or intended for use, in the collection of refuse.
(C) The term "non-residential property" shall mean real property which is used or occupied, in whole or in part,
other than as a single family residence.
(D) The term "person" shall include a natural person, as well as a firm, association, organization, partnership,
company, or corporation.
(E) The term "refuse" shall include debris, garbage, junk, rubbish, trash or waste of any type.
(F) The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive.
(G) The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural and the plural number
includes the singular.
(Ordinance 383 effective 2/2/1999)
Sec. 17-51. Separability Clause.
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision
shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be
unconstitutional or invalid. (Ordinance 383 effective 2/2/1999)
Article IX. Residentail Parking Districts.
Section 17-52. Statement of Purpose.
The Town Council finds that the health, safety and welfare of certain residents of the Town are adversely affected
by burdens placed upon them by the use of streets within residential areas of the Town for the parking of motor
vehicles by persons using nearby governmental, educational or other public or quasi-public facilities and that the use
of said streets for such purposes has resulted in congested traffic conditions, the overburdening of existing streets,
and the inability of residents of certain areas to obtain adequate parking adjacent to or reasonably close to their
places of residence, and to secure ease of access to their places of residence. To alleviate these conditions, the Town
has established residential parking districts in certain areas of the Town; the purpose of this Subarticle is to provide
regulations for on-street parking within such districts. (Ordinance 486 effective 6/8/2005)
17-53 Establishment of Residential Parking Districts.
There is established within the Town limits of the Town of Easton Residential Parking District No. 1, Residential
Parking District No. 2 and Residential Parking District Number 3, the boundaries of which are more specifically set
forth in this in Section 17-53. In addition to (Ordinance 486 effective 6/8/2005, historical reference 126)
Section 17-54. Boundaries and times of application.
The boundaries and times of application of each parking district are:
Residential Parking District No. 1:
Adkins Avenue, East side;
Wye Avenue, both sides;
Earle Avenue, both sides, from Wye Avenue to South Washington Street;
Biery Street, both sides, from Wye Avenue to West Street;
South Harrison Street, both sides, from Earle Avenue to South Street;
South Washington Street, both sides, from Brookletts Avenue to Vine Street excluding the west side south of
Biery Street;
Brookletts Avenue, both sides, from South Washington Street to South Hanson Street;
Brookwood Avenue, both sides, from Wye Avenue to the intersection of the North property line of 233
Brookwood Avenue with Brookwood Avenue.
South Street, located between Talbot Lane and Hanson Street (Ordinance 669 effective 11/8/2015)
Parking District No. 2:
Mecklenburg Avenue, both sides, from Bridge Street to Talbot House Access Roadway;
Note: The west side of Mecklenburg Avenue is reserved for residential permit parking. The east side of
Mecklenburg Avenue (abutting the campus of Easton High School is a “School Parking Area” and is reserved
for Easton High School permit parking.
Elwood Avenue, both sides, from Bridge Street to Elm Avenue;
Bridge Street, both sides, from Elwood Avenue to Mecklenburg Avenue;
East Oak Avenue, both sides, from Elwood Avenue to Mecklenburg Avenue;
Decatur Place, both sides;
Bainbridge Place, both sides.
Parking District No. 3:
1.Choptank Avenue from its intersection with High Street to its southerly terminus.
Note: The west side of Choptank Avenue and the cul-de-sac are reserved for residential permit parking; the
east side of Choptank Avenue (abutting the campus of the Saints Peter and Paul Schools) is a “School
Parking Area” and its reserved for Saints Peter and Paul School permit parking.
2.East Needwood Avenue from its intersection with Choptank Avenue to its intersection with Ted Avon
Avenue.
3. Prospect Avenue from its intersection with High Street to its southerly terminus.
The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to Residential Parking District No. 1 from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
Monday through Saturday. The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to Residential Parking Districts No. 2 and
No. 3 from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.
(Ordinance 486 effective 6/8/2005, historical reference 126)
17-54 Residential Parking District Parking with Permit; Two Hour Limitation on Parking
Without Permit.
No motor vehicle, other than one displaying a valid Residential Parking Permit for that District or a valid Residential
Visitor Parking Permit for that District shall park on any street within that District for more than two (2) hours
within the time periods set forth in Section 17-53. A person parking a vehicle on a Residential Parking District’s
streets without either permit shall be limited to two hours of parking per day in the District during the effective
hours of the provisions of this Subarticle. (Ordinance 486 effective 6/8/2005, historical reference 126)
17-55 Qualifications for Permits.
Any resident of a Residential Parking District, who is the owner of a motor vehicle, may apply for a Residential
Parking Permit for the District in which the person resides for each motor vehicle owned by said person. For the
purposes of this Section, the term “resident” means any person over the age of 16, who resides in a structure
approved for residential occupancy except dormitories. Any permit shall expire and be void when the permit holder
no longer resides within the District and the permit holder shall remove the permit sticker from any vehicle
registered to park upon its expiration or upon the resident’s moving outside of the District. Permits may be
transferred from one vehicle to another during a permit year solely in accordance with regulations governing such
transfers as provided for herein. Residential permits shall be issued without cost to eligible residents. (Ordinance
486 effective 6/8/2005, historical reference 126)
17-56 Residential Visitor Parking Permit.
Each household located within a Residential Parking District shall receive, upon request, not more than two (2)
Residential Visitor Parking Permits, the use of which shall be restricted to bona fide visitors or guests to said
household. Upon payment of a fee in the amount of One Dollar ($1.00), a household may apply for, and receive,
additional Residential Visitor Parking Permits upon establishing to the Chief of Police, or the Chief’s designate, the
necessity for such additional permits. (Ordinance 486 effective 6/8/2005, historical reference 126)
17-57 School Parking Permits for Districts Two and Three.
The Chief of Police may issue School Parking Permits to the principals of Easton High School (for District Two)
and Saints Peter and Paul Schools (for District Three) for the areas designated for within each District for the
respective use of each school. The number of permits to be issued for the use of each school shall be determined by
the Chief. The principals of the schools shall issue the School Parking Permits to students or staff of each
school. The Chief of Police may issue regulations for the design, issuance and use of such permits. No person
without a properly issued permit shall park in any space designated for School Parking Permits during the times that
this Subarticle is in effect. All expenses related to the issuance of School Parking Permits shall be borne by the
school for whose use the permits are issued. (Ordinance 486 effective 6/8/2005)
17-58 Application for Permit; Issuance of Permit.
An application for a Residential Parking District Permit shall be made by a resident of a Residential Parking District
to the Chief of Police on a form provided by the Easton Police Department. The application for a permit shall
contain information to verify that the applicant is a bona fide resident of the District for which the application has
been made and has legal title or the right to possession of the motor vehicle to be registered, including, but not
limited to, the following information: (1) The name and address of the owner of the motor vehicle; (2) the
applicant’s name and address; (3) the make, model, color, State of registration and license number of the motor
vehicle, and (4) the motor vehicle registration, operator’s permit and other relevant documents. The Chief of Police
shall issue a parking permit upon finding that the applicant meets the requirements set forth herein. If issuance of
the permit is otherwise barred by law, the permit shall not be issued. (Ordinance 486 effective 6/8/2005, historical
reference 126)
17-59 Regulations.
The Chief of the Easton Police Department is hereby authorized to prepare written regulations and procedures with
regard to the procedures for application for Residential Parking Permits and Residential Visitor Parking Permits,
display of permits, and other matters necessary and incidental to the carrying out of the purposes of this Subarticle.
(Ordinance 486 effective 6/8/2005, historical reference 126)
17-60 Display of Permit; Transfer of Permit.
(a) Display of Permit: The Residential Parking Permit shall be affixed to the vehicle as set forth in regulations to
be prepared by the Chief of Police. The design and content of the Permit shall be prescribed by the
regulations.
(b) Transfer or Replacement of Permit: When a vehicle to which a permit is affixed is sold, transferred or in any
other manner rendered unusable to the permit holder, the permit holder shall remove the permit from the
vehicle and may request the issuance of a replacement permit. The application for a permit shall be in
accordance with the provisions for an application for any original or renewal permit, with the exception that
no charge shall be made for a replacement permit.
(Ordinance 486 effective 6/8/2005, historical reference 126)
17-61 Violations; Penalties:
(a) The parking of any vehicle within the boundaries of a Residential Parking District in a manner contrary to the
provisions of this Ordinance shall be considered as “Exceeding the Posted Time Limit”, except parking in
designated School Parking areas shall be considered “Improper Parking”, and the fine for such offenses shall
be that as is established from time to time by the Easton Town Council.
(b) The use of any permit in a manner contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance is prohibited and the same is
hereby declared to be unlawful. Any person violating the same shall, on conviction thereof by a court of
competent jurisdiction, be guilty of a municipal infraction and shall subject to a fine or fines in the amounts
specified in Article XII Section 6 of the Town Code. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation.
(Ordinance 486 effective 6/8/2005, historical reference 126)
17-62 Other Parking Regulations Unaffected.
Nothing in this Subarticle limits the authority of the Town to designated streets or alleys, or portions thereof, as “No
Parking” zones. All other provisions of the Town Code pertaining to parking shall be applicable within the
Residential Parking Districts unless there is a specific contrary provision in this Subarticle. (Ordinance 486 effective
6/8/2005)
17-63 Severability.
The provisions of this Subarticle are severable and if any provision hereof is held to be illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional, or inapplicable to any person or circumstance, such illegality, invalidity, unconstitutionality or
inapplicability shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions of this Ordinance in their application to
other persons or circumstances. (Ordinance 486 effective 6/8/2005, historical reference 126)
CHAPTER 18 OFFENSES - MISCELLANEOUS
§ 18-1. Congregating so as to obstruct free passage.
§ 18-2. Defacing, disfiguring or injuring property.
§ 18-3. Fortunetelling and similar practices.
§ 18-4. Halloween regulations.
§ 18-5. Hospital area regulations.
§ 18-6. Obscene, dangerous shows, movies and similar exhibitions.
§ 18-7. Placing, posting or distributing circulares or advertising matter.
§ 18-8. Throwing missiles.
§ 18-9. Required dress, upper torso; penalty.
§ 18-10.Consumption of alcohol and/or possession of alcoholic beverage in open container in certain placesprohibited.
§ 18-11.Domestic animals prohibited in parks.
§ 18-12.Removal of parking tickets prohibited.
§ 18-13.Urination and/or defecation prohibited on public or private property.
§ 18-14. Prohibited activities in parks.
§ 18-15. BB Guns and Pellet Guns
§ 18-16 Aggressive Solicitation and Penalties for Violation of Such
Sec. 18-1. Congregating so as to obstruct free passage.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to congregate or assemble so as to obstruct or hinder the free passage of
any person or persons upon the streets, lanes, or alleys or on any of the sidewalks or approaches thereto; or to obstruct or
hinder the free passage of persons entering or exiting any public or private building within the limits of the town.
(Ordinance 10 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 18-2. Defacing, disfiguring or injuring property.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to write upon, mark, cut or in any way deface, disfigure or injure any
dwelling or building, wall, fence, tree or sidewalk, or any other property within the town or any property owned by the
town. (Ordinance 11 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 18-3. Fortunetelling and similar practices.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in the commercial practice of palmistry, fortunetelling,
phrenology and astrology within the limits of the town. (Ordinance 11 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 18-4. Halloween regulations.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person over twelve years of age to appear in or upon any of the streets, highways, alleys,
public parks or other public places in the town in any mask or disguise whereby the identity of such person is concealed.
Violations of this subsection (a) shall be a misdemeanor or any persons convicted of violating this subsection shall be
subject to imprisonment and/or fine as specified in Section 1.8. (Ordinance 136 effective 3/20/1987, historical reference
59, 127)
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to appear on the streets, highways, alleys, public parks, public homes, private
homes or public places in the town to make trick or treat visitations, provided that this section shall not apply to children
twelve years of age or younger on Halloween night prior to 8:00 P.M. Violation of this subsection (b) shall be a
municipal infraction and any person convicted of violating this subsection shall be subject to the civil penalties provided
for in Section 1-8. (Ordinance 149 effective 1/11/1988, historical reference 59, 127, 136)
Sec. 18-5. Hospital area regulations.
(a) Boundaries. A "hospital zone" is hereby created and is bounded by Washington Street from Vine Street
southward to Earle Avenue, and Brookletts Avenue from Washington Street eastward to Harrison Street.
(b) Posting notice of hospital zone. The chief of police is hereby authorized and empowered to have conspicuously
placed, at the outer limits of said zone, or at such point within the limits as in deemed proper by the Emergency
Hospital Board of Directors, a sign of ample dimensions to be easily read and containing the words "HOSPITAL
ZONE - UNNECESSARY NOISES PROHIBITED."
(c) Unnecessary noise prohibited. Within the hospital zone it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian, resident, vendor,
driver, chauffeur or any other person, by himself or by the operation of the instrument, agency or vehicle, which he
may have in hand or which he may be driving or controlling to make an unnecessary or unseemly noise, to the
disturbance of any patient or person within such zone which noise could, by the exercise of reasonable care and
forethought, be avoided.
(Ordinance 10 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 18-6. Obscene, dangerous show, movies and similar exhibitions.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, whether as principal, lessee or lessees, owner or owners of any
building used for such purposes within the corporate limits of the town to act, exhibit, display by picture (moving or
otherwise,) show or perform, or cause to be acted, exhibited, displayed, shown or performed or be in any manner
concerned with: (Ordinance 11 effective 1/1/1941)
1. Any play, opera, show, entertainment or performance whatsoever which is obscene, as that term is judicially
interpreted, or in any way a menace to public safety. (Ordinance 11 effective 1/1/1941)
2. Any show or public exhibition by ropes, chains or apparatus or contrivance suspended at a dangerous elevation above
the ground, on any street, alley or square or above a stage or floor within any building. (Ordinance 11 effective 1/1/1941)
(b) It shall be unlawful to give or undertake to give under any license issued any obscene exhibition, and giving or
attempting to give such shall be sufficient cause for closing any show and no license fee shall be returned by reason of
such closing. (Ordinance 9 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 18-7. Placing, posting or distributing circulars or advertising matter.
It shall be unlawful to place, post or distribute circulars or advertising matter in or on any vehicle parked within the
corporate limits of the town and it shall be unlawful for anyone to distribute circulars or advertising material anywhere in
the town in such manner as to permit it to blow about the neighborhood. (Ordinance 10 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 18-8. Throwing missiles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw any snowball, baseball, shell, rock, bat or other missile or shoot a sling shot,
or arrow, on any of the streets, lanes or alleys of the town. (Ordinance 11 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 18-9. Required dress, upper torso, penalty.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, whether male or female, to appear upon the streets, sidewalks and highways,
or in any public building of the Town of Easton unless he or she is wearing a shirt, blouse or similar article of
wearing apparel designed to cover the upper torso of said person.
(b) The penalty for violation of this Section shall be ten (10) days in jail or a fine of not more than One Hundred
Dollars ($100.00).
(Ordinance 70 effective 7/7/1974)
Sec. 18-10. Consumption of alcohol and/or possession of alcoholic beverage in open container in
certain places prohibited.
(A) A person may neither possess in an open container nor imbibe any alcoholic beverage while:
(1) On the mall, adjacent parking lot, or other outside area of any combination of privately owned retail
establishments, commonly known as a shopping center, to which the general public is invited for business
purposes, unless authorized by the owner of the establishments;
(2) On any adjacent parking lot, or other outside area of any other retail establishment, unless authorized by the
owner of the establishment;
(Ordinance 106 effective 10/11/1982, historical reference 75)
(3) On any public way, street, alley, sidewalk, off-street parking lot, park or other publicly-owned area;
provided that this prohibition shall not apply to a sidewalk café or its patrons as authorized by Section 10,
Article I of this Code; (Ordinance 106 effective 10/11/1982 and Ordinance 474, effective 9/30/2004, historical
reference 75)
(4) In any parked or moving vehicle, including any two-wheeled vehicle, located on any of the places
enumerated in this Section, unless authorized by the owner of said place.
(B) Presumptions. In any trial of any person charged with the violation of this Section, it shall be presumed that any
container, can or bottle contains the beverage indicated on the label of said container, can or bottle. The Defendant
may rebut this presumption by credible evidence sufficient to persuade the trier of fact.
(C) Penalty. Any person who violates the provisions of this Section is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
is subject to a fine not exceeding Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) and incarceration not exceeding ninety (90) days.
(Ordinance 106 effective 10/11/1982, historical reference 75)
Sec. 18-10A. Bottle Clubs and Similar Establishments Prohibited.
(a) Definitions. For the purposes of this section:
(1) "Bottle Club" shall mean any establishment, place of business, private club which is open to the public
generally or to its members and guests which, in return for payment or other compensation:
(i) Permits members, guests, customers or patrons to bring alcoholic beverages purchased elsewhere to the
premises and consume the same on the premises;
(ii) Serves, sells, gives, or dispenses alcoholic beverages to its members, guests, customers or patrons;
(iii) Keeps any alcoholic beverages for its members, guests, customers or patrons; or
(iv) Allows members, guests, customers or patrons to consume alcoholic beverages on its premises if the
members, guests, customers or patrons reserved, purchased, or brought the beverages to the premises from
another location.
(2) The term "bottle club" shall not include a private home where any of the activities described in
Subparagraph (1) occur without payment or other compensation to the person owning or possessing the
premises.
(b) Prohibition. No person may own or operate a bottle club in the Town of Easton except pursuant to a license
issued by the Talbot County Board of Liquor License Commissioners or other competent authority.
(c) Penalty. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 1 - 8 of this Code, any person who violates the provisions of
this Section is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, is subject to a fine not exceeding Five Hundred
Dollars ($500.00) and incarceration not exceeding ninety (90) days. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ordinance 408 effective 5/16/2000)
Sec. 18-11. Domestic animals prohibited in parks.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a dog or other domesticated animal to enter upon any park or
recreational area in the town, whether or not the dog or other domesticated animal is restrained by a leash or other
device.
(B) A violation of the provisions of this section shall be a municipal infraction, and shall carry a fine of Ten Dollars
($10.00), plus court costs, for a first offense, and Twenty Dollars ($20.00), plus court costs, for a second or
subsequent offense.
(C) At least ten days before the effective date of this Ordinance, the Director of the Easton Parks and Recreation
Department shall post conspicuous notices in Idlewild Park informing the public that dogs and other pets are
prohibited therein.
(Ordinance 113 effective 8/22/1983)
Sec. 18-12. Removal of parking tickets prohibited.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a parking ticket duly issued to another person from a motor vehicle
within the town and to dispose of same in such a way as to make it impossible for the owner or operator of the
vehicle to locate the ticket within reasonable effort. It shall also be unlawful for any person to destroy or render
illegible a duly issued parking ticket duly issued to another person on any motor vehicle within the town.
(B) Penalties. Any person who violates the provisions of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, is subject to a fine not exceeding One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) and incarceration not exceeding ten
days.
(Ordinance 118 effective 8/20/1984)
Sec. 18-13. Urination and/or defecation prohibited on public or private property.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate and/or defecate on public or private property in the town unless
these acts are performed into a toilet or other device designed and intended for the receipt or disposal of these
wastes.
(B) Penalty. Violations of this section are declared to be municipal infractions. Upon conviction, a person found to
have violated this section shall be fined $25 for the first offense and $50 for each subsequent offense.
(Ordinance 122 effective 11/26/1984)
Sec. 18-14. Prohibited activities in parks.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain upon any park or recreational area within the Town, either
on foot or in a vehicle, at any time between dusk and dawn or after the posted hours of operation as designated by
the park or recreation area.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to remain in any Town park or recreation area after having been requested to
leave said park or recreation area by a law enforcement officer.
(C) A violation of the provisions of this section shall be a municipal infraction and shall have the penalty specified
in Section 1-8 of the Town Code.
(Ordinance 350, effective 11/19/1996)
Editor’s Note [Ordinance 360 effective 9/8/1997 “An ordinance of the Town of Easton prohibiting the driver of a
motor vehicle from operating, or permitting the operation of a sound amplification system in a certain manner under
certain conditions and specifying a civil penalty for violation” was superceded by State Law effective October 1,
1997.]
Sec. 18-15. BB Guns and Pellet Guns
(A) Definitions. For the purposes of this Section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
"BB Gun": a device, whether or not shaped like a pistol or a rifle, which propels a ball bearing, pellet or other
projectile by means of manually compressed air or a spring or other mechanical action.
"Pellet Gun": a device, whether or not shaped like a pistol or rifle, which propels a ball bearing, pellet or other
projectile by means of compressed air or other gas.
"Public Place": any place in the Town of Easton which is either owned by a government agency or which is
generally accessible to members of the public or a substantial portion of the public. Public places include, but
are not limited to: streets, alleys, government-owned parking lots, parks, schools, the common areas and limited
common areas of condominiums, exterior shopping center sidewalks, walkways, driveways and the exterior
sidewalks, parking areas and driveways of commercial businesses.
(B) Discharge, Carrying and Possession of Loaded BB Guns and Air Guns Prohibited in Public Places. It shall
be unlawful for any person to discharge a BB gun or a pellet gun in any public place within the Town of Easton or to
carry or possess a loaded BB gun or a pellet gun in any public place in the Town of Easton. For the purposes of this
section18-15, a BB gun or pellet gun shall be "loaded" when it contains ball bearings, pellets or other projectiles
regardless of whether the gun is charged with air or other propellant gas. For the purpose of this Section 18-015, a
person possesses a pellet gun or a BB gun when
(1) the person has such a device on his or her person or in his backpack, satchel or bag or
(2) such a device is located in the passenger compartment or glove compartment of a motor vehicle in which the
person is a driver.
(C) Penalty. Any person who violates the terms of this Section 18-15 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be subject to a fine of up to $1,000 and imprisonment of up to six (6) months.
(Ordinance 362 effective 12/7/1997)
Sec. 18-16 Aggressive Solicitation and Penalties for Violation of Such
(A) Definitions. For purposes of this Section:
(1) Solicit means to request an immediate donation of money or other thing of value from another person,
regardless of the solicitor's purpose or intended use of the money or other thing of value. The solicitation may
be, without limitation, by the spoken, written, or printed work, or by other means of communication.
(2) Aggressive manner means and includes:
(a) Intentionally or recklessly making any physical contact with or touching another person in the course of
solicitation without the person's consent;
(b) Following the person being solicited, if that conduct is: (i) intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable
person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's
possession; or (ii) is intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into
responding affirmatively to the solicitation;
(c) Continuing to solicit within five (5) feet of the person being solicited after the person has made a
negative response, if continuing the solicitation is: (i) intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person
to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession;
or (ii) is intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding
affirmatively to the solicitation;
(d) Intentionally or recklessly blocking the safe or free passage of the person being solicited or requiring
the person, or the driver of the vehicle, to take evasive action to avoid physical contact with the person
making the solicitation;
(e) Intentionally or recklessly using obscene or abusive language or gestures: (i) intended to or is likely to
cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property
in the person's possession; or (ii) is intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being
solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation;
(f) Approaching the person being solicited in a manner that: (i) is intended to or is likely to cause a
reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the
person’s possession; or (ii) is intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into
responding affirmatively to the solicitation;
(3) Automated teller machine means a device linked to a financial institution's account records, which is able to
carry out transactions, including, but not limited to: account transfers, deposits, cash withdrawals, balance
inquiries, and mortgage and loan payments.
(4) Automated teller machine facility means the area comprised of one or more automatic teller machines, and
any adjacent space which is made available to banking customers after regular banking hours.
(5) Check cashing business means any person duly licensed by the superintendent of banks to engage in the
business of cashing checks, drafts, or money orders for consideration pursuant to the provisions of the banking
laws.
(6) Public area means an area to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access and includes, but
is not limited to, alleys, bridges, buildings, driveways, parking lots, parks, playgrounds, plazas, sidewalks, and
streets open to the general public, and the doorways and entrances to buildings and dwellings, and the grounds
enclosing them including private property used by the public in general.
(B) Prohibited Acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value, or to solicit the sale
of goods or services:
(1) In any aggressive manner in a public area;
(2) Within fifteen (15) feet of any entrance or exit of any bank or check cashing businesses or within fifteen
(15) feet of any automated teller machine during the hours of operation of such bank, automated teller machine
or check cashing business without the consent of the owner or other person legally in possession of such
facilities. Provided, however, that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller
machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine
facility;
(3) On private property if the owner, tenant, or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the
property, or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property; or
(4) From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public street, whether in exchange for cleaning
the vehicle's windows, or for blocking, occupying, or reserving a public parking space; provided, however, that
this paragraph shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the
operator or passengers of such vehicle.
(C) Penalties
(1) A violation of this Section may be punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred
(2) A violation of this Section may be punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100) or by
imprisonment for a term not to exceed thirty (30) days, or by both. If the person has been convicted of a
violation of this Section within the previous period of one (1) year, the person shall be fined not more than two
hundred and fifty dollars ($250) or imprisoned for not more than ninety (90) days, or both.
(D) Construction and Severability
(1) Severability is intended throughout and within the provisions of the Section. If any section, sentence, clause,
or phrase of this Section is held invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such
judgment shall in no way affect or impair the validity of the remaining portions of this Section.
(2) This Section is not intended to prescribe any demand for payment for services rendered or goods delivered.
(3) This Section is not intended to create a result through enforcement that is absurd, impossible or
unreasonable. The Section should be held inapplicable in any such cases where its application would be
unconstitutional under the Constitution of the State of Maryland or the Constitution of the United States of
America.
(Ordinance 391 effective 7/8/1999)

CHAPTER 19 PEDDLERS
§ 19-1. Definition.
§ 19-2. License; exemption.
§ 19-3. License and identification tags; certification; exemption.
§ 19-4. Transfer.
§ 19-5. Revocation of license.
§ 19-6. Use of streets.
§ 19-7. Consent of residents.
§ 19-8. Restrictions of articles to be sold.
§ 19-9. Transient business - License required; fee.
§ 19-10. Same - Applicability to bankrupts, assignees, fire sales or similar sales.
§ 19-11. Same - Exemption; sales under judicial process.
Sec. 19-1. Definition.
The word "peddler" shall include any person whether a resident of the town or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive
vehicle, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying
conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden trunk, farm products or
provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who,
without traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad car,
or other vehicle or conveyance, and further provided that one who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes
deliveries to purchasers as part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a peddler
subject to the provisions of the chapter. The word "peddler" shall include the words "hawker" and "huckster." (Ordinance
519 aka E-34 effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 19-2. License; fee; expiration; exemption.
All persons, firms or corporations engaged in the business of hocking, huckstering, peddling and vending of any
goods, wares, merchandise, food stuffs and produce on the streets of the Town shall be required to obtain from the
Town Clerk a Peddlers' License upon a form obtained from the Town Clerk who shall, upon receipt of payment of
an annual fee of Twenty-five Dollars ($25.00), or a daily charge of Five Dollars ($5.00), issue said License.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to or include persons, firms or corporations residing in the town who
shall have a State Trader's License, nor apply to the sale of farm, dairy and garden produce raised by the vendor in
the State of Maryland, nor to seafood caught by the vendor in the State of Maryland, nor to articles of the vendor's
own manufacture, made or manufactured in the State of Maryland.
(Ordinance 201 effective 7/14/1991, historical reference 9, 28)
Sec. 19-3. License and identification tags; certification; exemption.
All persons, firms or corporations engaged in the business of hawking, huckstering, peddling and vending of any
goods, wares, merchandise, food stuffs and produce on the streets of the town shall first procure an appropriate
license or identification tag to be supplied by the town clerk, at a cost not be exceed fifty (50 cents) annually and
shall keep same conspicuously displayed at all times on his vehicle, wagon, cart or person while he is so hawking,
peddling or selling within the town.
The application to be signed by the said hawker, peddler, huckster or vendor before he is issued the aforementioned
license or identification tag by the Town Clerk shall contain an appropriate certification to the effect that the said
applicant is the bona fide grower, producer or manufacturer of the products to be sold within the town. Nothing in
this section shall apply to person, firms, or corporations who are eligible under and have complied with the licensing
provisions of section 19-2.
(Ordinance 28 effective 12/20/1949, historical reference 9)
Sec. 19-4. Transfer.
No license or tag issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be used or worn at any time by any person other than
the one to whom it was issued. (Ordinance 519 aka E-34 effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 19-5. Revocation of license.
Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the Town Council, after notice and hearing,
for any of the following causes:
(A) Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for licenses;
(B) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on his business as peddler;
(C) Any violation of this chapter;
(D) Conducting the business of peddling in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of
the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public.
(Ordinance 519 aka E-34 effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 19-6. Use of streets.
Every person who shall hawk, peddle, huckster or vend goods to retail trade on the streets of the town, either from a
wagon, vehicle or conveyance of any description, shall keep moving from place to place and not remain in any one place
longer than 20 minutes, or return thereto within a period of five hours. Any hawker, peddler, huckster, or vendor shall
not be deemed to have complied with this provision unless he or they shall have moved a distance of at least 100 feet
from the point or place at which he or they last stopped; provided further, that any hawker, peddler, huckster or vendor
shall not stop, pause, or take up location for the purpose of selling to retail trade at any point upon the streets of the town
which is less than 100 feet from the entrance of any store or place of business which sells to retail trade like goods,
wares, merchandise, food stuffs, and produce which the hawker, peddler, huckster, or vendor is offering for sale.
(Ordinance 28 effective 12/20/1949, historical reference 9)
Sec. 19-7. Consent of residents.
As a condition precedent to any peddler going in or upon any private residence for the purpose of selling or disposing of
any goods, wares, or merchandise, the consent of the owner or occupant of the private residence shall first be obtained by
that person. (Ordinance 519 aka E-34 effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 19-8. Restrictions on articles to be sold.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to hawk, peddle, or offer for sale on any street, lane, or alley in the town,
medicines, patented remedies, nostrums, soaps, perfumes, extracts, toy balloons, toilet, or other like articles. (Ordinance
11 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 19-9. Transient business - License required; fee.
(a) Every person, firm, or corporation, whether principal or an agent, not already engaged in a permanent business
within the corporate limits of the Town, but which is about to enter or begin a transient business in the Town for the
sale of any goods, wares and merchandise shall first apply to the Town Clerk for a fee as set forth in this section;
provided, however, that should two or more person, firms, or corporations offer goods, wares, or merchandise for
sale at the same location and at the same time, including, but not limited to, antique shows, art shows, and the like,
then said persons, firms, or corporations, or the sponsor or coordinator of the show or exhibit, shall apply to the
Town Clerk for a license therefor and shall pay the license fee set forth in this section for one transient business
without regard to the actual number of persons, firms, or corporations participating in said exhibit or show, and that
the coordinator or sponsor shall be liable for the payment of said fee.
(b) The amount of a license for a transient business shall be $50 a day for the first two days, and $15 a day for each
day thereafter which the transient business operates within the Town.
(c) As used in this section, "TRANSIENT BUSINESS" means any business selling or offering for sale goods, wares,
or merchandise within the Town for a period of 30 days or less. A business shall be a transient business regardless of
whether or not it operates from one fixed location or moves from place to place within the Town.
(Ordinance 130 effective 8/11/1986, historical reference 9, 97, 105)
Sec. 19-10. Same - Applicability to bankrupts, assignees, fire sales or similar sales.
Any sale held or conducted by any person, firm, or corporation not previously permanently engaged in business in the
Town prior to such sale, said person, firm or corporation represented or held forth to be bankrupt, as assignee or about to
quit business, or the sale to be the result of goods damaged by fire, water, or otherwise shall be construed to be transient
business and subject to the provisions of this chapter. (Ordinance 9 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 19-11. Same - Exemption; sales under judicial process.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to apply to any sales made under any judicial or court process.
(Ordinance 9 effective 1/1/1941)
CHAPTER 19A PINBALL MACHINES
§ 19A-1. Definitions.
§ 19A-2. Registration required.
§ 19A-3. License.
§ 19A-4. License fee.
§ 19A-5. Duration of license; renewal.
§ 19A-6. Penalties.
Sec. 19A-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter the following terms shall have the meaning assigned to them:
"Clerk." The Town Clerk of the Town of Easton.
"Owner." Any person upon whose premises pinball machines are located and in operation; if the pinball machines
are located on leased premises, then the lessee thereof shall be considered the owners for the purpose of this
chapter.
"Pinball Machine." Any electronic or mechanical device, activated by deposit of money, which, when activated,
enables the user or users thereof to engage in games of skill, luck, or a combination thereof; this term shall include
pinball machines, as that term is commonly understood, and electronic video games, as that term is commonly
understood. This term shall exclude slot machines and other gambling devices.
(Ordinance 101 effective 6/8/1981)
Sec. 19A-2. Registration required.
All owners of pinball machines shall register each machine with the Clerk within 30 days of the effective date of this
chapter. Upon registering, each owner shall provide the Clerk with the following information of the location of each
machine, the make or type of each machine, the hours in which each machine shall be available to the public for playing,
and if the machine is leased, then he lessor of the machine and the lessor's address. (Ordinance 101 effective 6/8/1981)
Sec. 19A-3. License.
Upon the registration of each machine, the Clerk shall issue license for the operation thereof, each such license shall be
prominently displayed on, at or near the location of each pinball machine. (Ordinance 101 effective 6/8/1981)
Sec. 19A-4. License fee.
Before issuing a license under the provision of this chapter, the Clerk shall collect a license fee of $25 for each machine.
(Ordinance 101 effective 6/8/1981)
Sec. 19A-5. Duration of license; renewal.
All licenses issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall expire on the last day of March next following the date of
issue, and may be renewed upon application of the owner and payment of a Twenty-five Dollar ($25.00) renewal fee. No
license shall be issued for less than a full years' fee. (Ordinance 201 effective 7/14/1991, historical reference 101)
Sec. 19A-6. Penalties.
Failure to register a pinball machine or to obtain a license therefor shall constitute a municipal infraction and shall be
punishable by a fine of $25 for each day of violation. (Ordinance 101 effective 6/8/1981)

CHAPTER 20 PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES PERMIT ACT
§ 20-1. Short title.
§ 20-2. Definitions.
§ 20-3. Permit required for public assemblies.
§ 20-4. Application for permit to be filed with Chief of Police.
§ 20-5. Application for permit to contain pertinent information.
§ 20-6. Standards for issuance or denial of permit.
§ 20-7. Appeals procedure.
§ 20-8. Permit issued subject to existing law.
§ 20-9. Revocation of permit.
§ 20-1. Short title. This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Public Assembly Permit Act." (Ordinance 64
effective April 24th 1967)
§ 20-2. Definitions. For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall
have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. (Ordinance 64 effective April 24th 1967)
"Chief of Police" is the Chief of Police of the Police Department of the Town of Easton.
"County" is Talbot County, Maryland.
"Person" is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind.
"Public property" is any land including improvements or structures thereon owned, lease, maintained or
operated by the State of Maryland, County of Talbot, or Town of Easton.
"State" is State of Maryland.
"Town" is Town of Easton.
"Vehicle" is any wheeled conveyance powered by any means and shall include trailer or van.
§ 20-3. Permit required for public assemblies. No persons shall call, schedule, plan, announce, hold or conduct any
open air public meeting, rally, conference, assembly or similar gathering upon any public property within the corporate
limits of the Town of Easton without first having obtained a permit therefor. (Ordinance 64 effective April 24th 1967)
§ 20-4. Application for permit to be filed with Chief of Police. A permit for public meetings as provided in Section
20A-3 shall be issued by the Chief of Police of the Town following an application therefor which must be made a least
fourteen (14) days prior to the planned meeting. (Ordinance 64 effective April 24th 1967)
§ 20-5. Application for permit to contain pertinent information. Any person seeking a permit hereunder shall file an
application which application shall state: (Ordinance 64 effective April 24th 1967)
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the person sponsoring the meeting.
(3) The day and hours for which the permit is desired.
(4) The public property for which the permit is sought to hold the meeting.
(5) An estimate of the number of people holding the meeting, together with an estimate of the number of people
who will be attracted thereto.
(6) The number of vehicles which will be used in connection with the meeting.
(7) The amount and type of loud speaker or amplification equipment which will be used.
(8) If a parade, all of the above information, as well as the estimated number of marchers and the desired route.
(9) Purpose and subject of the meeting.
§ 20-6. Standards for issuance or denial of permit. The Chief of Police shall issue a permit hereunder if he finds:
(Ordinance 64 effective April 24th 1967)
(1) That the proposed activity or meeting will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public use
of the public property for which the permit is sought.
(2) That the proposed activity of meeting will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of the
general public health, welfare, safety, or recreation.
(3) That the proposed activity or meeting is not reasonably anticipated to incite violence, disorder, crime or
disturbance of the public peace.
(4) That the proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or burdensome expense or police operation or
activity, or traffic problems to the Town.
(5) That the facilities desired have not been the subject of a permit for a different use at the day and hour requested
in the application.
§ 20-7. Appeals procedure. Any person aggrieved by the failure of the Chief of Police to issue a permit as herein
provided shall have a right of appeal in writing to the Council of the Town within ten (10) days following the notification
of the denial of the application and the Town Council shall have the right to sustain or overrule the decision of the Chief
of Police. (Ordinance 64 effective April 24th 1967)
§ 20-8. Permit issued subject to existing law. An person granted a permit hereunder shall be subject to all laws and
ordinances of the Town, County and State to the same extent as is fully set forth in the permit. (Ordinance 64 effective
April 24th 1967)
§ 20-9. Revocation of permit. The Chief of Police and/or the Town Council shall have full and complete authority to
revoke any permit issued hereunder for violation of any law or ordinance for any of the standards for issuance set forth in
Section 20A-6. (Ordinance 64 effective April 24th 1967)
CHAPTER 20A PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES PERMIT ACT
§ 20A-1. Short title.
§ 20A-2. Definitions.
§ 20A-3. Permit required for public assemblies.
§ 20A-4. Application for permit to be filed with Chief of Police.
§ 20A-5. Application for permit to contain pertinent information.
§ 20A-6. Standards for issuance or denial of permit.
§ 20A-7. Appeals procedure.
§ 20A-8. Permit issued subject to existing law.
§ 20A-9. Revocation of permit.
Sec. 20A-1. Short title.
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Public Assembly Permit Act." (Ordinance 64 effective 4/24/1967)
Sec. 20A-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning
given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in
the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
"Chief of Police" is the Chief of Police of the Police Department of the Town of Easton.
"County" is Talbot County, Maryland.
"Person" is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind.
"Public property" is any land including improvements or structures thereon owned, lease, maintained or
operated by the State of Maryland, County of Talbot, or Town of Easton.
"State" is State of Maryland.
"Town" is Town of Easton.
"Vehicle" is any wheeled conveyance powered by any means and shall include trailer or van.
(Ordinance 64 effective 4/24/1967)
Sec. 20A-3. Permit required for public assemblies.
No persons shall call, schedule, plan, announce, hold or conduct any open air public meeting, rally, conference, assembly
or similar gathering upon any public property within the corporate limits of the Town of Easton without first having
obtained a permit therefor. (Ordinance 64 effective 4/24/1967)
Sec. 20A-4. Application for permit to be filed with Chief of Police.
A permit for public meetings as provided in Section 20A-3 shall be issued by the Chief of Police of the Town following
an application therefor which must be made a least fourteen (14) days prior to the planned meeting. (Ordinance 64
effective 4/24/1967)
Sec. 20A-5. Application for permit to contain pertinent information.
Any person seeking a permit hereunder shall file an application which application shall state:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the person sponsoring the meeting.
(3) The day and hours for which the permit is desired.
(4) The public property for which the permit is sought to hold the meeting.
(5) An estimate of the number of people holding the meeting, together with an estimate of the number of people
who will be attracted thereto.
(6) The number of vehicles which will be used in connection with the meeting.
(7) The amount and type of loud speaker or amplification equipment which will be used.
(8) If a parade, all of the above information, as well as the estimated number of marchers and the desired route.
(9) Purpose and subject of the meeting.
(Ordinance 64 effective 4/24/1967)
Sec. 20A-6. Standards for issuance or denial of permit.
The Chief of Police shall issue a permit hereunder if he finds:
(1) That the proposed activity or meeting will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public use of
the public property for which the permit is sought.
(2) That the proposed activity of meeting will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of the
general public health, welfare, safety, or recreation.
(3) That the proposed activity or meeting is not reasonably anticipated to incite violence, disorder, crime or disturbance
of the public peace.
(4) That the proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or burdensome expense or police operation or
activity, or traffic problems to the Town.
(5) That the facilities desired have not been the subject of a permit for a different use at the day and hour requested in the
application. (Ord. No. 64, 6, 4/24/67.)
Sec. 20A-7. Appeals procedure.
Any person aggrieved by the failure of the Chief of Police to issue a permit as herein provided shall have a right of
appeal in writing to the Council of the Town within ten (10) days following the notification of the denial of the
application and the Town Council shall have the right to sustain or overrule the decision of the Chief of Police.
(Ordinance 64 effective 4/24/1967)
Sec. 20A-8. Permit issued subject to existing law.
An person granted a permit hereunder shall be subject to all laws and ordinances of the Town, County and State to the
same extent as is fully set forth in the permit. (Ordinance 64 effective 4/24/1967)
Sec. 20A-9. Revocation of permit.
The Chief of Police and/or the Town Council shall have full and complete authority to revoke any permit issued
hereunder for violation of any law or ordinance for any of the standards for issuance set forth in Section 20A-6.
(Ordinance 64 effective 4/24/1967)
CHAPTER 21 RAT CONTROL
§ 21-1. Definitions.
§ 21-2. Buildings to be rat proof and free of rats.
§ 21-3. Inspections; notice of evidence of rat infestation, rat harborage or inadequate ratproofing.
§ 21-4. Compliance with notice to ratproof.
§ 21-5. Compliance with notice as to rat eradication.
§ 21-6. Compliance with notice as to rat harborage - Occupied premises.
§ 21-7. Same - Unoccupied premises.
§ 21-8. Ratproofing when building is constructed, repaired or remodeled.
§ 21-9. Same - Handling of food; denial of permit.
§ 21-10. Storage of food and feed.
§ 21-11. Containers for garbage or refuse; dumping.
§ 21-12. Accumulation of garbage, rubbish or trash.
§ 21-13. Piles of lumber, bricks, or similar materials.
§ 21-14. Emergency abatement of rat infestation.
§ 21-15. Effect of non-compliance with chapter.
Sec. 21-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different intention, the following terms shall, for
the purpose of this chapter; have the meanings stated in this section:
"Building" shall mean any structure, whether public or private, that is adopted for residential occupancy or for
transaction of business, for rendering of professional service, for amusement, for the display, sale or storage of
goods, wares, or merchandise, or for the performance of work or labor, including hotels, apartment buildings,
tenement houses, rooming houses, office buildings, public buildings, stores, theaters, market, restaurants, grain
elevators, abattoirs, warehouses, workshops, factories, and all outhouses, sheds, barns and other structures or
premises used for any of the above purposes.
"Health Officer" means the Deputy State and County Health Officer for Talbot County or his duly authorized
representative.
"Occupant" shall mean the individual, partnership or corporation that uses or occupies any building or part or
fraction thereof, whether the actual owner or tenant. In case of vacant buildings or vacant portions thereof, the
owner, agent or custodian shall have the responsibility as occupant.
"Owner" shall mean the actual owner, agent or custodian of the building, whether individual, partnership or
corporation. The lessee shall be construed as the "owner" when building agreements hold the lessee responsible
for maintenance and repairs.
(Ordinance 57 effective 12/17/1962)
"Rat" or any term including the word "rat" shall include mice. (Ordinance 519 aka E-34 effective 5/7/1967)
"Rat eradication" means the elimination or extermination of rats within buildings by any or all of the accepted
measures, such as: poisoning, fumigation, trapping and clubbing.
"Rat harborage" shall mean any condition which provides shelter or protection for rats, thus favoring their
multiplication and continued existence in, under, or outside of any structure.
"Ratproofing" applies to a form of construction to prevent the ingress of rats into buildings from the exterior, or
from one building to another. It consists essentially of treatment with material impervious to rat gnawing, all
actual or potential openings in exterior walls, ground or first floors, basements, roofs and foundations, that may be
reached by rats from the ground by climbing or burrowing.
(Ordinance 57 effective 12/17/1962)
Sec. 21-2. Buildings to be ratproof and free of rats.
All buildings in the town shall be ratproofed, freed of rats, and maintained in a ratproof and rat-free condition to the
satisfaction of the health officer.
The owners of all ratproofed buildings are required to maintain the premises in a ratproof condition and to repair all
breaks or leaks that may occur in the ratproofing without a specific order from the health officer.
It shall be unlawful for the occupant, owner, contractor, public utility company, plumber, or any person to remove
and fail to restore in like condition the ratproofing from any building for any purpose or to make any new openings
that are not closed or sealed against the entrance of rats.
(Ordinance 57 effective 12/17/1962)
Sec. 21-3. Inspections; notice of evidence of rat infestation, rat harborage or inadequate
ratproofing.
The health officer is empowered to make unannounced inspection of the interior and exterior of buildings, and to
make periodic inspection of all ratproofed buildings to determine evidence of rat infestation and the existence of
new breaks or leaks in their ratproofing, and when any evidence is found indicating the presence of rats or opening
through which rats may again enter any buildings the health officer shall serve the owners or occupants with notice
and/or order to abate the conditions found.
The health officer is further empowered to make additional inspections from time to time to determine whether the
conditions stated in any notice are being or have been remedied, and whether rat control measures are being
continuously maintained in a satisfactory manner.
(Ordinance 57 effective 12/17/1962)
Sec. 21-4. Compliance with notice to ratproof.
Upon receipt of written notice and/or order from the health officer the owner of any building specified therein shall take
immediate measures for ratproofing the building. Unless said work and improvements have been completed by the
owner in the time specified in the written notice, which in no event shall be less that fifteen (15) days, or written the time
to which a written extension may have been granted by the health officer, then the owner shall be punished as provided
in this Code. (Ordinance 57 effective 12/17/1962)
Sec. 21-5. Compliance with notice as to rat eradication.
Whenever the health officer notifies the occupant or occupants of a building in writing that there is evidence of rat
infestation of the building, said occupant or occupants shall immediately institute rat-eradication measures and shall
continuously maintain such measures in a satisfactory manner until the premises are declared by the health officer to be
free of rat infestation. Unless said measures are undertaken within five (5) days after receipt of notice, the occupant shall
be punished as provided in this Code. (Ordinance 57 effective 12/17/1962)
Sec. 21-6. Compliance with notice as to rat harborage - Occupied premises.
Whenever conditions inside or under occupied buildings provide extensive harborage for rats, the health officer is
empowered, after due notification, to close such buildings until such time as the conditions are abated by ratproofing and
harborage removal including, if necessary, the installation of suitable concrete floors in basements or replacement of
wooden first or ground floors with concrete or other major repairs necessary to facilitate rat eradication. (Ordinance 57
effective 12/17/1962)
Sec. 21-7. Same - Unoccupied premises.
Whenever conditions inside or under occupied buildings provide extensive harborage for rats, the health officer is
empowered to require compliance with the provisions of section 21-4 of this chapter and, in the event that said
conditions are not corrected in a period of sixty (60) days, or within the time to which a written extension may have been
granted by the health officer, the health officer is empowered to institute condemnation and destruction proceedings.
(Ordinance 57 effective 12/17/1962)
Sec. 21-8. Ratproofing when building is constructed, repaired or remodeled.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation hereafter to construct, repair or remodel any building, dwelling,
stable, or market, or other structure whatsoever, unless such construction, repair, remodeling, or installation shall render
the building or other structure ratproof. The provisions of this section apply only to such construction, repairs,
remodeling or installation as affect the ratproof condition of any building or other structure. (Ordinance 57 effective
12/17/1962)
Sec. 21-9. Same - Handling of food; denial of permit.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to occupy any new or existing buildings wherein foodstuffs are to
be stored, kept, handled, sold, held or offered for sale without complying with section 21-8 of this chapter; and unless the
provisions of this section are complied with no town license or permit to conduct or carry on such business will be
issued. (Ordinance 57 effective 12/17/1962)
Sec. 21-10. Storage of food and feed.
All food and feed within the town for feeding chickens, cows, pigs, horses and other animals shall be stored in rat-free
and ratproof containers, compartments or rooms unless stored in a ratproof building. (Ordinance 57 effective
12/17/1962)
Sec. 21-11. Containers for garbage or refuse; dumping.
Within the corporate limits of the town all garbage or refuse consisting of waste animal or vegetable matter upon which
rats may feed, and all small dead animals, shall be placed and stored until collected in covered metal containers of a type
prescribed by the health officer. It is further declared unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to dump or place on
any premises, land or waterway, any dead animals, or any waste vegetable or animal matter of any kind. (Ordinance 57
effective 12/17/1962)
Sec. 21-12. Accumulation of garbage, rubbish or trash.
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, place or dump, or permit to accumulate any garbage, rubbish, or trash in any
building or on any premise, improved or vacant, or on any open lot or alley in the town so that the same shall or may
afford food or harborage for rats. (Ordinance 57 effective 12/17/1962)
Sec. 21-13. Piles of lumber, boxes, or similar materials.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate on any premises, improved or vacant, or on any open lot or
alley in the town any lumber, boxes, barrels, bottles, cans, containers or similar materials that may be permitted to remain
thereon unless same shall be placed on open racks that are elevated not less than eighteen (18) inches above the ground,
and evenly piled or stacked. (Ordinance 57 effective 12/17/1962)
Sec. 21-14. Emergency abatement of rat infestation.
Whenever the health officer shall find that a public health emergency exists because of the investigation of a building,
structure, dump or any premises by rats which is likely to cause plague, typhus fever, rat-bite fever or other disease to be
spread to residents of the town, he may summarily abate such condition of infestation by rats without prior notice to
owners or occupants. (Ordinance 519 aka E-34 effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 21-15. Effect of non-compliance with chapter.
Upon failure of the owner or occupant of a building to comply with notice given by the health officer the town shall have
the authority to take whatever measures are deemed necessary by the health officer to remedy the condition found to
exist, and the cost and expense thereof shall be and constitute a lien upon the real property upon which said work is done,
which the lien shall be collectable in the same manner as ad valorem taxes levied against the property. (Ordinance 57
effective 12/17/1962)
CHAPTER 22 SANITARY SEWERS
§ 22-1. Purpose.
§ 22-2. Definitions
§ 22-3. Use of Public Sewers Required
§ 22-4. Building Sewers and Connections
§ 22-5. General Discharge Prohibitions
§ 22-6. Local Discharge Limitations
§ 22-7. Pretreatment Requirements
§ 22-8. Reporting Requirements
§ 22-9. Compliance Schedules
§ 22-10. Industrial Wastewater Contribution Permits
§ 22-11. Charges and Fees
§ 22-12. Bypasses
§ 22-13. Upsets
§ 22-14. Special Agreements
§ 22-15. Enforcement
Sec. 22-1. Purpose.
The purposes of this ordinance are:
A. To establish uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and
treatment system owned by the Town of Easton and operated by The Easton Utilities Commission and to enable The
Easton Utilities Commission to comply with all applicable State and Federal laws and the General Pretreatment
Regulations (40 CFR, Part 403);
B. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipality's wastewater system which will:
(1) interfere with the operation of the system;
(2) contaminate the sludge;
(3) pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere; or
(4) endanger both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in
the course of their employment and the general public.
(5) be otherwise incompatible with the system.
C. To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the system; and
D. To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the municipal wastewater system.
(Ordinance 306 effective 5/9/1995, historical reference 50, 534, 140)
Sec. 22-2. Abbreviations and definitions.
A. ABBREVIATIONS. The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
1. BOD - Biochemical Oxygen Demand.
2. CFR - Code of Federal Regulations.
3. COD - Chemical Oxygen Demand.
4. EPA - Environmental Protection Agency.
5. EUC - The Easton Utilities Commission.
6. l - Liter.
7. mg - Milligrams.
8. mg/l - Milligrams per liter.
9. NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
10. POTW - Publicly Owned Treatment Works.
11. SIC - Standard Industrial Classification.
12. SWDA - Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. 6901, et. seq.
13. TSS - Total Suspended Solids.
14. USC - United States Code.
B. DEFINITIONS. Unless the context specifically indicated otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this ordinance
shall be as follows:
(1) "Act" means: Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33
U.S.C. 1251, et. seq.
(2) "Authorized representative" means:
(a) a responsible corporate officer such as a president, secretary, treasurer, or vice-president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy- or
decision-making functions for the corporation, or the manager of one or more manufacturing, production,
or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures
exceeding $25 million, if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures.
(b) A general partner or proprietor if the Industrial User is a partnership or sole proprietorship respectively.
(c) A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in paragraph (a) or (b) above if:
(i) the authorization is made in writing by the individual described in paragraph (a) or (b);
(ii) the authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall
operation of the facility from which the industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant
manager, operator of a well, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility
for environmental matters for the company; and
(iii) the written authorization is submitted to the Easton Utilities Commission.
(d) If authorization under item (c) is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has
responsibility, a new authorization must be submitted to the Easton Utilities Commission prior to or
together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative."
(3) "Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD)" means: the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation
of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure for five days at 20 degrees centigrade, expressed in terms
of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)).
(4) "Building drain" shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the
discharge from soil waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer, beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.
(5) "Bypass" shall mean the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an Industrial User's
treatment facility.
(6) "Building sewer" shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of
disposal, also called house connection.
(7) "Categorical Pretreatment Standard or Categorical Standard" shall mean any regulations containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the U.S. EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C.
1317) which apply to a specific category of industrial users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter
N, Parts 405-471.
(8) "Easement" shall mean an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
(9) "Easton Utilities Commission" shall mean the Commission appointed by the Mayor and approved by the
Council of the Town of Easton to construct, operate, manage and maintain the municipal utility systems.
(10) "Engineer" shall mean the qualified person designated by the Mayor and Council of the Town of Easton as
the, "Town Engineer".
(11) "Floatable oil" is oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater
by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system.
(12) "Garbage" shall mean the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking,
and serving of foods.
(13) "Industrial User" means: any person, establishment, firm, company, association or group, whether public or
private, engaged in a manufacturing or service enterprise.
(14) "Interference." A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other
sources, both:
(a) inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or
disposal; and
(b) therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an
increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal
in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more
stringent State or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act
(SWDA) including Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA), and including State regulations contained in any State sludge management plan prepared pursuant
to Subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine
Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
(15) "NPDES or State Discharge Permit". A permit issued pursuant to S402 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1342) or Title 9, SS9-323 and 9-324 of the Health-Environmental Article of the
Annotated Code of Maryland.
(16) "Natural outlet" shall mean any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a
watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or groundwater.
(17) "New Source" means:
(a) Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants,
the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed Pretreatment Standards under
section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter
promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
(i) the building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is
located; or
(ii) the building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment
that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or
(iii) the production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation
are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the
existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity
as the existing source should be considered.
(b) Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new
source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the
criteria of paragraphs (a)(ii) or (a)(iii) of this section but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing
process or production equipment.
(c) Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner operator has:
(i) begun or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program: (A) Any placement,
assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or (B) significant site preparation work including
clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for
the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
(ii) entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are
intended to be used in its operation with a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can
be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and
design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph.
(18) "Pass-through." A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or
concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a
violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration
of a violation).
(19) "Person" means: any individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company,
trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agent or assigns. The
masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context.
(20) "pH". The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams
per liter or solution.
(21) "Pollutant" means: any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge,
munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment,
rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, commercial, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain
characteristics of wastewater (e.g. pH, temperature, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
(22) "Pretreatment or Treatment" means: the reduction, elimination, or alteration of pollutant properties to a less
harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharge or introduction into a POTW. This can be accomplished by
physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes, or other means, except as prohibited by 22-6(6) of
this ordinance.
(23) "Pretreatment Requirements" mean any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment
imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard.
(24) "Pretreatment Standard or Standards." Shall mean prohibitive discharge standards, categorical pretreatment
standards, state pretreatment standards, and local limits.
(25) "Prohibited Discharge Standards or Prohibited Discharges." Prohibitions against the discharge of certain
substances; these prohibitions appear in Section 22-5 of this ordinance.
(26) "Properly shredded garbage" shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food
that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
(27) "Public sewer" shall mean a common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility.
(28) "Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW)." A treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Act, (33
U.S.C. 1292) which is owned by the Town of Easton. This definition includes any devices or systems used in
the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes and any
conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.
(29) "Sanitary sewer" shall mean a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm, and
surface waters that are not admitted intentionally.
(30) "Severe property damage." Substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities
which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can
reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic
loss caused by delays in production.
(31) "Sewage." Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.)
(32) "Sewer" shall mean a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
(33) "Significant industrial user." Any industrial user who:
(a) is subject to national categorical standards, or
(b) discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater (excluding sanitary,
non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater), or
(c) contributes a process wastestream that makes up 5% or more of the hydraulic or organic capacity of the
POTW, or
(d) is found by the Easton Utilities Commission, State, or EPA to have significant impact either singly or in
combination with other contributing industries to the POTW, the quality of the sludge, the POTW's effluent
quality, or air emissions generated by the system.
Upon a finding that an industrial user meeting the above criteria in paragraphs (b), (c) and (d) of this
definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Easton Utilities Commission may at any time, on its own
initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial user, and in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8
(f)(6), determine that such industrial user is not a significant industrial user.
(34) "Slug." Any discharge of significant quantities of water, sewage, industrial waste in which the
concentration of any given constituent or quantity of flow could cause interference of the treatment works, passthrough
the POTW treatment plant, endanger sewer worker safety, contaminate the sludge, or cause a violation
of any permit issued to the POTW.
(35) "State" means: State of Maryland.
(36) "Storm drain" (sometimes termed "storm sewer") shall mean a drain or sewer for conveying water,
groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any source.
(37) "Suspended Solids" means: the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in
water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering.
(38) "Toxic Pollutant" means: any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations
promulgated by the EPA under S307(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act or other Federal Statutes or
in regulations promulgated by the Maryland Office of Environmental Programs under state law.
(39) "Town" shall mean the Town of Easton.
(40) "Unpolluted water" is water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that
would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the
sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
(41) "User" means: any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the Town
of Easton POTW.
(42) "Wastewater." The liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings,
commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated,
which are contributed to the POTW.
(43) "Waters of the State" includes:
(a) Both surface and underground waters within the boundaries of this State subject to its jurisdiction,
including that part of the Atlantic Ocean within the boundaries of this State, the Chesapeake Bay and its
tributaries, and all ponds, lakes, rivers, streams, public ditches, tax ditches, and public drainage systems
within this State, other than those designed and used to collect, convey, or dispose of sanitary sewage; and
(b) The flood plain of free-flowing waters determined by the Department of Natural Resources on the basis
of 100-year flood frequency.
(Ordinance 306 effective 5/9/1995, historical reference 50, 534, 140)
Sec. 22-3. Use of public sewers required.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on
public or private property within the Town of Easton, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or objectionable
waste.
(2) It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Town of Easton, any wastewater or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with State regulations and
subsequent provisions of this ordinance.
(3) Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank,
cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater within the Town of Easton.
(4) The owner(s) of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other
purposes, situated within the Town and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or
may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the Town, is hereby required at the owner(s) expense to
install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in
accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, within ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so.
(5) Where a public sanitary sewer is not available a building sewer may be connected to a private wastewater
disposal system, if authorized by the Easton Utilities Commission.
(6) Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system the owner(s) shall first obtain
written authorization from the Easton Utilities Commission and approval by the Talbot County Health Department.
(Ordinance 306 effective 5/9/1995, historical reference 50, 534, 140)
Sec. 22-4. Building sewers and connections.
(1) No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any
public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Town of Easton.
(2) There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: (a) for residential and commercial service, and (b) for
service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner(s) or his agent shall make application
on a special form furnished by the Town. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications,
or other information considered pertinent in the judgement of the Town Engineer.
(3) All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the
owner(s).
(4) A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except as otherwise authorized
by the Easton Utilities Commission.
(5) Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination
and test by the Easton Utilities Commission, to meet all requirements of this ordinance.
(6) The building sewer shall be constructed and installed in accordance with the requirements of the Easton Utilities
Commission and all other applicable codes and regulations.
(7) No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of
surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly
to a public sanitary sewer.
(8) The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Easton Utilities Commission when the building
sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the
supervision of the Easton Utilities Commission.
(Ordinance 306 effective 5/9/1995, historical reference 50, 534, 140)
Sec. 22-5. Prohibited discharge standards.
(1) No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly to the POTW, any pollutant which
causes pass-through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they
are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other National, State, or local pretreatment standards or
requirements.
(2) No user shall contribute the following substances to any POTW:
(a) Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams
with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Centigrade using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
(b) Any solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with
the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to: grease, garbage with particles
greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any dimension, or any material which can be disposed of as trash.
(c) Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or greater than 10.0 or having any other corrosive property capable
of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, or personnel of the POTW.
(d) Any wastewater containing pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals,
create a toxic effect in the receiving water of the POTW, or to exceed the limitation or requirement set forth in a
federal, state or local pretreatment standard or requirement.
(e) Any substance which may create a public nuisance, cause hazard to life, or prevent entry into the sewers for
maintenance and repair.
(f) Wastewater having a temperature greater than 130 F (55 C), or which will inhibit biological activity in the
treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature of the influent to
the plant to exceed 104 F (40 C).
(g) Any heat sufficient to raise the temperature of the wastewaters at the POTW treatment facility above 104 F (40
C).
(h) Pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or
pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the
POTW.
(i) Except as provided by wastewater contribution permits and payment of suecharges, authorized in Section 22-
10 of this chapter, any wastewater having effluent characteristics in excess of:
Constituent Maximum
BOD 250 mg/l
TSS 300 mg/l
Oil and Grease 150 mg/l
(j) Any wastewater having effluent characteristics in excess of limitations to be developed by the POTW for
industrial users, and any other user as appropriate, which are necessary to ensure compliance with the POTW’s
Discharge Permit, the State of Maryland Water Quality Regulations, Sludge Disposal Regulations, and to prevent
pass-through, interference or sludge contamination. Limitations may be developed for parameter including but
not limited to: cadmium, chromium, copper, cyanide, lead, mercury, nickel, silver, zinc, arsenic, barium, and
selenium.
(k) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that
may cause acute worker health and safety problems.
(l) Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the Town.
(m) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause
interference or pass through.
(n) Any slug load.
(Ordinance 306 effective 5/9/1995, historical reference 50, 534, 140)
Sec. 22-6. Pretreatment Requirements.
(1) "National Categorical Pretreatment Standards." The national categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR
Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated.
(2) "State Pretreatment Requirements." The State of Maryland pretreatment standards and requirements found in
COMAR, Title 26, are hereby incorporated.
(3) All industrial users shall comply with the federal general pretreatment standards in 40 CFR Part 403 and the
applicable national categorical pretreatment standards set out in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 401 through
471 upon promulgation and all applicable Federal, State, or local requirements or standards.
(4) Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this ordinance and shall
achieve compliance with all national categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by
the federal pretreatment regulations.
(5) Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the industrial user's
expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the
Easton Utilities Commission for approval before construction of the facility. The review and approval of plans and
operating procedures does not relieve the industrial user from complying with the provisions of this ordinance and
permit conditions. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to
and approved by the Easton Utilities Commission prior to the industrial user's initiation of the changes.
(6) Dilution Prohibition. No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a
discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge
limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The POTW may
impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements,
or in other cases when the impositions of mass limitations is appropriate.
(7) Spill Prevention Plans
(a) Industrial users shall provide protection from accidental discharge of materials which may interfere with the
POTW by developing spill prevention plans. Facilities necessary to implement these plans shall be provided and
maintained at the owner's or industrial user's expense. Spill prevention plans, including the facilities and the
operating procedures shall be approved by the Easton Utilities Commission before construction of the facility.
(b) Industrial users that store hazardous substances shall not contribute to the POTW after the effective date of this
ordinance unless a spill prevention plan has been approved by the Easton Utilities Commission. Approval of such
plans shall not relieve the industrial user from complying with all other laws and regulations governing the use,
storage, and transportation of hazardous substances.
(Ordinance 306 effective 5/9/1995, historical reference 50, 534, 140)
Sec. 22-7. Reporting requirements.
(1) Nature of Required Reports: Upon request of the Easton Utilities Commission, any discharger or potential
discharger of industrial wastes into the POTW may be required to submit plans, reports, questionnaires, notices or
analytical data to evaluate waste discharge characteristics and ensure compliance with this Ordinance. These may
include baseline monitoring reports, compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, compliance schedule
progress reports, violation reports and notice of slug loadings, upset, bypass, or any other reporting requirement
specified in 40 CFR 403.12. Reports shall include, but not be limited to, information on flows, pollutant
concentrations, spills, etc.
(2) Reporting Frequency: All significant industrial users shall submit to the Easton Utilities Commission periodic
compliance reports at least once every six months, unless required more frequently by the Easton Utilities
Commission. These reports shall be due on the dates specified in the Wastewater Contribution Permit. All reports
shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user.
(3) Certification Statement: Each report submitted shall include the following certification: "I certify under penalty
of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a
system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on
my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am
aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations."
(4) Hazardous Waste Disposal:
(a) The Industrial User shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and State
hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance, which, if otherwise
disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261. Such notification must include the name of the
hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge
(continuous, batch, or other). If the Industrial User discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar
month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is
known and readily available to the Industrial User: An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the
wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration for such constituents in the wastestream discharged during
that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged
during the following twelve months. All notifications must take place within 180 days of the effective date of this
rule. Industrial users who commence discharging after the effective date of this rule shall provide the notification
no later than 180 days after the discharge of the listed or characteristic hazardous waste. Any notification under
this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of
changed discharges must be submitted under 40 CFT 403.12 (j). The notification requirement in this section does
not apply to pollutants already reported under self-monitoring requirements of 40 CFR 403.12 (b), (d), and (e).
(b) Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of paragraph (p)(1) of this section during a calendar month in
which they discharge no more than fifteen kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous
wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen kilograms of non-acute
hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR
261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the Industrial User
discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification.
(c) In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of
hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the Industrial User must notify the
POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and State hazardous waste authorities of
the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations.
(d) In the case of any notification made under paragraph (p) of this section, the Industrial User shall certify that it
has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has
determined to be economically practical.
(5) Changes in Discharge:
(a) All industrial users shall promptly notify the Town in advance of any substantial change in the volume or
character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the
industrial user has submitted initial notification under 40 CFR 403.12(p).
(b) Each user shall notify the Easton Utilities Commission of any planned changes to the user's operation or
system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 60 days before the change. Any
changes shall be subject to the Easton Utilities Commission's approval."
(6) Notice of Violations:
(a) All users of the POTW shall immediately notify the POTW to which they discharge of all discharges that
could cause problems to the POTW, including any slug loadings that would violate any of the specific prohibition
of 40 CFR Part 403.5(b).
(b) If sampling performed by an industrial user indicated a violation, the user shall notify the Town within 24
hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the
results of the repeat analysis to the Town within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation, except the
industrial user is not required to resample if: (i) The Easton Utilities Commission performs sampling at the
industrial user at a frequency of at least once per month, or (ii) The Easton Utilities Commission performs
sampling at the user between the time when the user performs its initial sampling and the time when the user
receives the results of this sampling.
(Ordinance 306 effective 5/9/1995, historical reference 50, 534, 140)
Sec. 22-8. Compliance schedules.
If additional pretreatment or operation and maintenance will be required for an industrial user to comply with any
provisions of this Ordinance or a state or federal pretreatment standard or requirement, the Easton Utilities Commission
may require the industrial user to submit for approval a schedule specifying the shortest time frame for the industry to
achieve compliance. This schedule will contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and
completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of the additional pretreatment to bring the industrial
user into compliance. (Ordinance 306 effective 5/9/1995, historical reference 50, 534, 140)
Sec. 22-9. Industrial wastewater contribution permits.
A. Requirements to Apply for a Permit
(1) The following industrial users are required to apply for a Industrial Wastewater contribution permit:
(a) Any user whose discharge would be in violation of Section 22.5 if they had no permit;
(b) Any significant industrial user;
(c) Any user subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard;
(d) Any user required by state pretreatment requirements to obtain a permit;
(e) Any user providing pretreatment; and
(f) Any other user directed by the Easton Utilities Commission to apply for a permit.
(2) Existing users required to obtain a permit must apply for a wastewater contribution permit within 90 days of
the effective date of this ordinance.
(3) New sources required to obtain a permit must apply for and receive an industrial wastewater contribution
permit prior to discharging pollutants into the POTW.
(4) Any user not required to obtain a permit for existing discharges must apply for and receive a wastewater
contribution permit prior to changing the user's discharge in such a manner that the resulting discharge would
require a permit.
B. Permit Application
Users required to apply for a wastewater contribution permit shall complete and file an application with the
Easton Utilities Commission. In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate
for evaluations, the following information:
(1) Name, address, and location (if different from the address);
(2) SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, issued by the Executive Office of
the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972;
(3) Wastewater constituents and characteristics including but not limited to those mentioned in Section 22.5.
(4) Time and duration of contribution;
(5) Average daily and 30 minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations if
any;
(6) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans along with details to show all sewers, sewer
connections, and appurtenances by size, location and elevation;
(7) Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all materials which are or
could be discharged;
(8) The nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any national categorical
pretreatment standard or pretreatment standard or pretreatment requirement and a statement regarding whether
or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional operation
and maintenance and additional pretreatment is required;
(9) The shortest schedule by which the user will provide additional pretreatment or operation and maintenance
if required to meet pretreatment standards. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. In no case shall the reporting intervals in
the schedule exceed nine months;
(10) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production;
(11) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day);
(12) Number and type of employees, as well as hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of
operation of pretreatment system;
(13) Any other information deemed by the Easton Utilities Commission to be necessary to evaluate the permit
application.
C. Permit Required
It shall be unlawful for a user subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard or other significant
industrial user or any other user directed to apply for a permit by the Easton Utilities Commission to discharge
wastewater into the POTW except in accordance with the terms and conditions of a wastewater contribution
permit.
D. Permit Contents
Permits shall contain the following:
(1) Effective and expiration dates;
(2) Statement of non-transferability as specified in section 22-10 (H).
(3) Effluent limitations based on applicable general pretreatment standards, categorical pretreatment standards,
local limits, and/or State and local law;
(4) Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and recordkeeping requirements, including an
identification for the pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type, based
on the applicable general pretreatment standards, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and/or State
and local law;
(5) Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and
requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the compliance date
beyond applicable federal deadlines.
Permits may contain the following:
(1) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a community
sewer;
(2) Requirements for the installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities;
(3) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Town to ensure compliance with all applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements.
E. Basis for Effluent Limitations
(1) Effluent limitations shall be based upon the more stringent of the following:
(a) National categorical pretreatment standards.
(b) State pretreatment requirements; or
(c) Local limitations calculated by mass balance or other valid scientific method necessary to protect the POTW
from materials described in Section 22-5.
F. Permits Duration
(1) Permit duration: Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years. The terms and
conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the Easton Utilities Commission during the term of the
permit as limitations or requirements as identified in Section 22-9 (G) are modified or other just cause exists (i.e.,
changes in the federal, state, or local pretreatment requirements or standards). Users shall apply for a new permit
at least 180 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit.
G. Permit Modifications
(1) Within nine months of the promulgation of a national categorical pretreatment standard or pretreatment
requirement or such shorter time as specified within the standard or requirement, the wastewater contribution
permit of the users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the
time prescribed by such standard. The user shall reapply for a wastewater contribution permit within 180 days
after the promulgation of the pretreatment standard.
(2) A user must re-apply for a permit whenever the mass loading of pollutants contained in the permitted
discharge exceeds the average daily quantity applied for by greater than ten percent.
(3) A user may re-apply for a wastewater contribution permit whenever the user believes that some of the permit
requirements no longer apply.
H. Permit Transfer
Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit
shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed
operation without the prior written approval of the Easton Utilities Commission.
I. Monitoring
Industrial users shall provide and maintain in safe and proper condition, at their own expense, facilities to allow
the authorized representatives of the Easton Utilities Commission, EPA, or the State to inspect, sample, or
measure flows.
J. Records
(1) Users shall retain and make available upon request of authorized representatives of the Easton Utilities
Commission, the State, or the EPA all records required to be collected by the user pursuant to this ordinance.
(2) These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years after their collection.
(3) This period shall be extended during any litigation concerning compliance with this ordinance or permit
conditions.
K. Analytical Requirements
All analyses, including sampling techniques, submitted in support of any application, report, evidence or required
by any permit or order shall be performed in accordance with 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto.
Where 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where
the Administrator (as defined in 40 CFR Part 136) determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques
are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated
analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by
the Town or other persons, approved by the Administrator.
M. Confidential Information
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications,
wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the Easton Utilities Commission's inspection
and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests,
and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of [the Easton Utilities Commission], that the release of such
information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets
under applicable State law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or
data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held
confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made
available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental
agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as
defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public
without restriction.
M. Right of Entry: Inspection and Sampling
Representatives of the Easton Utilities Commission shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to
determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this ordinance and any wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the Easton Utilities Commission access at any reasonable time
to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the
performance for any additional duties.
A. Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry
into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation
of suitable identification, the Easton Utilities Commission will be permitted to enter without delay for the
purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
B. Representatives of the Easton Utilities Commission shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or
require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's
operations.
C. The Easton Utilities Commission may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The
facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be
calibrated [insert desired frequency] to ensure their accuracy.
D. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or
sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the Easton Utilities
Commission and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user.
E. Unreasonable delays in allowing the Easton Utilities Commission access to the user's premises shall be a
violation of this ordinance.
(Ordinance 306 effective 5/9/1995, historical reference 50, 534, 140)
Sec. 22-10. Industrial pretreatment program fees and surcharges.
A. Program Fees
The Easton Utilities Commission may adopt fees approved by the Mayor and Council of the Town of Easton which
may include distribution of costs to implement the Town of Easton Pretreatment Program.
These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this chapter and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the
Easton Utilities Commission.
B. Surcharges
The E.U.C. may adopt surcharges approved by the Mayor & Council of the Town of Easton for industrial users
contributing wastewater with characteristics in excess of:
Constituent Concentration
BOD (5-Day) 250 mg/l
TSS 300 mg/l
Oil and Grease 150 mg/l
(Ordinance 306 effective 5/9/1995, historical reference 50, 534, 140)
Sec. 22-11. Bypasses.
A. Bypass not violating applicable Pretreatment Standards or Requirements:
An Industrial User may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause Pretreatment Standards or Requirements
to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not
subject to the provision of paragraphs (B(1) and B(2) of this section.
B. Bypass Exceeding Applicable Standards:
(1) Notice: (a) If an Industrial User knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the
Easton Utilities Commission and/or POTW, if possible at least ten days before the date of the bypass. (b) An
Industrial User shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable Pretreatment Standards
to the Easton Utilities Commission within 24 hours from the time the Industrial User becomes aware of the
bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within 5 days of the time the Industrial User becomes aware
of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the
bypass, including exact dates and times, and if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is
expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The
Easton Utilities Commission may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been
received within 24 hours.
(2) Prohibition of bypass: (a) Bypass is prohibited, and the Easton Utilities Commission may take enforcement
action against an Industrial User for a bypass unless; (i) Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury, or severe property damage; (ii) There were not feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of
auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment
downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise
of reasonable engineering judgement to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment
downtime or preventative maintenance; and (iii) The Industrial User submitted notices as required under
paragraph (1) of this section. (b) The Easton Utilities Commission may approve an anticipated bypass, after
considering its adverse effects, if the Easton Utilities Commission determines that it will meet the three conditions
listed in paragraph (2)(a) of this section.
(Ordinance 306 effective 5/9/1995, historical reference 50, 534, 140)
Sec. 22-12. Upset provision and notification.
An upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical
pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset does not include
noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment
facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
An upset can be used as an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment
standards provided the industrial user meets certain conditions. An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative
defense of upset must demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence
that:
(a) An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause or causes;
(b) The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with
applicable operation and maintenance procedures;
(c) The industrial user has submitted the following information to the Easton Utilities Commission within 24 hours of
becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must follow within five
days): a description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; the period of noncompliance, including
exact dates and times, or if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; steps being
taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
(d) In any enforcement proceeding the Industrial User seeking to establish the occurrence of an Upset shall have the
burden of proof.
(e) Industrial Users will have the opportunity for judicial determination on any claim of Upset only in an enforcement
action brought for noncompliance with categorical Pretreatment Standards.
(f) The Industrial User shall control production or all Discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with
categorical Pretreatment Standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored
or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things,
the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
Sec. 22-13. Special agreements.
No provision contained in this Ordinance shall be deemed to prevent any special agreement or arrangement between the
Easton Utilities Commission and any person whereby wastewater of unusual strength or characteristic may be accepted
by the Easton Utilities Commission a publicly owned treatment plant for treatment which will not violate or cause the
Easton Utilities Commission and/or the user to violate federal or state pretreatment requirements or standards or to
violate discharge standards and which will not be harmful to the system. Under no circumstances shall the Easton
Utilities Commission waive federal or state pretreatment requirements or standards or waive pretreatment requirements
or standards established by an outside jurisdiction for users that discharge to that jurisdiction.
Sec. 22-14. Enforcement.
A. Annual Publication
The Easton Utilities Commission shall publish annually in the largest local daily paper a list of industrial users
which at any time during the previous twelve (12) months were in significant noncompliance with applicable
pretreatment requirements. For the purpose of this provision, an industrial user is in significant non-compliance if
its violation(s) meets one or more of the following criteria:
(1) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six percent or more
of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit
or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter;
(2) Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three percent or more of
all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the
product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD,
TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH).
(3) Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer-term average) that the Town
determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public);
(4) Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the
environment or has resulted in the Town's exercise of its emergency authority under 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B)
to halt or prevent such a discharge;
(5) Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local
control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final
compliance;
(6) Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports,
90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules;
(7) Failure to accurately report non-compliance;
(8) Any other violation or group of violations which the Town determines will adversely affect the operation or
implementation of the local pretreatment program.
B. Harmful Contributions
(1) The Easton Utilities Commission may suspend the wastewater treatment service or a wastewater contribution
permit or cut off the sewer connection when such suspension or cut-off is necessary, in the opinion of the Easton
Utilities Commission, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which:
(a) presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons;
(b) presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the environment;
(c) may cause or actually causes interference to the POTW; or
(d) causes the POTW to violate any condition of its NPDES or State discharge permit.
(2) The Easton Utilities Commission may reinstate the wastewater contribution permit or the wastewater treatment
service upon proof of the elimination of the non-complying discharge.
C. Revocation of Permit
The Easton Utilities Commission may revoke any wastewater contribution permit if the Easton Utilities
Commission finds that:
(a) A user has falsified information or records submitted or retained in accordance with this ordinance;
(b) A user has violated the conditions of a wastewater contribution permit;
(c) A user has refused right of entry guaranteed by this ordinance;
(d) A user has failed to re-apply for a permit or request a required permit modification; or
(e) A user has discharged into the POTW in violation of this ordinance.
D. Injunctive Relief
(1) The Easton Utilities Commission may seek injunctive relief in the Circuit Court for Talbot County, Maryland,
to suspend wastewater treatment service or a wastewater contribution permit or to cut off the sewer connection
when such suspension or cut off is necessary, in the opinion of the Easton Utilities Commission, in order to stop
an actual or threatened discharge which:
(a) presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons;
(b) presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the environment;
(c) may cause or actually causes interference to the POTW; or
(d) causes the POTW to violate any condition of its NPDES or State discharge permit.
(2) The Easton Utilities Commission may reinstate the wastewater contribution permit or the wastewater treatment
service upon proof of the elimination of the non-complying discharge.
E. Penalties
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to civil and/or criminal penalties as described in
Section 1-8 of the Town Ordinance. Each day of non-compliance shall be considered a separate violation.
(Ordinance 306 effective 5/9/1995, historical reference 50, 534, 140)

CHAPTER 23 SOLID FUEL
§ 23-1. Definitions.
§ 23-2. Coal dealer's license required; fee.
§ 23-3. Requirements for issuance of license.
Sec. 23-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the following meaning ascribed to them
respectively.
"Dealer." Any person who engages in the business of either selling or transporting coal in the town to the
consumer in the town. The term "Dealer" shall include the term "Trader."
"Solid Fuel." Anthracite, semianthracite, bituminous, or semibituminous coal, lignite coal, briquettes, boulets,
coke, gas house coke, petroleum coke, petroleum carbon, or any other manufactured or patented fuel not sold by
liquid measure, except charcoal.
(Ordinance 519 aka E-34 effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 23-2. Coal dealer's license required; fee; expiration.
Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of bartering or selling coal within the corporate limits of
the Town shall obtain a License from the Town made upon a form obtained from the Town Clerk who shall, upon
receipt of payment of a fee of Five Dollars ($5.00), issue said license. All licenses issued under the provisions of this
Chapter shall expire on the last day of March next following the date of issue. No License shall be issued for less
than a full years' fee. (Ordinance 201 effective 7/14/1991, historical reference 9)
Sec. 23-3. Requirements for issuance of license.
No person or persons, firm or corporation shall be entitled to receive a coal traders' license unless said person,
persons, firm or corporation shall have a bona fide coal yard including office, truck, scales, weigh master and
delivery equipment, located within the limits of Talbot County. (Ordinance 9 effective 1/1/1941)

CHAPTER 24 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Article I. In General.
§ 24-1. Street paving - Control and supervision.
§ 24-2. Same - Assessment of abutting property owners.
§ 24-3. Same - Allocation of costs.
§ 24-4. Same - Specifications.
§ 24-5. Same - Installation of sewer, water or gas mains and laterals.
§ 24-6. Same - Cost of installing sewer, water or gas mains and laterals.
§ 24-7. Obstructions on streets and sidewalks generally.
§ 24-8. Location of fixtures in regard to curbs and sidewalks.
§ 24-9. Restrictions on cellar doors, cellarways and openings in sidewalks.
§ 24-10. Restrictions on planting trees, shrubbery or similar obstructions.
§ 24-11. Damage to curbs and streets prohibited.
§ 24-12. Damage to sidewalks prohibited.
§ 24-13. Levels and grades; survey - Ratification and adoption.
§ 24-14. Removing or otherwise disturbing grade or line markers prohibited.
§ 24-15. Snow and ice removal.
§ 24-16. Sidewalks in front of premises to be kept clean.
§ 24-17. Transporting loose materials on public ways.
§ 24-18. Display of merchandise on sidewalks.
§ 24-19. Erection of utility poles.
§ 24-20. Roof water drainage across pavement prohibited.
§ 24-21. Posting bills or similar materials on utility poles; suspending advertising across streets.
§ 24-22. Construction, maintenance and repair of sidewalks by property owners.
§ 24-23. Sidewalk construction expense.
§ 24-24. Permit required for constructing or altering sidewalks.
§ 24-25. Sidewalk construction - Supervision.
§ 24-26. Same - Specifications.
§ 24-27. Town authority to effect sidewalk construction; notice to owner.
§ 24-28. Sidewalk construction and maintenance where owner fails to comply with notice.
§ 24-28A: Construction or Repair of Sidewalks, ect. by Public Agencies.
§ 24-29. Curb and gutter construction - Supervision and control.
§ 24-30. Same - Allocation of costs.
§ 24-31. Same - Assessment of property owners.
§ 24-32. Same - Specifications.
Article II. House numbers.
§ 24-33. Establishment of numbering system.
§ 24-34. Method on numbering.
§ 24-35. Adoption of house numbering system atlas.
§ 24-36. Official identification of buildings after July 1, 1936.
§ 24-37. Duties of town officials in regard to house numbering system.
§ 24-38. Posting numbers.
§ 24-39. Purpose
§ 24-40. Application and territorial limits.
§ 24-41. Definitions.
§ 24-42. Street naming and addressing manual and maps.
§ 24-43. Official street name list.
§ 24-44. Address numbers.
§ 24-45. Notification, use, and display of address numbers.
Article III – Trees
§ 24-47. Purpose
§ 24-48. Goals
§ 24-49. Definitions
§ 24-50. Objectives of the Department of Public Works
§ 24-51. Specifications for Planting
§ 24-52. Maintenance
§ 24-53. New Developments; Street Renovation Projects
§ 24-54. Interference with the Department of Public Works
§ 24-55. Certification Insurance
§ 24-56. Penalty
Article I. In General.
Sec. 24-1. Street paving - Control and supervision.
All streets paved within the corporate limits of the Town of Easton shall be under complete control and jurisdiction of
the town and shall be constructed under the supervision and direction of the town engineer, whose duty it shall be to
furnish to the council a report of the work done and an itemized statement of the costs of same. (Ordinance 474 aka B-48
effective 6/21/1955, historical reference 14)
Sec. 24-2. Same - Assessment of abutting property owners.
The cost of the street paving improvements shall be levied against abutting property owners by an ordinance passed by
the council; said costs to constitute a lien against the abutting property. (Ordinance 474 aka B-48 effective 6/21/1955,
historical reference 14)
Sec. 24-3. Same - Allocation of costs.
(a) The Town may assume forty (40) percent of the costs of street paving, the remaining sixty (60) percent shall be
paid by the abutting property owner or assessed against their property and collected as hereinafter provided.
(b) In any area in which street construction has not commenced as of July 17, 1972, the entire cost of street paving
shall be paid by the abutting property and collected as hereinafter provided.
(Ordinance 537 aka B-80 effective 7/17/1972, historical reference 14, 474 aka B-48)
Sec. 24-4. Same - Specifications.
All street paving shall be constructed in accordance with the standard plans and specifications prepared by the town
engineer and on file in the office of the town clerk. (Ordinance 474 aka B-48 effective 6/21/1955, historical reference 14)
Sec. 24-5. Same - Installation of sewer, water or gas mains and laterals.
(a) Before the paving of any street or roadway, under which there does not exist a water main, sewer main, gas main
or storm drain, it is required that there shall be installed such water, sewer and gas mains and storm drains as may be
required, together with all necessary laterals from such mains or drains to the established curb line in front of each
improved property or vacant lot.
(b) Before the paving of any street or roadway under which sanitary sewer mains, water mains and gas mains exist,
it is required that there shall be installed where they do not already exist, separate sewer, water and gas laterals,
extending from said main to the established curb line in front of each improved property or vacant lot.
(c) All water, sewer and gas mains and laterals within the corporate limits of the Town of Easton shall be under the
complete control and jurisdiction of the Easton Utility Commission and shall be constructed under the supervision of
the said Utilities Commission.
(Ordinance 475 aka B-49 effective 10/18/1955, historical reference 14)
Sec. 24-6. Same - Cost of installing sewer, water or gas mains and laterals.
The cost of water gas and sewer main and lateral installation and storm drains shall be in accordance with the Rates and
General Service Terms and Conditions governing each department of the Easton Utilities Commission. (Ordinance
effective 475 aka B-49 effective 10/18/1955)
Sec. 24-7. Obstruction of streets and sidewalks generally.
It shall be unlawful to place on any sidewalk or roadway in the town any piles or dirt or other material, or any obstruction
of any kind, except as provided in this chapter, unless a special permit is first secured from the chief of police or other
authorized agent of the town; and the owner of such material or obstruction shall be required to place thereon, and
maintain, a sufficient light when such obstruction shall remain in such position after dark. (Ordinance 10 effective
1/1/1941)
Sec. 24-8. Location of fixtures in regard to curbs and sidewalks.
Water meter covers, pave-wash boxes, manhole covers, valve boxes and similar fixtures shall be set or placed inside the
curb and not more than twelve inches therefrom, unless otherwise permitted by the town engineer, and flush with the
surface of the sidewalk so that they shall not present an obstruction or stumbling block to pedestrians. (Ordinance 46
effective 3/20/1956, historical reference 14, 38)
Sec. 24-9. Restrictions on cellar doors, cellarways and openings in sidewalks.
(a) No cellar door shall be placed in or on any sidewalk except by written permission of the council and any cellar
door so permitted and the hinges and other fastenings or attachments thereof shall be placed level with the said
sidewalk.
(b) All cellarways and openings in any sidewalk or public right-of-way shall be properly guarded when open.
(Ordinance 46 effective 3/20/1956, historical reference 14, 38)
Sec. 24-10. Restrictions on planting trees, shrubbery or similar obstructions.
It shall be unlawful to plant any tree, post, pole or shrubbery or similar obstruction, except installations by the town
and/or public utilities, between the sidewalk and curb line of any street or highway in the town without first obtaining
permission of the town and the execution of an agreement by the property owner assuming responsibility for all expenses
of repairs and removal of said trees and shrubbery, the trimming and maintenance of the trees or shrubbery may cause to
gas mains, water or sewerage lines, sidewalk, curb an gutter, or any other damage, and the trimming of the trees and
shrubbery for the clearance of al utility lines. (Ordinance 46 effective 3/20/1956, historical reference 14, 24, 38)
Sec. 24-11. Damage to curbs and streets prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, except employees of the town, when so directed, to dig up, break
or remove any curb or the surface of any street between curbs, whether paved or unpaved, within the limits of the town.
(Ordinance 14 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 24-12. Damage to sidewalks prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation shall, by contract or otherwise, do any work involving damage to any sidewalk on any
street or other public way in the town, except such sidewalk be restored to its original condition. (Ordinance 14 effective
1/1/1941)
Sec. 24-13. Levels and grades; survey - Ratification and adoption.
The survey, and maps, charts and specifications made in connection therewith, showing the levels and grades of the
streets, lanes, alleys, gutters and sidewalks of the town prepared by Williams, Proctor and Potts, 1907, which survey is
on file in the office of the town clerk, and all subsequent amendments and additions thereto existing at the time of the
adoption of this Code, are hereby ratified and adopted as the true and proper survey for levels and grades in the town.
(Ordinance 15 aka E-1 effective 3/22/1907)
Sec. 24-14. Removing or otherwise disturbing grade or line markers prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, or persons to drive down, pull up or remove or otherwise wilfully disturb or impair
any stake, stakes, or monuments, which may be planted or driven in the ground by the authority of the town for the
purpose of fixing and indicating the grade or line of any street, sidewalk pavement or curb or other lines or boundaries of
any public lands, streets, squares, lanes or alleys in the Town of Easton. (Ordinance 14 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 24-15. Snow and ice removal.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, or body corporate, to allow snow and ice to remain on or upon the
sidewalk of any street or alley adjoining property owned or occupied by him, them or it, for a longer period than twenty
four (24) hours from the cessation of the fall of said snow or sleet, and said person, persons, or body corporate shall have
the same cleared off and removed from the said sidewalk within the time set forth herein. (Ordinance 10 effective
1/1/1941)
Sec. 24-16. Sidewalks in front of premises to be kept clean.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep dirt or trash from the interior of any store, commercial establishment or
premises upon the sidewalk, but such dirt or trash shall be taken up and put in proper receptacles for removal.
It shall be the duty of all persons occupying stores, commercial establishments or premises fronting on any street or
public place to keep the sidewalk immediately in front thereof clean and clear of rubbish, trash, waste papers and similar
materials, and the same shall not be swept into the driveway or the street but it shall be taken up and put in proper
receptacles to be moved as other trash and waste is removed. (Ordinance 519 aka E-34 effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 24-17. Transporting loose materials on public ways.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to haul or transport over the public highways and streets of the town loose
materials in such a manner that said material either falls or is blown on said public streets and highways. (Ordinance 32
effetive 3/21/1951)
Sec. 24-18. Display of merchandise on sidewalks.
Displaying of merchandise on sidewalks immediately in front of stores which sell same shall be allowed except on
Sundays, provided such merchandise or stands or containers for same do not extend out from the building line more than
four (4) feet and in no case approach nearer to the curb line than six (6) feet; and provided further, that no merchandise
having sharp or dangerous projections shall be so displayed; and provided further, it shall be unlawful to place a machine
or mechanism that dispenses or vends merchandise or drinks on any of the sidewalks within the limits of said town.
(Ordinance 49 effective 3/16/1959, historical reference 10)
Sec. 24-19. Erection of utility poles.
In the erection of poles in the town by the lighting and telephone companies, no pole shall be planted in front of the
entrance of any property holder, and wherever practicable, said pole shall be placed upon the divisional line between
properties. (Ordinance 10 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 24-20. Roof water drainage across pavement prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any building located on any of the streets of the town to permit water or
descent from the roof thereof to or upon the pavement or sidewalk below. (Ordinance 10 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 24-21. Posting bills or similar materials on utility poles; suspending advertising across
streets.
It shall be unlawful for any person to set up, post or attach in any manner and hand line, poster, notice or advertisement
upon any telegraph, electric light or telephone pole or suspend any advertisement across the streets within the corporate
limits unless permission shall first be obtained in writing from the town. (Ordinance 10 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 24-22. Construction, maintenance and repair of sidewalks by property owner.
It shall be the obligation of the owner or owners of every lot or premises situate within the corporate limits of the town
and fronting on any curbed street or curbed alley in said town to make, or cause to be made and maintained, at the said
owner's expense, and in conformity with such lines and grades as have been or shall hereafter be established by the town,
a sidewalk to be made of such material and in such a manner as is provided by this chapter unless the town grant
permission to use other materials, and it shall further be the duty of said owner or owners to keep such pavement or
sidewalk in good and substantial repair. (Ordinance 14 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 24-23. Sidewalk construction expense.
Sidewalks shall be constructed at the expense of the property owner. (Ordinance 14 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 24-24. Permit required for construction or altering sidewalks.
Before the owner or owners of any lot or premises abutting upon any street proceed to construct or alter any
sidewalk on such street, a permit shall first be obtained from the town in form prescribed by it. The said permit shall
be issued by the town clerk after having been countersigned by the town engineer. Instructions as to location, width
and grade of the said sidewalk shall be set forth on the permit or by other written instruction by the town engineer, in
accordance with regulations and grades as established by the town.
The fee for the issuance of a permit for construction of a sidewalk shall be one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50), paid to
the town clerk prior to the issuance of said permit.
(Ordinance 14 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 24-25. Sidewalk construction - Supervision.
Construction of all sidewalks shall be under the supervision of the town engineer. (Ordinance 47 effective 4/3/1956,
historical reference 14)
Sec. 24-26. Same - Specifications.
(a) All sidewalks hereafter constructed shall be made of cement-concrete slabs, not less than four inches (4") in
thickness, constructed of material of such quality and in such proportion as is generally considered standard for good
practice. Other materials may be used only by permission granted by formal action of the town.
(b) Sidewalks shall be so constructed as to have a slope toward the paralleling curb of between one quarter of an
inch and three eights of an inch to the foot and wherever any sidewalk adjoins any curb it shall not be below nor
more than one-half inch above such curb.
(c) Where concrete or rigid sidewalk pavements abut or join upon curbs, there shall be placed an expansion joint to
be constructed under the direction of and satisfactory to the town engineer.
(d) In business sections of the town, all pavements hereafter laid shall extend in width from the property line to the
curb, but in no event shall the sidewalk in business sections be less than five feet; in the residential sections and
other portions of the town, no pavement shall be less than five feet, unless the space from property line to curb be
less, provided, however, that the town may permit a sidewalk in residential areas of a width of less than five feet,
upon a finding that a five foot sidewalk is not necessary, in which event the sidewalk may be constructed of a width
which the town council may by resolution determine; provided however, that except as otherwise herein provided,
no sidewalk may be constructed less than three and one-half feet in width and shall be laid conformable with
existing pavements, subject to the approval of the town engineer. In all cases where the pavement is not to extend
from the building or property line to the curb, the width shall be as prescribed in the permit or in the resolution of
the council ordering the construction of such pavement; and in the construction and application of this section, the
council shall determine which are the business sections and which are the residential sections of the town.
(Ordinance 47 effective 4/3/1956, historical reference 14)
Sec. 24-27. Town authority to effect sidewalk construction; notice to owner.
Whenever in the judgment of the town it shall be deemed proper that any sidewalk shall be raised or lowered to the
proper grade or that any sidewalk shall be paved, repaved or repaired in the town, the town shall first cause to be
constructed, a good and sufficient curb and gutter (if such curb and gutter have not been previously built)and after the
completion of said curb, the council shall cause a notice to be served by the chief of police or one of the police officers of
the town, requiring the owner or owners of the lot or premises abutting upon such sidewalk, to properly grade, pave,
repave or repair said sidewalk according to the lines and grades furnished by the town engineer, within twenty-five days
from the date of said notice. (Ordinance 14 effective 1/1/1941)
Sec. 24-28. Sidewalk construction and maintenance where owner fails to comply with notice.
If the owner or owners of any lot or premises shall refuse or neglect to comply with the notice referred to in section 24-
27 of this chapter, after the expiration of twenty-five days from the date of service thereof, the town shall forthwith, upon
such refusal or neglect, cause the sidewalk to be paved, graded, repaved or repaired in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. The town engineer shall supervise the said work, and it shall be the duty of the town engineer, in pursuance
of the order of the town, to grade, pave, repave, or repair such pavement or sidewalk in accordance with the legally
established lines and grades. The town engineer shall, upon completion of the work, return to the council a report of his
proceedings in the matter and all itemized statement of the cost of the same, which costs shall be recovered by the town
from the abutting property owners. (Ordinance 14 effective 1/1/1941 )
Sec. 24-28A: Construction or Repair of Sidewalks, Ect. By Public Agencies.
1. In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the Town, it has become necessary to initiate the
construction of streets and sidewalks under circumstances where it is not practicle for abutting property owners to
pay for a portion of the costs as provided for elsewhere in this Chapter.
2. Repair work may consist of the construction and repair of the streets and sidewalks, the drainage system, the
various utility systems, including the location or relocation of water, sewer, electric, gas, and cable communication
lines within public rights of way, streets and sidewalk lights, landscaping, as well as maintaining existing entrances
from public and private properties to the street and sidewalks, and to do all things necessary to accomplish these
purposes.
3. To carry out the previously described street and sidewalk construction and repairs as duly authorized by the Town
Charter and Town Code, the Town and its employees, agents, and assigns shall have a right of temporary entry upon
private property for the purpose of accomplishing such work, at all reasonable time, upon any premises in the Town
which abuts a public street or sidewalk in the Town.
4. The Town shall be responsible for repairing any damage done to private property by the Town and its employees,
agents, and assigns pursuant to the powers granted by this Section.
(Ordinance 420 effective 11/8/2000)
Sec. 24-29. Curb and gutter construction - Supervision and control.
All curbs and gutters within the corporate limits of the Town of Easton shall be constructed under the supervision and
charge of the town engineer, whose duty it shall be to furnish to the council a report of the work done including an
allowance for supervision and engineering and an itemized statement of the costs of same. (Ordinance 474 aka B-48
effective 6/21/1955, historical reference 14)
Sec. 24-30. Same - Allocation of costs.
The town may assume up to forty (40) percent of the costs of curb and gutter construction or repair, the remaining sixty
(60) percent to be paid for by the property owner or owners or assessed against his, her or their property and collected as
hereinafter provided. (Ordinance 474 aka B-48 effective 6/21/1955, historical reference 14)
In any area in which street construction has not commenced as of July 17, 1972, the entire cost of curb and gutter
construction or repair shall be paid by the abutting property owner, or assessed against the abutting property and
collected as herein provided. (Ordinance 537 aka B-80 effective 7/17/1972)
The entire cost of repairs or reconstruction of damaged or defective curbs and/or street gutters, may be borne by the
town; provided, however, that when any property owner shall request permission to lower or otherwise modify the grade,
dimensions or shape of any existing curb and/or sidewalk, for the purpose of or as a part of constructing a private
driveway or entrance to such owner's property, the entire cost of such alteration shall be borne by such owner.
(Ordinance 474 aka B-48 effective 6/21/1955, historical reference 14)
Sec. 24-31. Same - Assessment of property owners.
The cost of the curb and gutter improvements may be levied against abutting property by an ordinance passed by the
council; said cost constitute a lien against the abutting property. (Ordinance 474 aka B-48 effective 6/21/1955, historical
reference 14)
Sec. 24-32. Same - Specifications.
All curbs and gutters shall be constructed in accordance with the standard plans and specifications prepared by the town
engineer and on file in the office of the town clerk. (Ordinance 474 aka B-48 effective 6/21/1955, historical reference 14)
Article II. House numbers.
Sec. 24-33. Establishment of numbering system.
A numbering system for all houses, storerooms and other buildings on the streets, avenues, lanes and public ways of the
Town of Easton, such numbering system to apply generally to the front or main entrance of the premises numbered.
(Ordinance 384 aka E-6 effective 2/18/1936)
Sec. 24-34. Method of numbering.
(a) On the streets, avenues and public ways which run in a general "east and west" direction, the numbers assigned
to buildings on the southerly sides of such streets, avenues and public ways shall be "even" numbers and the
numbers assigned to buildings on the northerly side of such streets, avenues, and public ways which run in a general
"north" and "south" direction, the numbers assigned to buildings on the easterly side thereof shall be "even" numbers
and the numbers assigned to buildings on the westerly side of such streets, avenues, and public ways shall be
"uneven" numbers.
(b) Building numbers shall be divided into four series, to wit: north, south, east and west. The division line between
the north series and the south series of numbers shall extend continuously along Court Street, Dover Street and
Dover Road, from the westerly to the easterly boundaries of the town. The division line between the east series and
the west series of numbers shall be continuously along Washington Street from the southerly to the northerly
boundaries of the town.
(c) The buildings in each block or interval between main cross-streets, north and south, east and west, shall be
numbered centesimally, starting with number one and proceeding in each direction from the above stated division
streets, and beginning each such successive block with the next higher hundred than the last. In establishing such
block numbers, due regard shall be given "dead-end" streets so as to develop the most orderly numbering of all
buildings along each particular street, avenue or public way.
(Ordinance 384 aka E-6 effective 2/18/1936)
Sec. 24-35. Adoption of house numbering system atlas.
The numbers of all buildings and properties within the corporate limits of the town are hereby declared to be as shown
on an atlas entitled "House Numbering System Atlas," which is filed in the office of the town clerk as No. "D-35" of the
Town Plans and Maps, and which atlas is hereby made a part of this section, and such atlas and all notations, references
and other data shown thereon is by this reference made a part hereof to the same extent as if the information set forth on
such atlas were fully described and incorporated herein. (Ordinance 384 aka E-6 effective 2/18/1936)
Sec. 24-36. Official identification of buildings after July 1, 1936.
On and after the first day of July, 1936, no number on any building in the town shall be recognized as official, except
those assigned under the provisions of this article. (Ordinance 384 aka E-6 effective 2/18/1936)
Sec. 24-37. Duties of town officials in regard to house numbering system.
(a) The town engineer shall, from time to time, revise, correct and keep the house numbering system atlas up to date
and he shall also assign numbers to new buildings at the time building permits are applied for, such house number
shall be indicated on each building permit by the town clerk prior to issuance of such permit.
(b) The mayor, with the advice and assistance of the town engineer, shall be, and is, hereby authorized to make such
revisions in the herein established numbering system, as may become necessary or advisable on account of the
opening of new streets or other future developments of the town; provided, however, that such revisions or changes
shall not be inconsistent with the general system herein established and described.
(Ordinance 384 aka E-6 effective 2/18/1936.)
Sec. 24-38. Posting numbers.
Numerals indicating the official numbers of each house and building shall be posted in such a manner as to be visible
from the street on which the property is located. (1967 Code by Ordinance 519 aka E-34 effective 5/7/1967)
Sec. 24-39. Purpose.
The purpose of Sections 24-39 through 24-46 is to establish a system for the assignment of certain street names and the
numbering of certain properties located in the Town of Easton. (Ordinance 178 effective 6/10/1990)
Sec. 24-40. Application and territorial limits.
Sections 24-39 through 24-46 shall apply to the following lands, properties, buildings and other structures located
within the territorial limits of the Town of Easton:
(1) All lands, properties, buildings and other structures abutting the westerly boundary of the right-of-way of U.S.
Route 50;
(2) All lands, properties, buildings and other structures situate and lying on the easterly side of U.S. Route 50; and
(3) All lands, properties, buildings and other structures situate and lying on the westerly side of Maryland Route
322, excepting therefrom , however, all those properties, buildings, and other structures bounded on the north, south
and west by the North and South Branches of the Tred Avon River, and bounded on the east by Maryland Route
322, and commonly known as "Easton Point".
(Ordinance 178 effective 6/10/1990)
Sec. 24-41. Definitions.
As used in Sections 24-39 through 24-46, the following terms have the meanings indicated:
(1) STREET - A public or private way which provides a means of access to abutting property. The term shall
include road, street, avenue, drive, circle, highway, or similar term.
(2) TAX ASSESSMENT MAPS - Maps prepared by the Maryland Department of Assessments and Taxation which
show properties and streets in the Town of Easton.
(Ordinance 178 effective 6/10/1990)
Sec. 24-42. Street naming and addressing manual and maps.
(a) The Town Engineer shall prepare and maintain a Street Naming and Addressing Manual which describes in
detail the criteria, procedures and methods used to name streets and to assign address numbers to properties in the
Town subject to the provisions of Sections 24-39 through 24-46 of the Code. This manual shall include the
development of a grid system from which the address numbers will be derived.
(b) The Town Engineer shall keep and maintain a set of maps of the Town of Easton which display the address grid
system and the names of streets.
(Ordinance 178 effective 6/10/1990)
Sec. 24-43. Official street name list.
(a) The Town Engineer shall maintain an official Street Name List of the Town of Easton.
(b) Any new street opened, platted, or created shall be incorporated into the Official Street Name List by the Town
Engineer if the street meets the criteria contained in the Street Naming and Addressing Manual. The Town Engineer
and the Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the authority to approve the name of any new street.
(Ordinance 178 effective 6/10/1990)
Sec. 24-44. Address numbers.
(a) All property subject to the provisions of Sections 24-39 through 24-46 containing a home, business to other
primary use or structure shall have an address number assigned in accordance with the criteria and procedures
specified in the Street Naming and Addressing Manual.
(b) The Town Engineer shall assign an address number to a property subject to the provisions of Sections 24-39
through 24-46 prior to the issuance of a building permit.
(Ordinance 178 effective 6/10/1990)
Sec. 24-45. Notification, use, and display of address number.
(a) Following the initial assignment of addresses, the Town Engineer shall mail a notification of the new address to
the owner of the property by U.S. mail, first class postage prepaid. The name and address of the property owner
shall be as obtained from the records of the Maryland Department of Assessments and Taxation.
(b) The owner of any property who receives notification of a new address number shall be responsible for informing
all tenants or occupants of the new address.
(c) The owner or occupant shall have a period of one (1) year from the date the notification is mailed to make all
address changes or adjustments. Thereafter, the address number assigned under this Chapter shall be the only street
address used by the owner or occupant of the property.
(d) Within one (1) year from the date the notification of the new address is mailed, the owner shall have placed on
the property, in a location visible from the street upon which the address number is assigned, figures at least (3)
inches high showing the number of the house or building. Numbers placed on mailboxes or signs shall satisfy this
requirement only if the home or building is clearly identifiable in relation to the mailbox or sign.
(Ordinance 178 effective 6/10/1990)
Sec. 24-46. Enforcement and penalties.
(a) A violation of any provision of Sections 24-39 through 24-46 or failure to comply with any requirement thereof,
shall constitute a civil infraction. Each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. Any
person found by a court of competent jurisdiction to have violated any provision of Sections 24-39 through 24-46
shall pay a fine of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for the first violation. The fine for each subsequent violation shall
be One Hundred Dollars ($100.00).
(b) Once a person charged with a violation has received the infraction citation for the first violation, it shall not be
necessary to deliver an infraction citation for any subsequent violation of the same provision or section of this
Chapter. A subsequent violation shall mean a violation of the same section or provision of this Chapter, upon the
same parcel or piece of real property which has occurred not more than 30 days, but not less than 24 hours after the
first violation.
(c) The Town of Easton may enforce this Chapter by civil action for declaratory judgment and/or injunction, in
addition to, or instead of citing the violator for a civil infraction. In the case of a civil action for declaratory
judgment and/or injunction, the Town may recover its legal fees and costs from the violator.
(d) The owner and/or tenant of any building, structure, premise, or part thereof, and any architect, builder,
contractor, agent, or any other person who causes, commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains a violation of this
Chapter shall be guilty of a separate offense, and subject to all the penalties set forth herein.
(Ordinance 178 effective 6/10/1990)
Article III. Trees
Sec. 24-47 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this ordinance to establish a policy for the planting, maintenance, and removal of trees located on
public property in the Town of Easton and to name the Town of Easton’s Public Works (PW) Department as the
agency responsible for carrying out the provisions of this ordinance. This ordinance is intended to act as guidance
for PW in carrying out its duties. However, it is not intended to replace the Town Engineer’s and the Superintendant
of PW’s ability to make decisions in their best judgment, nor is it intended to supersede the Town of Easton’s
Zoning Ordinance or any other provision of the Town’s Charter or Code. The provisions of this ordinance are in
addition to any other responsibilities or rights of the Town to enforce any provision of the Town’s Charter, Code, or
other regulation applicable within the Town. (Ordinance 464 effective 1/5/2004)
Sec. 24-48 Goals.
This article establishes policies to act as guidance to accomplish the following goals:
1. Establish and maintain the appropriate amount of tree cover on public lands and maintain an inventory of
Town trees.
2. Maintain and conserve Town trees in a healthy and non hazardous condition through good
arboricultural practices.
3. Establish and maintain diversity toward native tree species and age classes to provide a healthy and stable
urban forest.
4. Assist and work with persons as they develop their properties, including new residential, commercial or
industrial sites; preserve existing trees or oversee proper replacement of trees removed from the site being
developed.
(Ordinance 464 effective 1/5/2004)
Sec. 24-49 Definitions.
ANSI A300—American National Standards Institute, Inc. Standard Practices for Tree Care Operations—Tree,
Shrub and Other Woody Plant Maintenance.
Conservation—maintenance of the existing order from loss, waste, or harm.
dbh—is the diameter/caliper of the tree trunk at a height of 4.5’ from the ground.
Developer includes an individual, group of individuals or corporation or other entity having intent to develop and/or
subdivide or improve a lot, piece or parcel of land for the purpose of transfer of ownership or leasehold or building
development.
Emergency situations—emergency situations, i.e. fallen limbs, where immediate attention to protect the public’s
safety is required.
ISA—International Society of Arboriculture.
Large tree should be selected to be any tree exceeding 45’ at maturity.
Medium tree should be selected not to exceed 45’ in height at maturity.
Park trees are herein defined as trees and shrubs in public parks, public open spaces and all areas to which the
public has free access, except right-of-ways owned by the Town.
Person—a natural person, individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, trust, voluntary
association, club, society or any group of persons acting as a group.
PW —The Town of Easton’s Public Works Department
Street trees are herein defined as trees and shrubs on public land located along any Town streets, avenues or alley
rights-of-ways.
Small tree should be selected not to exceed 15’ — 20’ in height at maturity.
Topping/Pollarding—is the severe internodal cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches (3”) in
diameter within the tree’s crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
(Ordinance 464 effective 1/5/2004)
Sec. 24-50 Objectives of the Department of Public Works (PW).
1. Complete a street/park tree inventory; review and update the information every two years.
2. Develop and maintain a street/park tree master plan document for the Town of Easton. Such a plan shall contain
a recommended tree species planting list and shall govern the sizes of trees that can be planted in areas of its
jurisdiction.
3. Study, investigate, develop and/or update a written plan for the care, conservation, pruning, planting, replanting,
removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets, and in other public areas. Such plan will be
presented annually to Town Council; and be used as the basis for budget funding.
4. Prepare and submit a tree planting, garden and maintenance budget to Town Council as directed by the Mayor.
This budget shall be discussed during workshop sessions with the Mayor and Town Council for consideration in
the final Town of Easton budget.
5. Make application for and receive grants or contributions of money, technical assistance and labor from any
person, organization or agency, if and when they are available and are deemed to be appropriate for Easton.
6. Define work specifications in order to request bid submissions from qualified contractors, initiate contracts and
arrangements for the proper care, planting or conservation of trees, when required.
7. Educate the public about the benefits of trees and their proper care.
(Ordinance 464 effective 1/5/2004)
Sec. 24-51 Specifications for Planting.
1. Spacing of trees: Spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the growth characteristics of the ultimate tree
canopy with the three species size classes, and in accordance with the Easton Zoning Ordinance.
• Small—plant no closer than 30’ apart.
• Medium—plant no closer than 40’ apart
• Large—plant no closer than 50’ apart.
Note: no street trees should be planted so as to create a safety hazard.
2. Utilities: no street trees should be planted so as to constitute a hazard or obstruction to utilities, whether those
utilities are above or below the ground.
3. Tree size: all street trees shall conform to American Association of Nurserymen Standards and be at least 1-1/4”
to 1-1/2” in dbh and at least eight to ten feet tall when planted unless special conditions exist and the
Superintendant of Public Works or the Town Engineer approves a deviation.
4. Planting: MD’s Department of Natural Resources Forest Service Urban program recommended planting
techniques for the type of tree to be planted (balled & burlap, containerized, bare root) should be followed. Such
specifications are to be given to contractors each time a contract for tree planting is awarded.
5. Species to be planted: The Town Engineer and Planning & Zoning shall determine the appropriateness of trees
within the Town of Easton. No individual person or organization is allowed to plant on any public property
without first receiving written permission from the Town Engineer or the Town Planner. The Tree Management
Plan and recommended species list shall be the guideline followed with exceptions for special plantings to be
approved by the Town Engineer or the Town Planner.
(Ordinance 464 effective 1/5/2004)
Sec. 24-52 Maintenance.
1. The Town shall have the right to treat, plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants, and shrubs within the
lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, parks, and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to
preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such grounds. It shall be the responsibility of PW to provide
adequate maintenance for all Town trees.
2. PW may remove or order the removal of any tree or part thereof (using ANSI A300 Standards) which is in a
hazardous condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewer lines, electric power lines, gas lines,
water lines, or other public improvements; or is infected with a non-treatable, infectious disease, infested with
pests, or cannot be treated economically.
3. No property owner shall plant, spray, prune, remove, cut above or below ground or otherwise disturb any Town
street or park trees. Any street or park trees removed by a property owner shall be replaced at the property
owner’s expense. (In the interest of good conservation, practices are acceptable when agreed upon by PW and
tree care professionals.)
4. Any individual or firm contracted by PW to provide pruning maintenance on street or park trees is required to
follow ANSI A300 standard practice.
5. Tree topping/pollarding: except as otherwise stated, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, Town department,
or utility company to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. No street or park trees are to
be exempted from this specific practice unless unusual damage (storm, etc.) allows best care practice via a
Certified Arborist consultation for best practices.
6. Pruning of Overhanging Trees; Cost: Any property owner with a tree overhanging any street or right-of-way
within the Town shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not significantly obstruct the light from the
public street lights or obstruct the view of any street intersection. Trees or other vegetation shall also be pruned
to provide a clear space above the surface of sidewalks and streets to allow for unobstructed passage of
pedestrians and vehicles. The owners should remove all dead, infectious, diseased or hazardous trees, or broken
or decayed limbs that constitute a hazard to the safety of streets. Upon finding any of the above conditions, PW
shall request a Town Code Enforcement Officer to notify the property owner of the problem(s) and direct the
property owner to correct the problem(s) in a timely manner. After the expiration of the time provided in the
notification letter, PW and/or its contracted agent shall have the right to prune any tree when it interferes with
the proper spread of street lighting or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign. The
property owner shall be responsible for the cost of this maintenance.
7. Removal/treatment of dead, diseased, infectious, non-treatable pest-infested, non correctable, or otherwise
hazardous trees.
a. PW shall have the right to remove any dead, diseased, pest-infested or other hazardous trees on Town-owned
property when such items constitute a hazard to life or property in the public right-of-way.
b. PW shall have the right to request that a Code Official notify private property owners in accordance with
established procedures to have dead, diseased or pest-infested trees on their property treated by an ISA certified
arborist or a MD licensed pesticide applicator, or removed when said trees are in such close proximity to Town
trees so as to pose a threat to the health of Town owned trees or a threat to the public health, safety, or welfare.
c. When PW plants a tree, costs involved in removing the tree/stump, and repairing damage to sidewalks and
curbs caused by the Town-owned trees are the Town’s responsibility.
8. Removal of Stumps: all stumps of street and park trees should be removed to 6” below grade as near to the time
the tree is removed as possible so they do not pose a hazard to the public.
9. Replacement/Mitigation Policy: a tree is to be planted and allowed to become established in close proximity to
a declining tree, for a period of at least five years prior to the removal of the declining tree. When such
replacement/establishment policy, in accordance with the Tree Management Plan cannot be followed due to
time constraints or budgetary constraints, prior to removal of the declining tree, any tree that is removed should
be replaced by one or more trees of an appropriate species as noted in the table below. One of the required
numbers of trees should be planted in as close proximity to the one removed as is feasible and the remaining
specified number within one year from the date of removal.
dbh of Tree Removed Replacement Quantity dbh of Replacement(s)
less than 6” 1 1-3/4” minimum
6”-9” 1 1-3/4” minimum
9”-l2” 2 1-3/4” minimum
10. A State of MD Roadside Tree Expert or licensed MD Tree Expert or the equivalent certification is preferred for
tree pruning, treating, or removal.
(Ordinance 464 effective 1/5/2004)
Sec. 24-53 New Developments; Street Renovation Projects.
1. In new residential, commercial or industrial developments, refer to the Town of Easton’s Zoning Ordinance, as
amended.
2. Town street renovation projects shall make provision for Street Tree plantings. The Town Planner, Town
Engineer, and PW shall work with the contracted project engineer/landscape architect during the design and
implementation phases of the project, and shall be responsible for making final recommendations.
(Ordinance 464 effective 1/5/2004)
Sec. 24-54 Interference with the Department of Public Works.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with PW and/or its agents in the course of its
carrying out the provisions of this ordinance, i.e. mulching, weeding, pruning, spraying, planting or removing of
any street tree, park tree, or those on Town-owned or private property as authorized in this ordinance.
2. Abuse of Street or Park Trees: Unless specifically authorized in writing by PW, no person shall intentionally
damage, cut, carve, transplant, or remove any tree; attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters or other
contrivance to any tree; allow gaseous liquid or solid substance which is harmful to such trees to come in
contact with the tree or root zones; or set fire to burn when such fire or heat thereof will injure any portion of
any tree on Town property.
(Ordinance 464 effective 1/5/2004)
Sec. 24-55 Certification; Insurance.
1. Any firm contracted by PW to prune or remove a Town-owned tree shall show proof of ISA Certified Arborist
or MD Licensed Tree Expert certification to PW and shall be familiar with and follow ANSI A300 standard
pruning practices before a contract for the work can be awarded.
2. Any firm contracted by PW or its agents to spray for or otherwise treat pests and diseases shall show proof that
it has an ISA Certified Arborist or an MD Licensed Tree Expert status and holds a current MD Pest Control
Operator’s License.
3. Firms contracted by PW or its agents, shall provide to PW Superintendent proof of Workman’s Compensation
Insurance and adequate Liability Insurance coverage in the minimum amounts of $1,000,000 for bodily damage
and $100,000 for property damage, indemnifying the Town from liability for any person or property injured or
damaged resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors as described herein.
(Ordinance 464 effective 1/5/2004)
Sec. 24-56 Penalty.
A violation of any provision of this Article by any private person or failure to comply with any requirement thereof,
shall constitute a municipal infraction. Each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance 464 effective 1/5/2004)
CHAPTER 25 SUBDIVISIONS
Editor's Note. - The Town of Easton Subdivision Regulations, and all amendments thereto, are incorporated into
this volume by reference as if fully set out herein. Copies are on file in the office of the town clerk, where they
may be examined between the hours of 8:30 A.M. and 4:00 P.M., Monday through Friday, except on holidays.
(Ordinance 498 effective 4/20/2006 and Ordinance 507 effective 4/11/2007)

CHAPTER 26 TAXATION
Article I. In General.
§ 26-1. Taxable property.
§ 26-2. Duty of town clerk to assess property.
§ 26-3. Furnishing information concerning property to be assessed.
§ 26-4. Board of assessors - Appointment; compensation.
§ 26-5. Same - Oath of office.
§ 26-6. Same - Duties generally.
§ 26-7. Same - Meetings.
§ 26-8. Same - Vacancies filled.
§ 26-9. General supervisory power of mayor.
Article II. Real property.
§ 26-10. Uniform method of valuation of real property.
§ 26-11. Duty of town clerk to prepare return of property valuations.
§ 26-12. Records of property valuation; contents.
§ 26-13. Notice and hearing by board of assessors; power to correct and adjust valuations.
§ 26-14. Power of council to revise and review valuations and assessments.
§ 26-15. Appeal.
Article III. Motor vehicles.
§ 26-16. Motor vehicle assessment.
§ 26-17. Method of assessment.
§ 26-18. Annual revision of motor vehicle assessments.
§ 26-19. Duty of town clerk to prepare return of motor vehicle valuations.
§ 26-20. Board of Assessors to hear protests.
§ 26-21. Appeal.
Article IV. Off-street parking tax district.
§ 26-22. Parking tax district no. 1.
Article I. In General.
Sec. 26-1. Taxable property.
Taxes for the support of the government of the town shall be levied upon assessments made on all property within the
corporate limits of the town subject to assessment of State and County taxes as provided in the Public General Laws of
the State of Maryland. (Ordinance 314 aka D-25 effective 4/9/1930)
Sec. 26-2. Duty of town clerk to assess property.
For the purpose of municipal taxation, the town clerk shall make an assessment of all the property within the corporate
limits of the town subject to assessment for State and County taxes. (Ordinance 314 aka D-25 effective 4/9/1930)
Sec. 26-3. Furnishing information concerning property to be assessed.
For the purpose of making an assessment of property in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, said assessor
shall have the power to examine, under oath, any individual person and any corporate officer whom the assessor believes
to have information or knowledge concerning the property to be assessed. (Ordinance 314 aka D-25 effective 4/9/1930)
Sec. 26-4. Board of Assessors - Appointment; compensation.
The mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the council, shall appoint two members of the council, who with the
town clerk, shall constitute a board of assessors. Each member of the board shall receive such compensation as is
determined by the town council. (Ordinance 314 aka D-25 effective 4/9/1930)
Sec. 26-5. Same - Oath of office.
Each member of the board of assessors shall, before assuming the duties of office, take and subscribe, in addition to the
oath prescribed by the Charter, the following oath or affirmation before the mayor, to wit: "I, A.D., do swear (or affirm)
that I will, to the best of my skill and judgment, execute the duties of a member of the Board of Assessors for the Town
of Easton diligently and faithfully, according to the directions of the ordinance under which I am appointed, without
favor, affection or partiality." (Ordinance 314 aka D-25 effective 4/9/1930)
Sec. 26-6. Same - Duties generally.
It shall be the duty of the board of assessors to:
(a) review and revise the assessments made by the town clerk;
(b) hear and determine all protests filed to the assessments made by the town clerk;
(c) assess all property which may have been omitted by the town clerk; and
(d) to strike from said assessment list any property which may have been erroneously or improperly assessed by
the town clerk.
(Ordinance 314 aka D-25 effective 4/9/1930)
Sec. 26-7. Same - Meetings.
The board of assessors shall, on and after April 21 of each year, meet at the council room in the town every evening
up to and including May 1 of each year, except Sunday of each week, and said meeting shall be from 7:00 P.M. to
9:30 P.M., and said board shall hold such other meetings from May 2 to May 7, both dates inclusive, as they may
deem necessary and advisable. The town clerk shall act as clerk to said board of assessors and shall keep all the
records of said board. (Ordinance 314 aka D-25 effective 4/9/1930)
Sec. 26-8. Same - Vacancies filled.
The mayor is empowered and directed to fill any vacancy in the board of assessors until the council shall be convened to
confirm any nomination to fill such vacancy. (Ordinance 314 aka D-25 effective 4/9/1930)
Sec. 26-9. General supervisory power of mayor.
The mayor shall have general supervision over the assessments referred to herein, and he shall see that all of the
provisions of this chapter are enforced. (Ordinance 314 aka D-25 effective 4/9/1930)
Article II. Real Property.
Sec. 26-10. Uniform method of valuation of real property.
The town clerk shall adopt uniform methods for the expression of opinion or judgment as to land and building valuation,
and uniform rules for computation, so far as may be possible; and shall establish and maintain a permanent public record
of the factors of valuation for each lot or parcel of land and factors of valuation and depreciation, if any, for each building
or other improvement upon land, and of the total valuation of each lot or parcel of land, and the building or buildings
thereon. Such analysis of the separate elements of real estate valuation shall be installed, and shall be continued as the
permanent practice of the assessor, in order to establish uniformity in the methods of valuation of all real properties in
compliance with, and fulfillment of, applicable laws relating to assessment of real estate for taxation. (Ordinance 314 aka
D-25 effective 4/9/1930)
Sec. 26-11. Duty of town clerk to prepare return of property valuations.
The town clerk shall prepare, and have verified by oath or affirmation, a return setting forth the names of owners to
whom property has been valued of the property valued to each owner, described as fully as may be requisite and the
value thereof. Said return shall include and specify or designate all property which is claimed to be exempt, together with
its valuation. Said returns shall be completed and filed in the office of the town clerk not later than April 15 of each year.
(Ordinance 314 aka D-25 effective 4/9/1930)
Sec. 26-12. Records of property valuation; contents.
(a) The town clerk, under the direction of the board of assessors, shall enter and keep in such record or records as
may be provided for that purpose, an accurate and fair account of all the properties which shall have been valued as
hereinbefore provided. The said records shall show the name of each owner of property set down in alphabetical
order. If the name of any owner is unknown, the property valued to such person shall be valued as belonging to a
person unknown. After the name of each owner so setdown, the property valued to such owners shall be setdown,
and the value thereof, as valued, shall be extended opposite to each item of property, and in describing any lot or
parcel of ground said lot shall be described as nearly as practicable by its number of frontfeet and its depth in feet;
and the improvements thereon shall be valued separately.
(b) The books, records and papers in possession of the board of assessors shall be turned over to the council on or
before the 14th day of May of each year.
(Ordinance 314 aka D-25 effective 4/9/1930)
Sec. 26-13. Notice and hearing by board of assessors; power to correct and adjust valuations.
(a) It shall be the duty of the board of assessors to give at least one week's notice, by advertisement in some
newspaper published in the town prior to the 21st day of April of each year and by notice set up at the court house
door, of the time and place of meetings at which said board of assessors shall be in session to consider the returns
made and filed by the town clerk, as provided in this chapter, and to hear and determine the protest of any person or
owner who may deem himself aggrieved by any valuation of property made by said town clerk. A majority of said
board shall constitute a quorum and be competent to perform all duties of said board, and said board shall inform all
persons or owners who may apply to them as to the property assessed to such respective persons or owners and the
amount at which said property shall be so valued.
(b) Said board shall have power to examine upon oath or affirmation any person making any complaint or protest
from any valuation returned to the board touching the particular value of any property so valued, or touching any
property belonging to said person or owner, whether the same had been valued, to such owner or not; and may, upon
due examination or upon their own knowledge, abate, lessen or increase the valuation so made in said returns. It
may value to the owners thereof property which has been omitted to be so valued by the town clerk. Said board is
hereby directed and required to examine carefully the several certificates, statements, and returns or valuations of
property claimed to be exempted from assessments made by the town clerk, and to correct said returns of assessable
property made to them as aforesaid, carefully, by striking there from all property omitted in said returns which ought
to have been included therein.
(c) This board shall have power to correct any valuation or assessment returned to them, whether any complaint or
protest in relation thereto has been made or not; and shall have the power to increase any valuation so returned to
them in every case in which they shall deem it proper to make due increase; provided, however, that no such
increase shall be made unless the person or persons returned, as owner or owners of said property, shall have been
given at least five (5) days' notice of the intention to make such increase and directed in said notice to appear before
said board and show cause, if any, why such increase should not be made; and the same process shall be served upon
the reputed owner, or agent in possession of said property, in every case in which the board of assessors shall value
any property which has been omitted to be so valued by the town clerk.
(Ordinance 314 aka D-25 effective 4/9/1930)
Sec. 26-14. Power of council to revise and review valuations and assessments.
The council is authorized and empowered to annually revise valuations and assessments of property in the town. The
said council shall have power to increase or lower assessments of real or personal property, and to value and assess any
real or personal property omitted from assessment; provided no increase in valuation shall be made, nor shall any
property be newly assessed, until at least five days' notice of such intention shall have been given to the owner, agent, or
person in possession of such property. (Ordinance 314 aka D-25 effective 4/9/1930)
Sec. 26-15. Appeal.
The owner of property, or other person to whom any property may be valued and assessed, who shall deny his ownership
in such property, or shall claim that such property is exempt from valuation and assessment, or shall protest the amount
at which his property is assessed, or any person acting on behalf of such owner or person, may file with the town clerk an
appeal from the action of the board of assessors to the board of transfers and abatements provided by Sec. 74 of Chapter
458 of the Acts of Assembly of 1906 and amendments thereto, at any time within fifteen days after the return is made by
said board of assessors to the council, and may appeal from the decisions of said board of transfers and abatements to the
Circuit Court for Talbot County and the Court of Appeals of Maryland, as provided by said Chapter 458 of the Acts of
1906 and amendments thereto. (Ordinance 314 aka D-25 effective 4/9/1930)
Article III. Motor Vehicles.
Sec. 26-16. Motor vehicle assessment.
The town clerk and board of assessors shall assess all motor vehicles subject to taxation in the town. (Ordinance 316 aka
D-26 effective 5/28/1930)
Sec. 26-17. Method of assessment.
Motor vehicles shall be assessed as follows: All of said motor vehicles of the model of the current year shall be assessed
at 65% of the standard local price of the particular make of motor vehicle. All models of the preceding year shall be
assessed at 45% of said cost price; those of two (2) years previous at 30%; those of three (3) years previous at 20%; those
of four (4) years previous at 10%, provided that no motor vehicle shall be assessed at an amount less than the sum of
$100.00. (Ordinance 316 aka D-26 effective 5/28/1930)
Sec. 26-18. Annual revision of motor vehicle assessments.
The town clerk shall annually revise the assessments of motor vehicles, allowing for depreciation in accordance with the
scale provided in section 26-17 of this article. (Ordinance 316 aka D-26 effective 5/28/1930)
Sec. 26-19. Duty of town clerk to prepare return of motor vehicle valuations.
The town clerk shall prepare and have verified by oath or affirmation a return setting forth the names of owners to whom
motor vehicles have been valued, and of the number, model and make valued to each owner and the value thereof. Said
returns shall be completed and filed in the office of the town clerk not later than May 31 of each year. (Ordinance 316
aka D-26 effective 5/28/1930)
Sec. 26-20. Board of Assessors to hear protests.
The board of assessors shall hold a special session on May 31 of each year, between the hours of 7:00 and 9:30 o'clock
P.M., to consider the returns made and filed by the town clerk, as provided in this article and to hear and determine the
protest of any person or owner who may deem himself aggrieved by any valuation made. (Ordinance 316 aka D-26
effective 5/28/1930)
Sec. 26-21. Appeal.
Any person to whom any motor vehicle is assessed may appeal from the action of the board to the last session of said
board of transfers and abatements to the Circuit Court for Talbot County and the Court of Appeals of Maryland, as
provided by Chapter 458 of the Acts of 1906 and amendments thereto. (Ordinance 316 aka D-26 effective 5/28/1930)
Article IV. Off-street parking tax district.
Sec. 26-22. Parking tax district no. 1.
Section 1. That the following described area located within the corporate limits of the Town is hereby designated as
a special assessment district, to be known as "Parking District No. 1", for the purpose of financing the cost of
acquisition and development of off-street parking facilities. The boundaries of Parking Tax District No. 1 shall be as
follows:
Beginning where the projection of Talbot Street intersects Washington Street.
Thence: (1) northwardly, with Washington Street, to the rear lines of those lots fronting on the southerly side of Port
Street;
Thence: (2) westwardly, with the rear lines of those lots fronting on the southerly side of Port Street, to a point one
hundred twenty-five (125) feet west of the center line of West Street;
Thence: (3) northwardly, parallel with West Street to Port Street;
Thence: (4) northwardly, with the rear lines of those lots fronting on the westerly side of West Street, to Bay Street;
Thence: (5) eastwardly, with Bay Street, to the center line of West Street;
Thence: (6) northwardly, with the projection of the center line of West Street, to the rear lines of those lots fronting
on Bay Street:
Thence: (7) eastwardly, with the rear lines of those lots fronting on Bay Street, to Washington Street;
Thence: (8) northwardly, with Washington Street, to Harrison Street;
Thence: (9) eastwardly and southwardly, with Harrison Street, to Gravel Alley;
Thence: (10) eastwardly, with Gravel Alley, to Turner’s Lane;
Thence: (11) southwardly, with Turner’s Lane, to North Street;
Thence: (12) eastwardly, with North Street, to Hanson Street;
Thence: (13) southwardly, with Hanson Street, to the rear line of those lots fronting on the northerly side of Dover
Street;
Thence: (14) eastwardly, with the rear lines of those lots fronting on the northerly side of Dover Street, to the main
tract of the former Delaware Railroad;
Thence: (15) southwardly, with the main track of the former Delaware Railroad, to the rear lines of those lots
fronting on the southerly side of Dover Road;
Thence: (16) westwardly, with the rear lines of those lots fronting on the southerly sides of Dover Road and Dover
Street, to Higgins Street;
Thence: (17) southwardly, with Higgins Street, to South Lane;
Thence: (18) westwardly, with South Lane, to Aurora Street;
Thence: (19) southwardly, with Aurora Street, to Talbot Street;
Thence: (20) westwardly, with Talbot Street to the place of Beginning.
Where any portion of the boundary of Parking Tax District Number 1 is described as running with the boundary
lines of any lot fronting on a public street, the boundary of as the same exists on March 30, 1990 and any subsequent
change in the boundaries of any such lot shall not effect a change in the boundaries of the District without further
legislative action of the Town Council.
(Ordinance 175 effective 5/10/1990, historical reference 87, 119)

CHAPTER 27 WATER AND UTILITIES
§ 27-1. Water, Gas and Sewer Main and Lateral Installation
Sec. 27-1. Water, Gas and Sewer Main and Lateral Installation.
Upon a request for extension of the water and sewer system and following payment of all the estimated costs of the
requested extension with the Easton Utilities Commission, said Commission shall arrange to have the requested
extension constructed. (Ordinance 515 aka B-69 effective 2/21/1966, historical reference 14, 475 aka B-49)
CHAPTER 28 ZONING
Editor's Note. - The Zoning Code and Zoning Map, and all amendments thereto, are incorporated into this
volume by reference as if fully set out herein. Copies are on file in the office of the town clerk, where they may be
examined between the hours of 8:30 A.M. and 4:00 P.M., Monday through Friday, except on holidays.
Ordinance 497 effective 4/20/2006, New Zoning Code
Ordinance 500 effective 7/6/2006, New Zoning Map and Zoning Code Amendment
Ordinance 506 effective10/8/2006, Zoning Code Amendment
Ordinance 509 effective4/16/2007, Zoning Map Amendment
Ordinance 510 rejected by council
Ordinance 511 effective8/3/2007, Zoning Map Amendment
Ordinance 513 not acted on
Ordinance 515 effective10/7/2007, Zoning Code Amendment
Ordinance 516 effective10/7/2007, Zoning Map Amendment
Ordinance 521 rejected by council
Ordinance 525 effective 5/31/2008, Zoning Code Amendment
Ordinance 528 effective 8/28/2008, Zoning Code Amendment
Ordinance 531 effective5/12/2008, Zoning Map Amendment
The Code
CHAPTER 29 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
§ 29-1. Definitions
§ 29-2. Purpose of Article
§ 29-3. Effect on Provisions of the Town Code
§ 29-4. Applicability of Development Impact Fees
§ 29-5. Affordable Housing
§ 29-6. Annual Review and Adjustments
§ 29-7. Imposition and Enforcement of Development Impact Fees
§ 29-8. Calculation of Development Impact Fees – Fee Schedule
§ 29-9. Development Impact Fee Credits
§ 29-10. Administration of Development Impact Fees
§ 29-11. Appropriation of Development Impact Fees
§ 29-12. Refund of Development Impact Fees
§ 29-13. Amount of Impact Fees
Editor's Note. - Exhibit A to Ordinance 482-Schedule of Town of Easton Impact Fees, and all amendments thereto,
are incorporated into this volume by reference as if fully set out herein. Copies are on file in the office of the town
clerk, where they may be examined between the hours of 8:30 A.M. and 4:00 P.M., Monday through Friday, except
on holidays.
SECTION 29.1. DEFINITIONS.
Unless otherwise defined in this section, words and terms shall have the meaning assigned to them in Article 28
(Zoning), Article 25, (Subdivision Regulations), and Article 6 (Building Code). In case of a conflict, any term in
this Article shall have the meaning defined herein.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING means any residential dwelling unit that is sold for less than the Maximum
Acquisition Cost.
AGRICULTURAL PURPOSES means the production, processing, or harvesting of crops, vegetation, or animals
for human or animal consumption or use, and includes without limitation horticultural and floricultural wholesale
operations, greenhouses, sod production, wholesale nurseries, viticulture (grape growing), orchards and
aquaculture.
APPLICANT means an individual, corporation, or other legal entity that applies for a building permit or zoning
certificate in the Town.
APPROPRIATION or TO APPROPRIATE means an action by the Town Council to identify specific public
facilities for which development impact fee funds may be used. Appropriation shall include, but is not limited to:
(1) Inclusion of a public facility in the adopted capital budget or Capital Improvement Plan ;
(2) Execution of a contract or other legal encumbrance for construction of a public facility using impact fee
funds in whole or in part; or,
(3) Actual expenditure of impact fee funds through payments made from an impact fee account or subaccount.
BUILDING PERMIT means a permit or other final approval required as a condition precedent to the construction,
extension, conversion, alteration, or reconstruction of a structure required under Article 6 (Building Code) and
Article 28 (Zoning).
CAPITAL BUDGET means the budget adopted by the Town Council from time to time, for the purpose of
identifying and financing needed capital improvements.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS means land acquisition, site development, site related improvements, purchase of
The Code
equipment, or construction of structures necessary for the expansion or construction of public facilities serving the
Town and its residents, including all related costs.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN means the schedule of capital improvements to be undertaken by the Town
as determined from time to time by the Town Council or as set forth in the capital budget.
COMMERCIAL USE means any development for commercial or recreational/entertainment use of a site as
defined in Chapter 28 (Zoning).
CREDIT AGREEMENT means an agreement made pursuant to this Article, which provides for a credit of certain
required development impact fees in exchange for the provision of dedicated lands or the construction of facilities
that are consistent with, add to, or complement the Town’s Capital Improvement Plan .
DEPARTMENT means the Town’s Department of Planning & Zoning and/or Department of Permits &
Inspections.
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE or IMPACT FEE means a fee levied pursuant to this Article as a condition of
issuance of a building permit or zoning certificate, and which is intended to fund capital improvements and public
facilities in the Town needed to serve new growth and development activity in the Town.
DWELLING UNIT -- means one or more rooms physically arranged so as to create an independent housekeeping
establishment for occupancy by one family with separate toilets and facilities for cooking and sleeping.
FAMILY -- means an individual, or two or more persons related by blood or marriage, or a group of not more
than
three persons not related by blood or marriage, living together as a single housekeeping group in a dwelling unit.
FINANCE OFFICER means the Easton Town Clerk.
FLOOR AREA means the total horizontal area in square feet of all floors within the exterior walls of the building,
including habitable or usable garage, basement, attic, or similar spaces, but not including vent shafts, unroofed
inner courts, or unusable areas below ground or in attics.
INDUSTRIAL USE means any development for industrial use of a site as defined or described in Chapter 28
(Zoning).
INSTITUTIONAL USE means any development for institutional use of a site as defined in Chapter 28 (Zoning).
MAXIMUM ACQUISITION COST is the highest purchase price for a residential dwelling unit at which residents
of Town remain eligible to participate in the "Maryland Mortgage Program" as established from time to time by
the Maryland Department of Housing and Community Development, Community Development Administration
(CDA).
MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT means a new development consisting of both residential and non residential uses
and structures, or one or more different types of non residential uses or structures, either on the same site or part
of
the same new development.
NEW DEVELOPMENT means any development or development activity for which a building permit or zoning
certificate is issued after the effective date of this Article, and which either increases the number of dwelling units
or which increases total non residential floor area. Accessory and replacement residential structures are excluded.
NON RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT means any development for commercial, industrial, or institutional use.
OWNER OCCUPIED AFFORDABLE HOUSING means a residential dwelling unit that has been granted an
affordable housing deferral that is occupied by the owner as the owner's primary residence for at least seven (7)
The Code
months of each calendar year.
PERMIT OFFICIAL means the Town Planner and Codes Administrator.
PLANNING OFFICER means the Town Planner and Codes Administrator.
PUBLIC FACILITIES means public works, improvements, and facilities, including government facilities,
bridges,
streets and roads, parks and recreational facilities, police and fire stations or substations and storm drainage
facilities required in whole or in part to accommodate new construction or development.
PUBLIC FACILITIES EXPENDITURES means funds or resources appropriated or dedicated in connection with
the planning, design, engineering, and construction of public facilities; planning, legal, appraisal, and other costs
related to the acquisition of land, financing, and development costs, the costs of compliance with purchasing
procedures and applicable administrative and legal requirements, and all other necessary or incidental costs to
provide the public facility.
RATE the rate or rates used to calculate development impact fees for non residential new development set forth in
Appendix "A."
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT means any new development for residential use.
RESIDENTIAL USE means existing or proposed dwelling units, including, but not limited to, single family, multi
family, duplex, manufactured, or modular homes, and apartments, including second floor apartments.
SITE RELATED IMPROVEMENT means off site capital improvements or facilities made necessary by new
development, including, but not limited to, hiking/ biking paths, sidewalks, roadway construction, upgrades or
improvements, and traffic control devices or measures.
ZONING CERTIFICATE means a permit for the use or occupancy of a structure where a building permit is not
required but the development of the structure will produce additional dwelling units or will increase non
residential
floor area.
(Ordinance 482 effective 5/17/2005)
SECTION 29.2. PURPOSE OF ARTICLE.
The purpose of this Article is to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the Town by:
Establishing uniform procedures for the imposition, calculation, collection, expenditure, and administration of
development impact fees imposed on new development;
Requiring all new residential and non residential development to contribute its fair and proportionate share
towards
the costs of capital improvements reasonably necessitated by such new development;
Providing a means of financing public facilities needed to accommodate new development in a safe and timely
manner;
Ensuring that the new development paying development impact fees reasonably benefits from the appropriation of
impact fees to fund public facilities provided to accommodate such new development;
Implementing the Town’s Comprehensive Plan and capital budget by seeking to ensure that adequate public
facilities are available in a timely and well planned manner; and,
Ensuring that all applicable legal standards and criteria are properly incorporated in these procedures.
The Code
(Ordinance 482 effective 5/17/2005)
29.3. EFFECT ON PROVISIONS OF THE TOWN CODE.
29.3.1. Construction. This Article may not be construed to alter, amend, or modify any provision of Article 6
(Building Code), Article 25 (Subdivision Regulations), or Article 28 (Zoning) of this Code. The provisions of those
Articles shall be operative and remain in full force and effect notwithstanding any contrary provisions, definitions,
or intentions that are or may be expressed or implied in this Article. The parts and sub parts of this Article are
intended to be severable. If a court should determine by a valid and final judgment that any part of this ordinance, or
the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is unconstitutional, illegal, or void for any reason, then,
notwithstanding that determination, the remaining provisions hereof and the application thereof to all other persons
and circumstances shall remain in full force and effect.
29.3.2. Compliance with other laws. Payment of development impact fees shall not entitle the applicant to a
building permit or zoning certificate unless all other applicable Federal, State, and Town statutes, ordinances, and
regulations concerning land use, zoning, planning, adequate public facilities, forest conservation, critical area,
sewage disposal, platting, subdivision, and other laws, requirements, standards, and conditions have been met, and
all applicable permit requirements have been fulfilled. All of the foregoing prerequisites are independent of and in
addition to the requirement for payment of a development impact fee.
29.3.3. Effect on land use and development regulations. This Article, including the specific development impact
fee ordinances for particular public facilities, shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use of property, density
or intensity of development, design and improvement standards, or other applicable standards or requirements of
land development regulations of the Town.
(Ordinance 482 effective 5/17/2005)
SECTION 29.4. APPLICABILITY OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES.
29.4.1. Affected area. This Article shall apply to all new development within the Town.
29.4.2. Type of development affected. Except as specifically exempt by the provisions of this Article, this Article
shall apply to all new development.
29.4.3. Types of development not affected. No development impact fee shall be imposed upon:
(1) development for which a building permit or zoning certificate has been issued prior to the effective date
of this Article;
(2) any new residential development that does not add a new dwelling unit; nor shall a development impact
fee be imposed for alteration, expansion, or replacement of an existing dwelling unit where no additional
dwelling unit is created;
(3) the alteration or change of use of existing non residential structures where there is no increase in the
non residential floor area;
(4) developments that are the subject of a valid development rights and responsibilities agreement or other
agreement to which the Town is a party that contains provisions in conflict with this Article, but only to
the extent of the conflict or inconsistency;
(5) farm structures, defined as any building or structure used exclusively for agricultural purposes; and
(6) the development of public facilities by the State of Maryland, Talbot County, the Town, or the federal
government.
(Ordinance 482 effective 5/17/2005)
The Code
SECTION 29.5. AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
29.5.1 Affordable housing reserve. The Council shall, as part of the annual budget process, establish an
affordable housing reserve in the general fund to be used to defer impact fees otherwise payable on development and
construction of affordable housing. In any budget year, the total amount of impact fees deferred for affordable
housing shall not exceed the affordable housing reserve.
29.5.2. Deferral of development impact fees. Development impact fees shall be deferred on residential dwelling
units that qualify as affordable housing under this Article, provided all of the following conditions are met.
(a) Funds are available in the affordable housing reserve;
(b) The record title holder files a written request for deferral before the issuance of a building permit;
(c) The record title holders, on behalf of themselves and subsequent purchasers, agree to pay the
amount of any deferral in full, except for amounts that are forgiven pursuant to Section 29.5.4;
(d) The deferred development impact fee is paid when the residential dwelling unit is sold,
transferred, or conveyed, except that the deferral may be continued and transferred to the initial purchaser
if:
(1) the record title holder does not occupy or let the newly constructed residential dwelling unit prior to
sale to the initial purchaser; and,
(2) the initial purchaser agrees to pay the deferred development impact fee in full, except for amounts that
are forgiven pursuant to Section 29.5.4, when the residential dwelling unit is sold, transferred, or conveyed.
(e) The property owner shall execute an agreement in a form prepared by the Town Attorney to repay
any balance due on deferred impact fees, which agreement shall be recorded at the property owner’s
expense in the Land Records of Talbot County.
29.5.3. Records of deferrals. The Town shall maintain a record for the subject property containing:
(1) the amount of deferral;
(2) the tax map and parcel number; and,
(3) the record title holder's and initial purchaser's name and address.
29.5.4. Forgiveness of deferrals. Deferrals for owner occupied affordable housing shall be forgiven at the rate of
15% of the original amount per year, pro rated for each portion of any 365 day period of occupancy.
29.5.5. Limitations of deferrals. No more than ten percent (10%) of the budgeted affordable housing reserve may
be granted to any single applicant in any fiscal year. No more than twenty percent (20%) of the units in any
subdivision or any phase thereof shall qualify for deferral of impact fees under this Article.
29.5.6. Termination of deferrals. Deferred impact fees for affordable housing terminate, and except to the extent
that owner occupied affordable housing deferrals have been forgiven, deferred impact fees are due and payable
immediately when the residential dwelling unit is sold, transferred, or conveyed.
29.5.7. Accounting for deferred amounts. The Finance Officer shall transfer the amount of deferred impact fees
from the general fund affordable housing reserve to the appropriate impact fee categories in accordance with the
provisions of Section 29.10 of this Article. When deferred impact fees are collected under Section 29.5.6 above, the
funds shall be deposited into the general fund.
29.5.8. Notification to Finance Office. If the Permit Official determines that the proposed development qualifies
The Code
for a public housing, a non profit housing exemption, or an affordable housing deferral, he or she shall:
(1) Notify the Finance Officer of the total amount of the impact fee that would be imposed on the new
development absent the exemption, deferral, or reduction;
(2) That the exemption, deferral, or reduction has been approved;
(3) The amount by which the development impact fee has been exempted, deferred, or reduced; and
(4) That a funding source other than development impact fees or other development exactions shall be
used to fund the appropriate development impact fee account in the amount exempted, deferred, or reduced.
29.5.9. Effect of deferral, or reduction. If the Permit Official grants a deferral or reduction of development
impact fees otherwise due, the Finance Officer shall transmit funds equal in amount to those deferred or reduced
from a source other than impact fees into the appropriate development impact fee account no later than the
beginning of the fiscal year following the calendar year in which the exemption or deferral was granted.
29.5.10. Administrative procedures and guidelines. The Town Council, by resolution, may adopt administrative
procedures and guidelines to implement the affordable housing impact fee deferral programs.
(Ordinance 482 effective 5/17/2005)
29.6. ANNUAL REVIEW AND ADJUSTMENTS.
29.6.1. Annual review. On or before January 31, of each year after adoption of this Article, and prior to Town
Council adoption of the Annual Budget and Capital Improvement Plan , the Mayor shall coordinate the preparation
and submission of an annual report to the Town Council on the subject of Development Impact Fees.
29.6.2. Contents of annual report. The annual report may include any or all of the following:
(1) Recommendations for amendments, if appropriate, to these procedures or to specific ordinances
adopting development impact fees for particular public facilities;
(2) Proposed changes to the Town’s Capital Improvement Plan , including the identification of additional
public facility projects anticipated to be funded wholly or partially with development impact fees;
(3) Proposed changes to development impact fee schedules as set forth in the ordinances imposing and
setting development impact fees for particular public facilities;
(4) Proposed changes to any development impact fee calculation methodology; and
(5) Any other data, analysis, or recommendations as the Mayor may deem appropriate, or as the Town
Council may request.
29.6.3. Annual inflation adjustment. On July 1 of each year after adoption of this Article, the amount of any
development impact fee shall be automatically adjusted to account for inflationary increases in the cost of providing
public facilities utilizing the most recent 20 city annual national average data from the Engineering News Record
Construction Cost Index. If this index is unavailable, the Town Engineer shall designate a substitute index. The
adjustments shall apply to all permits issued on or after July 1 of each year. The Finance Officer shall make the
automatic annual adjustment unless the Town Council has determined an alternate adjustment in their Annual
Review.
29.6.4. Waiver of inflation adjustment. Nothing herein shall prevent the Town Council from electing to retain
existing development impact fees or from electing to waive the inflation adjustment for any given fiscal year.
(Ordinance 482 effective 5/17/2005)
The Code
SECTION 29.7. IMPOSITION AND ENFORCEMENT OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT
FEES.
29.7.1. In general. The Town shall not issue a building permit or zoning certificate for new development until the
development impact fees required under this Article have been calculated and paid. The amount of the development
impact fee is the amount of the fee in effect on the date of issuance of the building permit or zoning certificate.
29.7.2. Lien. If new development is undertaken without payment of all applicable development impact fees, the
development impact fees shall:
(1) Be a lien against the site of development.
(2) Be levied, collected, and enforced in the same manner as real property taxes imposed by the Town; and
(3) Have the same priority and bear the same interest and penalties as real property taxes.
29.7.3. Payment. If real property on which a development impact fee is due and unpaid is sold, in the absence of
an agreement to the contrary between the contract seller and the contract purchaser, the seller shall pay the
development impact fee prior to or at settlement.
29.7.4. Actions to recover. If a development impact fee is not paid as required by this Article, the Town Attorney
may institute an action to recover the fee and enjoin any further construction and all use of the property until the fee
is paid. Any persons who fail to pay a development impact fee as required by this Article shall be responsible for
payment of enforcement costs, including court costs, litigation expenses, and reasonable attorney's fees.
(Ordinance 482 effective 5/17/2005)
SECTION 29.8. CALCULATION OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES FEE SCHEDULE.
29.8.1 In general. At the time of application for a building permit or zoning certificate. The Permit Official shall
calculate development impact fees and the applicant shall pay the same to the Town prior to the issuance of a
building permit or zoning certificate.
29.8.2. Rate for mixed-use developments. Impact fees due from a mixed use development shall be based upon the
development impact fee for each public facility generated by each land use type in the mixed use development. The
Permit Official shall determine the area, number of units, type of use, and other criteria necessary to calculate the
development impact fee based on uses, sizes, and configuration shown on the building plans.
29.8.3. Rates for other uses. For proposed new development for which no specific land use type is listed in this
Article, the Permit Official shall apply the land use type as defined in the Institute of Traffic Engineers Trip
Generation Manual (1997 ed.) that is most similar to the proposed new development in terms of impact on public
facilities, based on the predominant characteristics of the proposed new development.
29.8.4. Calculation of fee. Upon receipt of an application for a building permit or zoning certificate, the Permit
Official shall determine the development impact fee based on the following standards:
(a) Whether the proposed new development constitutes a residential or non residential use.
(b) The specific type of residential or non residential development, if applicable;
(c) If residential, the number of new dwelling units;
(d) If non residential, the number of additional square feet of floor area (rounded up to the nearest square
foot) and the proposed use; and,
(e) The calculation of development impact fees due from a phased new development shall be based upon
The Code
the development impact fees due for each specific land use within the phase of development for which
building permits or zoning certificates are requested.
(f) The calculation of development impact fees for non residential development shall utilize graduated
rates for square feet of total floor area within each separate size classification shown on Appendix "A". For
mixed use developments, total non residential floor area within each size and use category shall be
aggregated for each phase of development. The total amount of non residential floor area from each phase
of development shall be added, cumulatively, to determine the graduated rate(s) for successive phases.
After making these determinations, the Permit Official shall calculate the applicable development impact fee by
multiplying the number of new dwelling units or new floor area, by the amount of the applicable development
impact fee per unit of development, and incorporating any applicable credit made pursuant to Section 29.9.
(Ordinance 482 effective 5/17/2005)
SECTION 29.9. DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE CREDITS
29.9.1. Applicability. The Planning Officer shall grant a credit against any development impact fee imposed by
this Article upon any new development where the applicant has negotiated and entered into a credit agreement with
the Town to dedicate land or construct capital improvements that:
(1) Are consistent with, add to, or complement the Town 's Capital Improvement Plan ;
(2) Are funded by development impact fee revenue;
(3) Are of the same category of public facility impacted by the proposed new development; and
(4) Will be constructed or dedicated in accordance with a schedule set forth in the Capital
Improvement Plan or credit agreement.
(5) No credit shall exceed development impact fees imposed by this Article for the proposed new
development.
29.9.2. Procedure. The determination of the credit shall be undertaken through the submission of a proposed credit
agreement to the Planning Officer, which shall include the following:
(1) A proposal to dedicate specific capital assets or to construct specific capital improvements that will be
dedicated or constructed in lieu of the required development impact fee, and the time by which the capital
assets will be dedicated or the capital improvements will be constructed; and
(2) The fair market value of the assets to be dedicated, supported by independent appraisal(s), and the
projected costs for the suggested capital improvements, which shall be based on local information for
similar capital improvements, along with a construction timetable for the completion thereof. Such
estimated costs shall include the cost of construction, labor and materials, lands, easements and rights,
surveys, plans and specifications, engineering and legal services, and all other expenses necessary or
incident to such construction.
(3) The proposed plan and cost estimates shall be prepared by a person or persons qualified in the
provision of the particular capital improvement, impact analysis, and economics.
29.9.3. Initial determination. Within sixty (60) working days of the submission of the proposed credit agreement,
the Planning Officer shall determine if the proposed agreement is complete. If it is determined that the proposed
credit agreement is not complete, the Planning Officer shall send a written statement to the applicant outlining the
deficiencies and no further action shall be taken until all deficiencies have been corrected.
29.9.4. Review by Town staff. Once the Planning Officer determines the proposed credit agreement is complete,
The Code
within sixty (60) working days, the Planning Officer shall recommend approval of the agreement if the Planning
Officer, with concurrence of the Town Engineer, determines that the proposed capital improvements are consistent
with, add to, or complement the Town 's Capital Improvement Plan as it applies to the specific category of capital
improvement, and the value of the assets to be dedicated or the construction costs of the suggested capital
improvements equals or exceeds the amount of development impact fees otherwise payable. If, within this time
period, the Planning Officer or the Town Engineer determine that either the suggested capital improvements are not
consistent with, do not add to, or do not complement the Town 's Capital Improvement Plan , or that the proposed
dedication, appraisal(s), construction costs, or schedule are not consistent with the requirements of this Article or are
otherwise unacceptable, the Planning Officer, with the concurrence of the Town Engineer, shall propose changes to
the agreement, construction, costs or schedule that are consistent with this Article and the Town 's Capital
Improvement Plan .
29.9.5. Approval By Town Council. If the Planning Officer, with the concurrence of the Town Engineer,
recommends approval of the proposed credit agreement, or if the changes proposed by the Planning Officer with the
concurrence of the Town Engineer are acceptable to the applicant, the credit agreement shall be prepared and
forwarded to the Town Council for final review and consideration. The Town Council may approve, by resolution
disapprove, or modify the proposed credit agreement, in whole or in part, and may make any decision or
determination that, in its judgment, may be necessary or prudent to protect the public interest or promote the
purposes of this Article.
29.9.6. Payment of fees after execution of credit agreement. Upon execution of the credit agreement, the balance
of development impact fees due, if any, shall be paid in accordance with this Article, and title to any land dedicated
shall be conveyed to the Town pursuant to the credit agreement.
29.9.7. Conveyance of property. If the credit agreement requires dedication of assets other than land, the applicant
shall execute such deeds, leases, easements, and other instruments in a form satisfactory to the Town Attorney as
may be necessary to convey the same to the Town for public purposes no later than the time the development
impact fees would otherwise be due.
29.9.8. Timing of conveyance. Any land awarded credit under this section shall be conveyed no later than the time
at which development impact fees are required to be paid. The portion of the development impact fee represented by
a credit for construction shall be deemed paid when the construction is completed and accepted by the Town for
maintenance or when adequate security for the completion of the construction has been provided.
29.9.9. Bond and surety. The credit agreement shall include a payment and performance bond, surety, or other
acceptable assurance that the project will be completed as proposed and that all payments required to be made by the
applicant will be paid in full and on time in accordance with the credit agreement and construction contract
documents. The bond, surety, or other assurance shall be in a form and amount acceptable to the Town Engineer
and Town Attorney.
(Ordinance 482 effective 5/17/2005)
SECTION 29.10. ADMINISTRATION OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES.
29.10.1. Collection. The Permit Official shall collect all applicable development impact fees at or before the time
of issuance of a Town or municipal building permit or zoning certificate unless:
(1) The applicant is determined to be entitled to a full or partial credit, pursuant to Section 29.9 of this
Article;
(2) The applicant has been granted a deferral of the impact fee pursuant to Section 29.5;
(4) The applicant has been determined to be not subject to the payment of a development impact fee; or
(5) The applicant has filed an appeal and has posted with the Town a letter of credit or other surety
acceptable to the Permit Official in the amount of the development impact fee, as calculated by the Permit
The Code
Official, in a form approved by the Town Attorney.
29.10.2. Accounting for development impact fees. The person required to pay development impact fees shall
provide the Permit Official a statement of the amount of development impact fees required under this Article for
each type of land use and each category of public facility.
29.10.3. Development impact fee accounts. The Finance Officer shall establish a development impact fee account
for each category of public facilities for which development impact fees are imposed. Such account shall clearly
identify the category, account, or fund for which the development impact fee has been imposed. All development
impact fees collected by the Town shall be deposited in the appropriate development impact fee account, which
shall be interest bearing. All interest earned on funds deposited to such account shall be credited to and considered
funds of the account. The funds of each such account shall be capable of being accounted for separately from all
other Town funds, over time. The Finance Officer shall establish and implement necessary accounting controls to
ensure that the development impact fee funds are properly deposited, accounted for, and appropriated in accordance
with this Article, and any other applicable legal requirements.
(Ordinance 482 effective 5/17/2005)
29.11. APPROPRIATION OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES.
29.11.1. In general. Development impact fee funds may be appropriated for public facilities, for public facilities
expenditures, and for the payment of principal, interest, and other financing costs on contracts, bonds, notes, or other
obligations issued by or on behalf of the Town or other applicable governmental entities to finance such public
facilities and public facility expenditures. All appropriations from development impact fee accounts shall be detailed
in a budget adopted by the Town Council.
29.11.2. Restrictions on appropriations. Development impact fees shall be appropriated only:
(1) For the particular category of public facilities for which they were imposed, calculated, and
collected. Development impact fees shall not be appropriated for funding any expenditure that would be
classified in an accounting as a maintenance or repair expense or for operational or personnel expenses
associated with the provision of a public facility; and,
(2) Within six (6) years of the beginning of the fiscal year immediately succeeding the date of
collection, unless the development impact fee funds will be appropriated in accordance with Section
29.11.3.
29.11.3. Appropriation of development impact fee funds beyond six (6) years of collection. Notwithstanding
Section 29.11.2, development impact fee funds may be appropriated beyond six (6) years from the beginning of the
fiscal year immediately succeeding the date of collection if, prior to the expiration of that time period, the Council
finds:
(1) The demand for the public facility is generated in whole or in part by the new development,
(2) The public facility will actually serve the new development, and
(3) (a) The Capital Improvement Plan prepared by the Town for the particular category of public facility has
used a longer time frame; or
(b) The public facility or capital improvement requires more than six (6) years to plan,
design, fund and construct
(Ordinance 482 effective 5/17/2005)
SECTION 29.12. REFUND OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES.
29.12.1. Expiration or revocation of building permit or zoning certificate. An applicant who has paid a
development impact fee for a new development for which the necessary building permit or zoning certificate has
The Code
expired or for which the building permit or zoning certificate has been revoked prior to construction shall be eligible
to apply for a refund of development impact fees.
29.12.2 Failure of Town to use or appropriate development impact fee funds within time limit. The current
property owner may apply for a refund of development impact fees paid by an applicant if the Town has failed to
use or appropriate the development impact fees collected from the applicant within the time limits established in
Section 29.11.2 unless such funds are used or appropriated in accordance with Section 29.11.3 of this Article.
29.12.3. Abandonment of development after initiation of construction. An applicant who has paid a
development impact fee for a new development for which a building permit or zoning certificate has been issued and
pursuant to which construction has been initiated, but which construction is abandoned prior to completion and
issuance of a certificate of occupancy, shall not be eligible for a refund unless the uncompleted building is
completely demolished.
29.12.4. Administrative fee. An administrative fee of 2%, not to exceed $500, shall be deducted from the amount
of any refund granted and shall be retained by the Town to defray the administrative expenses associated with the
processing of a refund application.
29.12.5. Refund application procedures.
(1) Applications for a refund shall be made in writing and shall include specific amounts claimed
from particular development impact fee categories and all other information required below.
(2) Upon receipt of a complete application for a refund, the Permit Official shall review the
application and documentary evidence submitted by the Applicant as well as such other information as the
Permit Official may request, and shall make a written determination whether a refund is due.
(3) Following an affirmative determination, the Permit Official shall notify the Finance Officer, who
shall issue a refund from the appropriate development impact fee account. In calculating the amount of a
refund, the Permit Official and Finance Officer shall not include any interest.
(4) Applications for refunds due to abandonment of a new development prior to completion or due to
expiration or revocation of a building permit or zoning certificate shall be made within sixty (60) days
following expiration or revocation of the building permit or zoning certificate. The applicant shall submit:
(a) Evidence of the amount of the development impact fees paid by public facilities category
and receipts evidencing such payments; and
(b) Documentation evidencing the expiration or revocation of the building permit or zoning
certificate prior to construction.
(c) Documentation evidencing compliance with the requirements of Section 29.12.3 of this
Article, if applicable.
(5) Applications for refunds due to the failure of the Town to appropriate, expend, or encumber
development impact fees within the time limits established in Section 29.7 of this Article shall be made by
the current property owner(s) in writing and shall be made within one hundred eighty (180) days of the
expiration of such time limit. If a portion of the impact fees collected have been appropriated, expended, or
encumbered before the date of application, any refund to eligible property owners shall be distributed on a
pro rata basis. The refund applicant shall submit:
(a) Evidence that the refund applicant is the property owner or the authorized agent of the
property owner;
(b) The amount of the development impact fees paid by public facility category and receipts
evidencing such payments; and
The Code
(c) Documentation of the Town 's failure to appropriate, expend, or encumber development
impact fee funds for relevant public facilities within the time limits established in Section
29.11 of this Article.
29.12.6. Forfeiture of refund. Failure to apply for a refund within the deadlines set forth in this section shall
constitute a forfeiture of any fees available for refund to the property owner or applicant.
29.12.7. Method of refund payment. The Town may, at its option, make refunds of development impact fees by
direct payment, by offsetting such refunds against other development impact fees due from the applicant or property
owner for the same category of public facilities for new development on the same property, or by other means
subject to agreement with the applicant or property owner.
(Ordinance 482 effective 5/17/2005)
29.13. AMOUNT OF IMPACT FEES.
Residential and non residential development impact fees shall be paid as required by this Article in the amounts set
forth in the schedule attached as Exhibit “A”. The Council may amend the schedule of fees from time to time by
ordinance. (Ordinance 482 effective 5/17/2005)
The Code
CHAPTER 31 FOREST CONSERVATION
Editor's Note. - The Forest Conservation Ordinance, and all amendments thereto, are incorporated into this
volume by reference as if fully set out herein. Copies are on file in the office of the town clerk, where they may be
examined between the hours of 8:30 A.M. and 4:00 P.M., Monday through Friday, except on holidays.
(Ordinance 239 effective 2/8/1993 and Ordinance 445 effective 6/17/2002 , historical reference 231)
Appendix A
APPENDIX A
Editor's Note - This Appendix sets out the powers enumerated in Article 23B, Section 22 of the Maryland
Municipal Corporations Charter Act.
(1) General powers. -- The council shall have the power to pass all such ordinances not contrary to the Constitution and
laws of the State of Maryland or this charter as it may deem necessary for the good government of the town; for the
protection and preservation of the town's property, rights, and privileges; for the preservation of peace and good order;
for securing persons and property form violence, danger, or destruction; and for the protection and promotion of the
health, safety, comfort, convenience, welfare, and happiness of the residents of the town and visitors thereto and
sojourners therein.
(2) Specific powers. -- The council shall have, in addition, the power to pass ordinances not contrary to the laws and
Constitution of this State, for the following specific purposes.
(3) Advertising. -- To provide for advertising for the purposes of the town, for printing and publishing statements as to
the business of the town.
(4) Aisles. -- To regulate and prevent the obstruction of aisles in public halls, churches and places of amusement, and to
regulate the construction and operation of the doors and means of egress therefrom.
(5) Amusements. -- To provide in the interest of the public welfare for licensing, regulating, or restraining theatrical or
other public amusements.
(6) Appropriations. -- To appropriate municipal monies for any purpose within the powers of the council.
(7) Auctioneers. -- To regulate the sale of all kinds of property at auction within the town and to license auctioneers.
(8) Band. -- To establish a municipal band, symphony orchestra or other musical organization, and to regulate by
ordinance the conduct and policies thereof.
(9) Billboards. -- To license, tax and regulate, restrain or prohibit the erection or maintenance of billboards within the
city, the placing of signs, bills and posters of every kind and description on any building, fence, post, billboard, pole, or
other place within the town.
(10) Bridges. -- To erect and maintain bridges.
(11) Buildings. -- To make reasonable regulations in regard to buildings and signs to be erected, constructed, or
reconstructed in the town, and to grant building permits for the same; to formulate a building code and a plumbing code
and to appoint a building inspector and a plumbing inspector, and to require reasonable charges for permits and
inspections; to authorize and require the inspection of all buildings and structures and to authorize the condemnation
thereof in whole or in part when dangerous or insecure, and to require that such buildings and structures be made safe or
be taken down.
(12) Cemeteries. -- To regulate or prohibit the interment of bodies within the municipality and to regulate cemeteries.
(13) Codification. -- To provide for the codification of all ordinances which have been or may hereafter be passed.
(14) Community services. -- To provide, maintain and operate community and social services for the preservation and
promotion of the health, recreation, welfare, and enlightenment of the inhabitants of the town.
(15) Cooperative activities. -- To make agreements with other municipalities, counties, districts, bureaus, commissions,
and governmental authorities for the joint performance of or for cooperation in the performance of any governmental
functions.
(16) Curfew. -- to prohibit the youth of the town from being in the streets, lanes, alleys, or public places at unreasonable
hours of the night.
(17) Dangerous conditions. -- To compel persons about to undertake dangerous improvements to execute bonds with
sufficient sureties conditioned that the owner or contractor will pay all damages resulting from such work which may be
sustained by any persons or property.
Appendix A
(18) Departments. -- To create, change, and abolish offices, departments, or agencies, other than the offices, departments,
and agencies established by this charter; to assign additional functions or duties to offices, departments, or agencies
established by this charter, but not including the power to discontinue or assign to any other office, department, or
agency any function or duty assigned by this charter to a particular office, department, or agency.
(19) Disorderly houses. -- To suppress bawdy houses, disorderly houses and houses of ill fame.
(20) Dogs. -- To regulate the keeping of dogs in the town and to provide, wherever the county does not license or tax
dogs, for the licensing and taxing of the same; to provide for the disposition of homeless dogs and dogs on which no
license fee or taxes are paid.
(21) Elevators. -- To require the inspection and licensing of elevators and to prohibit their use when unsafe or dangerous
or without a license.
(22) Explosives. -- To regulate or prevent the storage of gunpowder, oil, or any other explosive or combustible matter; to
regulate or prevent the use of firearms, fireworks, bonfires, explosives, or any other similar things which may endanger
persons or property.
(23) Filth. -- To compel the occupant of any premises, building or outhouse situated in the town, when the same has
become filthy or unwholesome, to abate or cleanse the condition; and after reasonable notice to the owners or occupants
to authorize such work to be done by the proper officers and to assess the expense thereof against such property, making
it collectible by taxes or against the occupant or occupants.
(24) Finances. -- To levy, assess, and collect ad valorem property taxes; to expend municipal funds for any public
purpose; to haver general management and control of the finances of the town.
(25) Fire. -- To suppress fires and prevent the dangers thereof and to establish and maintain a fire department; to
contribute funds to volunteer fire companies serving the town; to inspect buildings for the purpose of reducing fire
hazards, to issue regulations concerning fire hazards, and to forbid and prohibit the use of fire-hazardous buildings and
structures permanently or until the conditions of town fire-hazard regulations are met; to install and maintain fire plugs
where and as necessary, and to regulate their use; and to take all other measures necessary to control and prevent fires in
the town.
(26) Food. -- To inspect and to require the condemnation of, if unwholesome, and to regulate the sale of, any food
products.
(27) Franchises. -- To grant and regulate franchises to water companies, electric light companies, gas companies,
telegraph and telephone companies, transit companies, taxicab companies, and any others which may be deemed
advantageous and beneficial to the town, subject, however, to the limitations and provisions of Article 23 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland. No franchise shall be granted for a longer period than fifty years.
(28) Gambling. -- To restrain and prohibit gambling.
(29) Garbage. -- To prevent the deposit of any unwholesome substance wither on private or public property, and to
compel its removal to designated points; to require slops, garbage, ashes and other waste or other unwholesome materials
to be removed to designated points, or to require the occupants of the premises to place them conveniently for removal.
(30) Grants-in-aid. -- To accept gifts and grants of federal or of State funds from the federal or State governments or any
agency thereof, and to expend the same for any lawful public purpose agreeably to the conditions under which the gifts
or grants were made.
(31) Hawkers. -- To license, tax, regulate, suppress and prohibit hawkers and itinerant dealers, pawnbrokers and all other
persons selling any articles on the streets of the town, and to revoke such licenses for cause.
(32) Health. -- To protect and preserve the health of the town and its inhabitants; to appoint a public health officer, and to
define and regulate his powers and duties; to prevent the introduction of contagious diseases into the town; to establish
quarantine regulations, and to authorize the removal and confinement of persons having contagious or infectious
diseases; to prevent and remove all nuisances; to inspect, regulate, and abate any buildings, structures, or places which
cause or may cause unsanitary conditions or conditions detrimental to health; provided, that nothing herein shall be
construed to affect in any manner any of the powers and duties of the State Board of Health, the county board of health,
or any public general or local law relating to the subject of health.
Appendix A
(33) House numbers. -- To regulate the numbering of houses and lots and to compel owners to renumber the same or in
default thereof to authorize and require the same to be done by the town at the owner's expense, such expense to
constitute a lien upon the property collectible as tax monies.
(34) Jail. -- To establish and regulate a station house or lock-up for temporary confinement or violators of the laws and
ordinances of the town or to use the county jail for such purpose.
(35) Licenses. -- Subject to any restrictions imposed by the public general laws of the State, to license and regulate all
persons beginning or conducting transient or permanent business in the town for the sale of any goods, wares,
merchandise, or services; to license and regulate any business, occupation, trade, calling, or place of amusement or
business; to establish and collect fees and charges for all licenses and permits issued under the authority of this charter.
(36) Liens. -- To provide that any valid charges, taxes or assessments made against any real property within the town
shall be liens upon such property, to be collected as municipal taxes are collected.
(37) Lights. -- To provide for the lighting of the town.
(38) Livestock. -- To regulate and prohibit the running at large of cattle, horses, swine, fowl, sheep, goats, dogs or other
animals; to authorize the impounding, keeping, sale and redemption of such animals when found in violation of the
ordinance in such cases provided.
(39) Markets. -- To obtain by lease or rent, own, construct, purchase, operate, and maintain public markets within the
town.
(40) Minor privileges. -- To regulate or prevent the use of public ways, sidewalks, and public places for signs, awnings,
posts, steps, railings, entrances, racks, posting handbills and advertisements, and display of goods, wares, and
merchandise.
(41) Noise. -- To regulate or prohibit unreasonable ringing of bells, crying of goods or sounding of whistles and horns.
(42) Nuisances. -- To prevent or abate by appropriate ordinance all nuisances in the town which are so defined at
common law, by this charter, or by the laws of the State of Maryland, whether the same be herein specifically named or
not; to regulate, to prohibit, to control the location of, or to require the removal from the town of all trading in, handling
of, or manufacture of any commodity which is or may become offensive, obnoxious, or injurious to the public comfort or
health. In this connection the town may regulate, prohibit, control the location of, or require the removal from the town
of such things as stockyards, slaughterhouses, cattle or hog pens, tanneries, and renderies. This listing is by way of
enumeration, not limitation.
(43) Obstructions. -- To remove all nuisances and obstructions from the streets, lanes and alleys and from any lots
adjoining thereto, or any other places within the limits of the town.
(44) Parking facilities. -- To license and regulate and to establish, obtain by purchase, by lease or by rent, own, construct,
operate, and maintain parking lots and other facilities for off street parking.
(45) Parking meters. -- To install parking meters on the streets and public places of the town in such places as they shall
by ordinance determine, and by ordinance to prescribe rates and provisions for the use thereof, except that the installation
of parking meters on any street road maintained by the State Roads Commission of Maryland must first be approved by
the Commission.
(46) Parks and recreation. -- To establish and maintain public parks, gardens, playgrounds, and other recreational
facilities and programs to promote the health, welfare, and enjoyment of the inhabitants of the town.
(47) Police force. -- To establish, operate, and maintain a police force. All town policemen shall, within the municipality,
have the powers and authority of constables in this State.
(48) Police powers. -- To prohibit, suppress, and punish with the town all vice, gambling, and games of chance;
prostitution and solicitation therefor and the keeping of bawdy houses and houses of ill fame; all tramps and vagrants; all
disorder disturbances, annoyances, disorderly conduct, obscenity public profanity, and drunkenness.
(49) Property. -- To acquire by conveyance, purchase or gift, real or leasable property for any public proposes; to erect
buildings and structures thereon for the benefit of the town and its inhabitants; and to convey any real or leasehold
property when o longer needed for the public use. after having given at least twenty days' public notice of the proposed
conveyance; to control, protect and maintain public buildings, grounds and property of the town.
Appendix A
(50) Quarantine. -- To establish quarantine regulations in the interests of the public health.
(51) Regulations. -- To adopt by ordinance and enforce within the corporate limits police, health, sanitary, fire, building,
plumbing, traffic, speed, parking, and other similar regulations not in conflict with the laws of the State of Maryland or
with this charter.
(52) Sidewalks. -- To regulate the use of sidewalks and all structures in, under or above the same to require the owner or
occupant of premises to keep the sidewalks in front thereof free from snow or other obstructions; to prescribe hours for
cleaning sidewalks.
(53) Sweepings. -- To regulate or prevent the throwing or depositing of sweepings, dust, ashes, offal, garbage, paper,
handbills, dirty liquids, or other unwholesome material into any public way or onto any public or private property in the
town.
(54) Taxicabs. -- To license, tax and regulate public hackmen, taxicab men, draymen, drivers, cabmen, porters and
expressmen, and all other persons pursuing like occupations.
(55) Vehicles. -- To regulate and license wagons and other vehicles not subject to the licensing powers of the State of
Maryland.
(56) Voting machines. -- To purchase, lease, borrow, install, and maintain voting machines for use in town elections.
(57) Zoning. -- To exercise the powers as to planning and zoning, conferred upon municipal corporations generally in
Article 66B of the Annotated Code of Maryland, subject however, to the limitations and provisions of said article.
(58) Saving clause. -- The enumeration of powers in this section is not to be construed as limiting the powers of the town
to the several subjects mentioned.
Appendix A
Appendix A
TOWN OF EASTON
ZONING ORDINANCE
2010 EDITION
Effective March 15, 2006 pursuant to Ordinance Number 497
Includes Amendments through Ord. 624 effective 6/24/13
CHAPTER 28
TOWN OF EASTON ZONING ORDINANCE
ARTICLE I – GENERAL
SECTION 28 – 101 TITLE 1-1
SECTION 28 – 102 LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY 1-1
SECTION 28 – 103 STATEMENT OF LEGISLATIVE INTENT 1-1
SECTION 28 – 104 JURISDICTION 1-2
SECTION 28 – 105 SEPERABILITY CLAUSE 1-2
SECTION 28 – 106 EFFECTIVE DATE AND DISPOSITION OF PENDING MATTERS 1-2
SECTION 28 – 107 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP 1-3
SECTION 28 – 108 REPLACEMENT OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP 1-4
SECTION 28 – 109 OFFICIAL CRITICAL AREA OVERLAY DISTRICT MAPS 1-4
SECTION 28 – 110 LIMITS ON THE NUMBER OF ACTIVE APPLICATIONS 1-5
SECTION 28 – 111 RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES 1-5
SECTION 28 – 112 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS 1-6
SECTION 28 – 113 INTERPRETATIONS 1-7
SECTION 28 – 114 DEFINITIONS 1-8
ARTICLE II – PERMITTED USES
SECTION 28 – 201 PERMITTED USES 2-1
ARTICLE III – SITE PLAN REVIEW
SECTION 28 – 301 SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS 3-1
28 – 301.1 PURPOSE 3-1
28 – 301.2 GENERAL 3-1
28 – 301.3 PROCEDURE 3-2
28 – 301.4 EFFECT OF SITE PLAN APPROVALS 3-7
ARTICLE IV – ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
SECTION 28 – 401 A-1 – AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT 4-1
28 – 401.1 PURPOSE 4-1
28 – 401.2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 4-1
SECTION 28 – 402 R-7A – RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 4-2
28 – 402.1 PURPOSE 4-2
28 – 402.2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 4-2
SECTION 28 – 403 R-10A – RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 4-3
28 – 403.1 PURPOSE 4-3
28 – 403.2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 4-3
SECTION 28 – 404 R-10M – RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 4-5
28 – 404.1 PURPOSE 4-5
28 – 404.2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 4-5
SECTION 28 – 405 CR – CENTRAL BUSINESS COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 4-6
28 – 405.1 PURPOSE 4-6
28 – 405.2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 4-6
SECTION 28 – 406 CG – GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 4-8
28 – 406.1 PURPOSE 4-8
28 – 406.2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 4-8
SECTION 28 – 407 CL – LIMITED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 4-9
28 – 407.1 PURPOSE 4-9
28 – 407.2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 4-10
SECTION 28 – 408 BC – BUSINESS COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 4-11
28 – 408.1 PURPOSE 4-11
28 – 408.2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 4-11
SECTION 28 – 409 I – INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 4-13
28 – 409.1 PURPOSE 4-13
28 – 409.2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 4-13
SECTION 28 – 410 I-1 – SELECT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 4-14
28 – 410.1 PURPOSE 4-14
28 – 410.2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 4-14
SECTION 28-411 I-2 – GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 4-16
28-411.1 PURPOSE 4-16
28-411.2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 4-16
SECTION 28-412 G/I – GOVERNMENTAL/INSTITUITIONAL DISTRICT 4-17
28-412.1 PURPOSE 4-17
28-412.2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 4-17
SECTION 28-413 RH – REGIONAL HEALTHCARE DISTRICT 4-18
28-413.1 PURPOSE; CRITERIA FOR ESTABLISHMENT 4-18
28-413.2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 4-19
28-413.3 PERMITTED USES 4-23
28-413.4 ANCILLARY USES 4-26
28-413.5 TEMPORARY USES 4-27
28-413.6 PROHIBITED USES 4-27
28-413.7 ADDIONTAL REQUIREMENTS; PROCESSES 4-28
SECTION 28-414 MIXED-USE WATERFRONT DISTRICT (MXW) 4-29
28-414.1 PURPOSE 4-29
28-414.2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 4-34
28-414.3 PERMITTED USES 4-34
28-414.4 PROHIBITED USES 4-40
28-414.5 SITE PLANNING STANDARDS 4-40
28-414.6 ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS 4-45
28-414.7 LANDSCAPING AND LANDSCAPING FEATURES 4-49
28-414.8 BUILDING INFRASTRUCTURE 4-49
28-414.9 REFUSE, SOLID WASTER AND RECYCLING STORAGE 4-49
28-414.10 RESTURAUNT SEATING 4-49
28-414.11 SIGNAGE STANDARDS 4-50
28-414.12 OPERATING STANDARDS 4-51
ARTICLE V – CRITICAL AREA 5-1
SECTION 28-501 CHESAPEAKE BAY CRITICAL AREA OVERLAY DISTRICT 5-1
28-501.1 CHESAPEAKE BAY CRITICAL AREA OVERLAY DISTRICT 5-1
28-501.2 IMPLEMENTATION OF CRITICAL AREA ORDINANCE PURPOSE AND GOALS 5-1
28-501.3 INTENSELY DEVELOPED AREA 5-3
28-501.4 LIMITED DEVELOPMENT AREAS 5-4
28-501.5 RESOURCE CONSERVATION AREAS 5-8
28-501.6 LAND USE AND DENSITY 5-9
28-501.7 SUPPLEMENTAL USE STANDARDS 5-11
28-501.8 GROWTH ALLOCATION 5-20
28-501.9 GRANDFATHERING 5-24
28-501.10 VARIANCES 5-25
28-501.11 LOT CONSOLIDATION AND RECONFIGURATION 5-25
28-501.12 AMENDMENTS 5-26
28-501.13 ENFORCEMENT 5-27
28-501.14 THE 100-FOOT BUFFER 5-31
28-501.15 BUFFER MANAGEMENT AREA (BMA) PROVISIONS 5-36
28-501.16 OTHER HABITAT PROTECTION AREAS 5-39
APPENDIX A SUMMARY OF NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS – CRITICAL AREA COMMISSION 5-41
ARTICLE VI – PLANNED REDEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT
SECTION 28 – 601 PLANNED REDEVELOPMENT (PR) OVERLAY DISTRICT 6-1
ARTICLE VII – HISTORIC DISTRICT
SECTION 28 – 701 HISTORIC DISTRICT 7-1
ARTICLE VII – PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
SECTION 28 – 801 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (“PUD”) 8-1
ARTICLE IX – PLANNED HEALTHCARE DISTRICT
SECTION 28 – 901 PLANNED HEALTHCARE DISTRICT (“HC”) 9-1
ARTICLE X – SUPPLEMENTAL ZONE REGULATIONS
SECTION 28-1001 OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS 10-1
28 – 1001.1 PURPOSE 10-1
28 – 1001.2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 10-1
28 – 1001.3 PARKING REQUIREMENTS 10-2
28 – 1001.4 JOINT USE – OFF-SITE FACILITIES 10-8
28 – 1001.5 HANDICAP PARKING 10-9
SECTION 28 – 1002 OFF-STREET LOADING 10-9
28 – 1002.1 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 10-9
SECTION 28 – 1003 STRUCTURES PERMITTED ABOVE HEIGHT LIMIT 10-10
SECTION 28 – 1004 FRONT YARD ADJUSTMENTS 10-10
SECTION 28 – 1005 CORNER LOT RESTRICTIONS 10-10
SECTION 28 – 1006 OTHER EXCEPTIONS TO SETBACK REQUIREMENTS 10-10
SECTION 28 – 1007 SUPPLEMENTAL USE STANDARDS 10-12
28- 1007.1 RESIDENTIAL USES 10-12
28 – 1007.2 COMMERCIAL USES 10-25
28 – 1007.3 INDUSTRIAL USES 10-46
28 – 1007.4 MISCELLANEOUS USES 10-49
SECTION 28 – 1008 VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS 10-55
28 – 1008.1 PURPOSES 10-55
28 – 1008.2 STANDARDS 10-55
SECTION 28 – 1009 SETBACKS FROM MAJOR ROADS 10-56
SECTION 28 – 1010 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS GOVERNING THE PROVISION AND 10-56
APPROVAL OF COMMON USE AREAS AND/OR FACILITIES
28 – 1010.1 PURPOSE 10-56
28 – 1010.2 REQUIREMENTS 10-56
SECTION 28 – 1011 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES 10-57
SECTION 28 – 1012 SPECIAL YARD REQUIREMENTS – CRITICAL AREA BUFFER 10-57
SECTION 28 – 1013 STANDARDS FOR PLACEMENT OF SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS 10-58
SECTION 28 – 1014 LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERING 10-58
28 – 1014.1 PURPOSE 10-58
28 – 1014.2 LANDSCAPE PLAN(S) 10-59
28 – 1014.3 MINIMUM PLANT MATERIAL SPECIFICATIONS 10-61
28 – 1014.4 WARRANTY OF LANDSCAPE IMPROVEMENTS 10-62
28 – 1014.5 FOREST CONSERVATION OVERLAPPING REQUIREMENTS 10-63
28 – 1014.6 LANDSCAPE IMPROVEMENTS 10-64
28 – 1014.7 BUFFERYARD STANDARDS 10-71
SECTION 28 – 1015 SETBACKS FROM STREAMS 10-76
SECTION 28 – 1016 SIDEWALKS 10-76
ARTICLE XI – SIGN REGULATIONS
SECTION 28-1101 SIGN REGULATIONS 11-1
28 – 1101.1 PURPOSES 11-1
28 – 1101.2 APPLICABILITY-EFFECT 11-1
28 – 1101.3 ADMINISTRATION 11-2
28 – 1101.4 GENERAL 11-4
28 – 1101.5 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 11-7
ARTICLE XII – NON-CONFORMING LOTS, USES, AND STRUCTURES
SECTION 28 – 1201 GENERAL 12-1
SECTION 28 – 1202 NON-CONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD 12-2
SECTION 28 – 1203 NON-CONFORMING USES OF LAND (NOT WITHIN STRUCTRES) 12-2
SECTION 28 – 1204 NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES 12-2
SECTION 28 – 1205 NON-CONFROMING USES CONTAINED 12-3
SECTION 28 – 1206 ELIMINATION OF CERTAIN NON-CONFORMITIES 12-3
SECTION 28 – 1207 SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES AND NOT NON-CONFORMING USES 12-4
SECTION 28 – 1208 NON-CONFORMING YARDS AND SETBACK 12-4
SECTION 28 – 1209 NON-CONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD IN THE CRITICAL AREA 12-4
OVERLAY ZONE
ARTICLE XIII ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION 28 – 1301 ZONING CERTIFICATES 13-1
28 – 1301.1 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 13-1
28 – 1301.2 ZONING COMPLIANCE REQUIRED 13-1
28 – 1301.3 ZONING CERTIFICATION REQUIRED 13-1
28 – 1301.4 CONSTRUCTION AND USE TO BE AS PROVIDED IN APPLICATIONS, PLANS AND 13-2
ZONING CERTIFICATES
SECTION 28 – 1302 PLANNING COMMISSION 13-2
28 -1302.1 CREATION, DESIGNATION 13-2
28 – 1302.2 COMPOSITION, APPOINTMENT, COMPENSATION, TERM, REMOVAL AND VACANCIES 13-3
28 -1302.3 POWERS AND DUTIES 13-3
SECTION 28 – 1303 BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS 13-4
28 – 1303.1 MEMBERS OF BOARD 13-4
28 – 1303.2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE BOARD OF APPEALS 13-5
28 – 1303.3 HEARINGS; APPEALS; NOTICE 13-5
28 – 1303.4 STAY OF PROCEEDINGS 13-6
28 – 1303.5 POWERS AND DUTIES 13-6
28 – 1303.6 APPEALS FROM THE BOARD OF APPEALS 13-12
SECTION 28 – 1304 DUTIES OF TOWN OFFICIALS, BOARD OF APPEALS, TOWN 13-13
COUNCIL AND COURT ON MATTERS OF APPEAL
SECTION 28 – 1305 SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSES 13-14
SECTION 28 – 1306 TEMPORARY USE PERMITS 13-14
SECTION 28 – 1307 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS 13-14
SECTION 28 – 1308 VIOLATIONS 13-14
SECTION 28 – 1309 ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW FOR CERTAIN DEVELOPMENT 13-15
ACTIVITIES ON IMPROVED LOTS
ARTICLE XIV AMENDMENTS
SECTION 28 – 1401 GENERAL 14-1
SECTION 28 – 1402 PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW 14-1
SECTION 28 – 1403 PUBLIC HEARING 14-1
SECTION 28 – 1404 BASIS FOR APPROVING REZONING 14-2
SECTION 28 – 1405 TIME LIMITATION ON REHEARING REZONING APPLICATIONS 14-3
SECTION 28 – 1406 AMENDMENT REQUIREMENTS IN THE CRITICAL AREA 14-3
OVERLAY DISTRICT
ARTICLE XV DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES AGREEMENTS
SECTION 28 – 1501 AUTHORITY 15-1
SECTION 28 – 1502 APPLICABILITY 15-1
SECTION 28 – 1503 CONTENTS OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES 15-1
AGREEMENT
SECTION 28 – 1504 REFERRAL TO PLANNING COMMISSION; COMPLIANCE 15-2
WITH COMPREENSIVE PLAN
SECTION 28 – 1505 PUBLIC HEARING; MANNER OF APPROVAL 15-3
SECTION 28 – 1506 AMENDMENT OF AGREEMENT 15-3
SECTION 28 – 1507 TERMINATION OF AGREEMENTS; SUSPENSION 15-3
SECTION 28 – 1508 APPLICABLE LAWS, REGULATIONS AND POLICIES 15-3
SECTION 28 – 1509 RECORDING AGREEMENTS IN THE LAND RECORDS 15-4
SECTION 28 – 1510 ENFORCEMENT BY INTERESTED PARTIES 15-4
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-1
1 ARTICLE I
2 GENERAL
3
4 SECTION 28 – 101 TITLE
5
6 These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE
7 TOWN OF EASTON. The Ordinance includes both the text of the regulations and the Official
8 Zoning Map which is located in the Office of the Town Planner, Town Office, Easton, Maryland.
9
10 SECTION 28 – 102 LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY
11
12 These regulations are established in accordance with the provisions of Article 66B of the
13 Annotated Code of Maryland.
14
15 SECTION 28 – 103 STATEMENT OF LEGISLATIVE INTENT
16
17 A. These regulations are adopted with the intent that they will implement the policies of
18 the Comprehensive Plan; will control congestion in the streets; will secure the public
19 safety; will promote health and the general welfare; will provide adequate light and
20 air; will promote the conservation of natural resources; will prevent undue
21 concentration of population; and will facilitate the adequate provision of
22 transportation, water, sewerage, schools, recreation, soil conservation, landscaping,
23 parks, and other public facilities and services. In addition, this Ordinance is intended
24 to:
25
26 1. help accomplish the coordinated, adjusted, and harmonious development of
27 the Town and its environs in accordance with present and future needs;
28
29 2. promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity, and general
30 welfare; including among other things, adequate provisions for traffic, the
31 promotion of public safety, adequate provision for light and air, conservation
32 of natural resources, the prevention of environmental pollution, and the
33 promotion of the healthful and convenient distribution of population;
34
35 3. encourage and, where necessary, require land use development and uses
36 which exemplify good civic design and arrangement and the stewardship of
37 the Chesapeake Bay and the land as a universal ethic;
38
39 4. encourage the conservation of resources, including a reduction in resource
40 consumption;
41
42 5. locate development in locations suitable for it given existing and reasonably
43 foreseeable development; and
44
45 6. encourage appropriate and sustainable economic growth.
46
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-2
B. These regulations are made with reasonable 1 consideration of, among other things, the
2 character of the Town; the suitability of its various areas for particular uses; the desire
3 to enhance the value of buildings and encourage the orderly development; and the most
4 appropriate use of land throughout the jurisdiction.
5
6 SECTION 28 – 104 JURISDICTION
7
8 These regulations shall apply to all properties within the corporate limits of the Town of Easton,
9 Maryland.
10
11 SECTION 28 – 105 SEPARABILITY CLAUSE
12
13 Other than as noted in this section, if any section or provision of this Ordinance is declared by
14 the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
15 Ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or
16 invalid. However, if any court declares any portion of any provision of this Ordinance relating to
17 any planned redevelopment and/or floating zone district (§ 28 – 601, § 28 – 801, § 28 – 901)
18 unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall render the entire section invalid and the uses
19 permitted hereunder as floating zone uses shall not be permitted in the Town unless and until
20 such unconstitutionality or invalidity has been corrected by legislative action by the Town
21 Council.
22
23 SECTION 28 – 106 EFFECTIVE DATE AND DISPOSITION OF PENDING MATTERS
24
25 A. The provisions of this Ordinance were adopted on 02\21\06 and became effective on
26 03\15\06. Ordinance Number 396 (previous Zoning Ordinance) and all amendments
27 thereto shall as of the effective date of this Ordinance be of no further effect or
28 validity, except as to the extent that specific continuing rights are granted by the
29 terms of this Zoning Ordinance. Except as expressly provided in the remaining
30 provisions of this Section, this Ordinance shall take effect and be enforced
31 immediately upon its passage.
32
33 B. Construction may be begun and/or completed under the terms of a building permit
34 issued prior to the effective date of this Section, if such permit was in force and fully
35 valid on that date. Such construction is subject to (1) all terms of the permit, (2) the
36 Ordinance under which it was issued and (3) if applicable, the provisions of
37 Subsection D below.
38
39 C. Any of the following matters filed prior to the effective date of this Section shall be
40 processed and/or decided in accordance with the Ordinance in effect on the date on
41 which the particular matter was filed:
42
43 1. Applications for a building permit for the construction and/or modification of
44 a single-family home;
45
46 2. Applications for subdivision approval, if such application received
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-3
preliminary approval by the Planning Commission 1 prior to the effective date
2 of this Ordinance;
3
4 3. Applications for site plan approval, if such application received preliminary
5 approval prior to the effective date of this Ordinance;
6
7 4. Any planned redevelopment or floating zone map amendment application
8 which has received approval from the Town Council but has not received final
9 site plan and/or subdivision approval from the Planning and Zoning
10 Commission
11
12 D. A project may be begun and/or completed in accordance with preliminary site plan
13 approval given prior to the effective date of this Ordinance or in accordance with
14 Subsection 28 – 106 C (3), under the terms of the Ordinance governing such
15 approval. However, any such approval shall expire at the later of (a) two years from
16 the effective date of this Section or (b) two years from the date of such final approval.
17 On written application of the owner prior to the time of such expiration, the Planning
18 Commission may grant an extension for a specified period of not more than two years
19 from the expiration date provided in this Subsection. The Planning Commission shall
20 not grant an extension unless it finds that the owner has not effectively abandoned the
21 project, such as, for example, where construction has not been completed for reasons
22 beyond the control of the owner and his contractors and agents.
23
24 E. With respect to any building permit or pending matters referred to in Subsections B,
25 C, and D above, nothing in this Section shall be construed (a) to affect the status of
26 any use or structure involved in any such permit, application, approval or pending
27 matter as a nonconforming use or structure under this Ordinance; (b) to extend,
28 enlarge or otherwise affect the provisions of any prior Ordinance relating to the
29 duration, expiration or termination of any such permit, application, approval or
30 pending matter; or (c) to revive or give any other effect to any permit, application,
31 approval or pending matter which has been, or is hereafter deemed to be, abandoned
32 or terminated under the provisions of this Ordinance or any prior Ordinance which is
33 applicable.
34
35 SECTION 28 – 107 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
36
37 A. The incorporated areas of the Town are hereby divided into zones, as shown on the
38 Official Zoning Map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby
39 adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance.
40
41 B. The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor and
42 Council attested by the Town Clerk, and bearing the seal of the Town under the
43 following words: "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in
44 Section 28 – 107 of the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Easton, Maryland," together
45 with the date of the adoption of this ordinance.
46
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-4
C. If changes are made in zone 1 boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Official
2 Zoning Map, such changes shall be made or noted by ordinance number on the
3 Official Zoning Map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the Mayor
4 and Town Council, together with an entry in the amending ordinance as follows: "On
5 (date), by official action of the Town Council, the following (change or changes)
6 were made in the Official Zoning Map: (brief description of nature of change),"
7 which entry shall be signed by the Mayor and Council and attested by the Town
8 Clerk.
9
10 D. No changes of any nature shall be made in the Official Zoning Map or matter shown
11 thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this ordinance. Any
12 unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person or persons shall be considered a
13 violation of this ordinance and punishable as provided under Section 28 – 1308 of
14 this Ordinance.
15
16 E. Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Official Zoning Map which
17 may from time to time be made or published, the Official Zoning Map, which shall be
18 located in the office of the Town Planner, shall be the final authority as the current
19 zoning status of land and water areas, buildings, and other structures in the Town.
20
21 SECTION 28 – 108 REPLACEMENT OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
22
23 A. In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or
24 difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the
25 Town Council may by resolution adopt a new Official Zoning Map which shall
26 supersede the prior Official Zoning Map.
27
28 B. The new Official Zoning Map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the
29 prior Official Zoning Map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending
30 the original zoning map or ordinance or any subsequent amendment thereof. The
31 Planning Commission shall certify as to the accuracy of the new Official Zoning Map
32 prior to its adoption by the Mayor and Council. The new Official Zoning Map shall
33 be identified by the signatures of the Mayor and Council attested by the Town Clerk,
34 and bearing the seal of the Town under the following words: "This is to certify that
35 this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted
36 (date of adoption of map being replaced) as part of the Zoning Ordinance of the Town
37 of Easton, Maryland."
38
39 SECTION 28 – 109 OFFICIAL CRITICAL AREA OVERLAY DISTRICT MAPS
40
41 A. Official Critical Area Overlay District Maps shall be prepared and maintained as part
42 of the Official Zoning Map of the Town. They shall delineate the extent of the
43 Critical Area Overlay District ("CAO") that shall correspond to the Chesapeake Bay
44 Critical Area. Within the designated Critical Area District, all land shall be assigned
45 one of the following land use management classifications: Intensely Developed Area
46 (IDA), Limited Development Area (LDA), and Resource Conservation Area (RCA).
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-5
The Critical Area Overlay District Maps may 1 be amended by the Town in compliance
2 with the amendment provisions in this Ordinance, the Maryland Critical Area Law
3 and Critical Area Criteria, contained in COMAR 14.15 or its successor regulations.
4
5 B. The Town may elect to adjust the Critical Area Boundary to delete areas of the Town
6 from the Critical Area Overlay District only at such times as new Official Wetland
7 Maps are adopted by the State of Maryland or an area of the Critical Area has been
8 approved for exclusion by the Critical Area Commission. The Town may also elect
9 to add areas to the Critical Area at any time. Such changes shall be treated as
10 amendments to the Critical Area Overlay District ("CAO") on the Official Critical
11 Area Overlay District Maps for the Town.
12
13 SECTION 28 – 110 LIMITS ON THE NUMBER OF ACTIVE APPLICATIONS
14
15 At no time may an applicant/property owner submit an application for any property for which
16 another application has been submitted and is being reviewed. In order to have a different
17 application reviewed by the Town, any applicable preceding application must either (1) expire (if
18 approved) or (2) be formally withdrawn by the applicant. These provisions shall also apply to
19 applications to subdivide land under the provisions of the Town’s Subdivision Regulations. This
20 provision shall not apply to applications that are complimentary, for example a site plan review
21 and a Special Exception request.
22
23 SECTION 28 – 111 RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
24
25 Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of zones as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the
26 following rules shall apply:
27
28 A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets, highways,
29 or alleys shall be construed to follow such center lines;
30
31 B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed
32 as following such lot lines;
33
34 C. Boundaries indicated as approximately following town limits shall be construed as
35 following town limits;
36
37 D. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway
38 between the main tracks;
39
40 E. Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to follow such shore
41 lines, and in the event of change in the shore line shall be construed as moving with
42 the actual shore line; boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines
43 of streams, rivers, creeks, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow
44 such center lines;
45
46 F. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-6
28 – 110 (A) through 28 – 110 (E) above 1 shall be so construed. Distances not
2 specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of
3 the map;
4
5 G. Where a lot of one acre or less is divided by one or more zone boundary lines, and
6 where more than fifty percent of said lot lies within a more intensive use district, the
7 lot shall be considered as entirely within the more intensive use district. This
8 provision shall not be interpreted to rezone any area to a less intensive use. This
9 provision shall not apply to any lot of more than one acre, and in such cases, the
10 provisions of each zoning district shall apply.1
11
12 H. If all rules for the interpretation of zoning boundaries as outlined above have been
13 exhausted and it is still unclear as to what the zoning classification is for a parcel or a
14 portion thereof, said zoning shall be deemed to be A-1 until such time as the Town
15 Council may affix the appropriate classification thereto. Such determination by the
16 Town Council shall be made after first referring the matter to the Planning and
17 Zoning Commission for recommendation and holding a public hearing advertised in
18 accordance with the provisions of Section 28 – 1403 of this Ordinance.
19
20 SECTION 28 – 112 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS
21
22 The regulations set by this Ordinance within each zone shall be minimum regulations and shall
23 apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, and particularly, except as hereinafter
24 provided:
25
26 A. No building, structure, or land shall hereinafter be used or occupied, and no building
27 or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed,
28 moved, or structurally altered internally or externally, unless in conformity with all
29 the regulations herein specified for the zone in which it is located.
30
31 B. No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered:
32
33 1. to exceed the height;
34
35 2. to accommodate or house a greater number of families;
36
37 3. to occupy a greater percentage of lot area;
38
39 4. to have more narrow or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other
40 open spaces;
41
42 than herein required; or in any manner contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance.
1 Note: The use of contiguous lots can have the effect of causing the lots to be considered merged for the purposes of
administering the Zoning Ordinance and the Town’s Subdivision Regulations. See Remes v. Montgomery County,
387 MD 52 (2005).
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-7
1
2
3 C. No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required
4 about or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with this
5 Ordinance, shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking or
6 loading space similarly required for any other building, except in accordance with
7 Sections 28 – 1001 and 28 – 1002.
8
9 D. No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this Ordinance shall be reduced in
10 dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots
11 created after the effective date of this Ordinance shall meet at least the minimum
12 requirements established by this Ordinance.
13
14 SECTION 28 – 113 INTERPRETATIONS
15
16 For the purposes of this Ordinance, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as
17 follows:
18
19 A. The word person includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust,
20 company, or corporation as well as an individual.
21
22 B. The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural,
23 and the plural number includes the singular; words of the masculine gender will
24 include the feminine and the neuter gender will refer to any gender unless the context
25 plainly indicates the contrary.
26
27 C. The word shall is mandatory, the word may is permissive.
28
29 D. The words used or occupied include the words intended, designed, or arranged to be
30 used or occupied.
31
32 E. The word lot includes the words plot or parcel.
33
34 F. The word Town means the Town of Easton, Maryland.
35
36 G. A building or structure includes any part thereof.
37
38 H. Unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different meaning is intended, a
39 regulation which involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events
40 connected by the conjunction and, or, or either/or, the use of the conjunction is
41 defined as follows:
42
43 1. And means that all the connected items, conditions, provisions and events
44 apply together and not separately.
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-8
2. Or means that the connected 1 items, conditions, provisions, or events apply
2 separately or in any combination.
3
4 3. Either/or means that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events
5 shall apply separately but not in combination.
6
7 I. The word includes does not limit a term to the specified examples, but is intended to
8 extend the term's meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or
9 character.
10
11 SECTION 28 – 114 DEFINITIONS
12
13 In this Ordinance, the following specific terms are used as defined unless otherwise apparent
14 from the context:
15
16 Abatement – The act of putting an end to a land alteration or development activity or
17 reducing the degree or intensity of the alteration or activity.
18
19 Abutting – Having property or zoning lines in common.
20
21 Accessory Use or Structure - A structure or use that: a) is clearly incidental to and
22 customarily found in connection with a principal building or use; b) is subordinate to and
23 serves a principal building or a principal use; c) is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose
24 to the principal building or principal use served; d) contributes to the comfort,
25 convenience, or necessity of occupants, business, or industry in the principal building or
26 principal use served; and e) is located on the same lot as the principal building or use
27 served.
28
29 Addition – Newly constructed area that increases the size of a structure.
30
31 Adjacent – A property abutting or directly across a street, highway, road, alley,
32 watercourse or right-of-way.
33
34 Adult Day Care Center – A nonresidential center that:
35
36 a. Serves the elderly, medically handicapped adults, or victims of Alzheimer's
37 disease and related disorders;
38 b. Meets the definitions in Health-General Article, § 14-201(b) or § 14-301(b),
39 Annotated Code of Maryland; and
40 c. Is licensed by the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene under COMAR
41 10.12.04.
42
43 Adult Oriented Business – means any business, operation, or activity, a significant
44 amount of which consists of:
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-9
i. the conduct, promotion, delivery, 1 provision, or performance of adult
2 entertainment or material; including, but not limited to, that occurring in, at, or
3 in connection with a cabaret, lounge, night club, modeling studio, bar
4 restaurant, club or lodge, or other establishment; or
5 ii. the sale, provision, rental, or promotion of adult entertainment or material, in
6 any format, form, or medium, including, but not limited to, books, magazines,
7 videos, DVDs, CDs, movies, photographs, and/or coin operated or pay-per8
view viewing devices, including, but not limited to, the operation of an adult
9 book or video store or viewing booth.
10
11 For the purposes of this definition, the term “significant” shall have the meaning
12 set forth in § 30-1 of the Easton Town Code. Additional definitions pertinent to
13 Adult Oriented Businesses are as follows:
14
15 Adult entertainment or material – shall have the meaning set forth in § 30-1 of
16 the Easton Town Code.
17
18 Adult book or video store – shall have the meaning set forth in § 30-1 of the
19 Easton Town Code.
20
21 Live Viewing Booth – means any booth, cubicle, stall or room of less than six
22 hundred (600) square feet of floor space or area to which patrons may gain
23 admittance, wherein the following are regularly featured:
24
25 i. persons who appear in a state of semi-nudity; and/or
26 ii. live entertainment characterized by the depiction or description of
27 specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities
28
29 Viewing booth – means any booth, cubicle, stall, or compartment that is
30 designed, constructed, or used to hold or seat patrons and is used for presenting
31 motion pictures or viewing publications by any photographic, electronic,
32 magnetic, digital, or other means or media (including but not limited to, film,
33 video or magnetic tape, laser disc, cd-rom, books, magazines, or periodicals) for
34 observation by patrons therein. A viewing booth shall not mean a theater, movie
35 house, playhouse, or a room or enclosure or portion thereof that contains more
36 than 600 square feet.
37
38 Afforestation – means the establishment of a tree crop on an area from which it has
39 always or very long been absent, or the planting of open areas that are not presently in
40 forest cover.
41
42 Agricultural Cultivation – Services or activities performed in connection with the
43 cultivation of soil or the raising, harvesting, handling, planting, drying, packing,
44 packaging, processing, grading, or storing or delivering to storage or to market or to a
45 carrier for transportation to market an agricultural or horticultural commodity in its
46 unmanufactured state, including without limitation grains, fibers, hay, silage, fruit and
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-10
truck crops, but excluding livestock and poultry. 1 These services or activities include
2 tillage, plowing, seeding, fertilization, pest control, harvesting, and maintenance of best
3 management practices.
4
5 Agricultural easement – A non-possessory interest in land which restricts the
6 conversion of use of the land, preventing non-agricultural uses.
7
8 Agriculture – All methods of production and management of livestock, crops,
9 vegetation, and soil. This includes, but is not limited to, the related activities of tillage,
10 fertilization, pest control, harvesting, and marketing. It also includes, but is not limited
11 to, the activities of feeding, housing, and maintaining of animals such as cattle, dairy
12 cows, sheep, goats, hogs, horses, and poultry and handling their by-products, except
13 where prohibited by other Town Codes. The processing, packaging or manufacturing of
14 agricultural products is not included in the use “Agriculture.”
15
16 Agriculture, controlled-environment – The practice of agriculture either wholly or
17 partially within a structure in which such factors as temperature, light and humidity can
18 be regulated.
19
20 Airport – Any area of land or water designed and set aside for the landing and take-off
21 of aircraft, including all necessary facilities for the housing and maintenance of aircraft
22 and any accessory structures or uses.
23
24 Alley – A public way affording a secondary means of access to the rear or sides of the
25 lot.
26
27 Alteration – Any change, addition, or modification in construction or occupancy of an
28 existing structure.
29
30 Alteration, structural - Any change in the supporting members of a building or
31 structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders; provided, however, that the
32 application of any exterior siding to an existing building for the purpose of beautifying
33 and modernizing shall not be considered a structural alteration.
34
35 Ambulance Service – A facility housing ambulance or medical emergency vehicles and
36 attendant staff, including offices and supply storage.
37
38 Anadromous fish – means fish that travel upstream (from their primary habitat in the
39 ocean) to freshwater in order to spawn.
40
41 Anadromous fish propagation waters – those streams that are tributary to the
42 Chesapeake Bay and Atlantic Coastal Bays in which the spawning of anadromous species
43 of fish (e.g., rockfish, striped bass, yellow perch, white perch, shad, and river herring)
44 occurs or has occurred. The streams are identified by the Department of Natural
45 Resources.
46
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-11
Antenna – Any exterior transmitting or receiving 1 devices mounted on a tower, building
2 or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves,
3 digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless
4 telecommunications signals or other communication signals.
5
6 Aquaculture –
7
8 a. Farming or culturing of finfish, shellfish, other aquatic plants or animals or both,
9 in lakes, streams, inlets, estuaries, and other natural or artificial water bodies or
10 impoundments;
11
12 b. Activities include hatching, cultivating, planting, feeding, raising, and harvesting
13 of aquatic plants and animals and the maintenance and construction of necessary
14 equipment, buildings, and growing areas; and
15
16 c. Cultivation methods include, but are not limited to, seed or larvae development
17 and grow out facilities, fish ponds, shellfish rafts, rack and longlines, seaweed
18 floats and the culture of clams and oysters on tidelands and subtidal areas. For the
19 purpose of this definition, related activities such as wholesale and retail sales,
20 processing and product storage facilities are not considered aquacultural practices.
21
22 Assisted Living Facility – A facility providing room, board and living assistance to
23 persons requiring assistance, but who do not require nursing home or hospital care.
24
25 Bar and/or cocktail lounge – (See also Restaurant, Nightclub and Tavern) Any
26 premises wherein alcoholic beverages are sold at retail for consumption on the premises
27 and minors are excluded therefrom by law. It shall not mean a premises wherein such
28 beverages are sold in conjunction with the sale of food for consumption on the premises
29 and the sale of said beverages comprises less than twenty-five (25%) percent of the gross
30 receipts.
31
32 Barren Land – Unmanaged land having sparse vegetation.
33
34 Bed and Breakfast Inn - A single family owner occupied dwelling which is used for the
35 lodging of overnight guests, none of whom shall remain for more than fifteen (15)
36 consecutive nights.
37
38 Bedroom – A room in a dwelling unit planned and intended for sleeping separable from
39 other rooms by a door.
40
41 Best Management Practices (BMPs) – conservation practices or systems of practices
42 and management measures that control soil loss and reduce water quality degradation
43 caused by nutrients, animal waste, toxics and sediment. Agricultural BMPs include, but
44 are not limited to, strip cropping, terracing, contour stripping, grass waterways, animal
45 waste structures, ponds, minimal tillage, grass and naturally vegetated filter strips, and
46 proper nutrient application measures.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-12
Bistro – An establishment possessing a Talbot 1 County Class I Alcoholic Beverages
2 License where wine and/or beer is sold for consumption both on premises and off3
premises, and where light food service is provided consisting or hor d’oeuvres,
4 appetizers, small savory dishes such as chesses, breads, and cured meats, cold
5 sandwiches, desserts and/or similar light fare.
6
7 Boarding House – An establishment with lodging where meals are regularly prepared
8 and served for compensation and where food is placed upon the table family style,
9 without service or ordering of individual portions from a menu.
10
11 Brew pub – A restaurant that also possesses a State of Maryland Class 7 micro-brewery
12 license or a Class 6 pub-brewery license.
13
14 Buffer – Area that based on conditions at the time of development is immediately
15 landward from mean high water of tidal waterways, the edge of each bank of a tributary
16 stream, or the landward edge of a tidal wetland; and the area exists in, or is established in,
17 natural vegetation to protect a stream, tidal wetland, tidal waters or terrestrial
18 environments from human disturbance. The Buffer includes an area of at least 100-feet
19 even if that area was previously disturbed by human activity or is currently developed
20 and also includes any expansion for contiguous sensitive areas, such as a steep slope,
21 hydric soil, highly erodible soil, non-tidal wetland, or a Non-tidal Wetland of Special
22 State Concern as defined in the COMAR 26.23.01.01. In non-Critical Area contexts, see
23 “Buffer Area or Yard” below.
24
25 Buffer Exemption Area – means areas within the designated Buffer which are largely or
26 totally developed and which include lots less than 200 feet deep the development of
27 which is grandfathered under the provisions of COMAR 14.15.02.07.
28
29 Buffer Management Area (BMA) – an area officially mapped by the Town of Easton
30 and approved by the Critical Area Commission as a Buffer Management Area, where it
31 has been sufficiently demonstrated that the existing pattern of residential, industrial,
32 commercial, institutional, or recreational development prevents the Buffer from fulfilling
33 its water quality and habitat functions, and where development in accordance with
34 specific Buffer Management Area provisions can be permitted in the Buffer without a
35 variance.
36
37 Buffer Management Plan – Includes a major Buffer management plan, a minor Buffer
38 management plan, and a simplified Buffer management plan.
39
40 Bufferyard – in the Critical Area, means an area at least 25 feet wide, located between
41 development activity and tidal waters, tidal wetlands, or a tributary stream, planted with
42 vegetation consisting of native canopy trees, understory trees, shrubs, and perennial
43 herbaceous plants that is used in Buffer Management Areas to provide water quality and
44 habitat benefits. This area is to be managed and maintained in a manner that optimizes
45 these benefits.
46
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-13
Outside the Critical Area, “Bufferyard” or “Buffer 1 Area” means a landscaped area
2 intended to separate and partially obstruct the view of two adjacent land uses or
3 properties from one another.
4
5 Building area – The area of a lot remaining after all setback lines are established.
6
7 Building envelope – That area within the required setback lines for the given lot.
8
9 Building Inspector – The governmental official of the Town of Easton charged with
10 administering the Town's Building Code and issuing building permits, or his or her
11 designee.
12
13 Building line – The line, parallel to the street line that passes through the point of the
14 principal building nearest the front lot line.
15
16 Business Services – Services rendered to a business establishment or individual on a fee
17 or contract basis including actuarial, advertising, credit reporting, janitorial, office or
18 business equipment rental or leasing, photofinishing, telecommunications, window
19 cleaning, blue-printing and photocopying, and other such services.
20
21 Caliper – The diameter of a tree measured at two inches above the root collar.
22
23 Canopy tree – means a tree that when mature commonly reaches a height of at least 35
24 feet.
25
26 Car wash – An area of land and/or a structure with machine- or hand-operated facilities
27 used principally for the cleaning, washing, polishing, or waxing of motor vehicles.
28
29 Cemetery – Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for
30 cemetery purposes, including columbariums, crematories, mausoleums, and mortuaries
31 when operated in conjunction with and within the boundaries of such cemetery.
32
33 Clearcutting – the removal of the entire stand of trees in one cutting with tree
34 reproduction obtained by natural seeding from adjacent stands or from trees that were cut
35 from advanced regeneration or stump sprouts or from planting of seeds or seedlings by
36 man.
37
38 Club – Buildings or facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association, or persons
39 for a social, educational, or recreational purpose; but not primarily for profit or to render
40 a service that is customarily carried on as a business.
41
42 Cluster development – A residential development to which dwelling units are
43 concentrated in a selected area or selected areas of the development tract so as to provide
44 natural habitat or other open space uses on the remainder.
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-14
Colonial nesting water birds – Herons, egrets, 1 terns, and glossy ibis. For the purposes
2 of nesting, these birds congregate (that is "colonize") in relatively few areas, at which
3 time, the regional populations of these species are highly susceptible to local
4 disturbances.
5
6 COMAR – The Code of Maryland Regulations, as from time to time amended, including
7 any successor provisions.
8
9 Commercial – When used in conjunction with a use shall mean the use is open to the
10 general public and a fee is charged by the owner, lessee, or licensee for a service or a
11 product.
12
13 Commercial harvesting – a commercial operation that would alter the existing
14 composition or profile, or both, of a forest, including all commercial cutting operations
15 done by companies and private individuals for economic gain.
16
17 Community Center – A place, structure, area, or other facility used for providing
18 religious, fraternal, social, and/or recreational programs generally open to the public and
19 designed to accommodate and serve significant segments of the community. Such
20 facilities may include meetings rooms, recreation rooms, dining & kitchen facilities and
21 day care centers. Such facilities are not operated primarily for profit.
22
23 Community piers – means boat docking facilities associated with subdivisions and
24 similar residential areas, and with condominium, apartment, and other multiple-family
25 dwelling units. Private piers are excluded from this definition.
26
27 Comprehensive or Master Plan – The duly adopted Comprehensive Plan of the Town
28 of Easton.
29
30 Condominium – An estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in
31 common with other owners in a portion of a parcel of real property, together with a
32 separate interest in space in a building, such as an apartment or office, established
33 pursuant to Section 11-101 of the Maryland Annotated Code Real Property Article. A
34 condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of such real
35 property.
36
37 Conservation easement – means a non-possessory interest in land that restricts the
38 manner in which the land may be developed in an effort to conserve natural resources for
39 future use.
40
41 Consolidation – A combination of any legal parcel of land or recorded legally buildable
42 lot into fewer lots or parcels than originally existed. An application for consolidation may
43 include a subdivision, lot line abandonment, boundary line adjustment, replatting request,
44 or lot line adjustment.
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-15
Construction Supply and Services 1 – A business which provides the products normally
2 associated with heavy construction and infrastructure such as sewer, water and gas pipes,
3 culverts, cable, etc. Such an establishment typically deals with contractors as opposed to
4 the general public.
5
6 Convenience store – Any retail establishment offering for sale prepackaged food
7 products, household items, and other goods commonly associated with the same and
8 having a gross floor area of 5,000 square feet or less.
9
10 Cover crop – The establishment of a vegetative cover to protect soils from erosion and to
11 restrict pollutants from entering the waterways. Cover crops can be dense, planted crops
12 of grasses or legumes, or crop residues such as corn, wheat or soybean stubble which
13 maximize infiltration and prevent runoff from reaching erosive velocities.
14
15 Craft Beverage Manufacturing – A facility possessing the appropriate license from the
16 State of Maryland, in which beer, wine, cider, mead, distilled spirits or other similar
17 beverages are brewed, fermented, or distilled.
18
19 Critical Area – all lands and waters defined in §8-1807 of the Natural Resources Article,
20 Annotated Code of Maryland. They include:
21
22 a. All waters of and lands under the Chesapeake Bay and Atlantic Coastal
23 Bays and its tributaries to the head of tide;
24 b. All State and private wetlands designated under Title 9 of the Natural
25 Resources Article, Annotated Code of Maryland;
26 c. All land and water areas within 1,000 feet beyond the landward
27 boundaries of State or private wetlands and the heads of tides designated
28 under Title 9 of the Natural Resources Article, Annotated Code of
29 Maryland; and
30 d. Modification to these areas through inclusions or exclusions proposed by
31 local jurisdictions and approved by the Commission as specified in §8-
32 1807 of the Natural Resources Article, Annotated Code of Maryland.
33
34 Critical Area Commission – means the Critical Area Commission for the Chesapeake
35 and Atlantic Coastal Bays.
36
37 Cul-de-sac – A local street, one end of which is closed and consists of a circular turn
38 around.
39
40 Day Care Center, Group – Any arrangement that provides day care for children on a
41 regular basis, with thirteen (13) or more clients including any relatives of the care
42 provider.
43
44 Day Care Center, Small Group – Any arrangement that provides day care for children
45 on a regular basis, with not less than nine (9) and not more than twelve (12) clients
46 including any relatives of the care provider.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-16
1
2 Day Care Facility, Family – Any arrangement that provides day care for children on a
3 regular basis for eight (8) or fewer clients including any relatives of the care provider.
4
5 Deck – An open-air structure above grade, but not more than thirty (30) inches above
6 grade, and immediately adjacent or attached to the principal structure.
7
8 Density – means the number of dwelling units per acre of gross area of a development
9 tract.
10
11 Development – Any activity, other than normal agricultural activities, which materially
12 affects the existing condition or use of any land, or any structure.
13
14 Developed Woodlands – an area of trees or of trees and natural vegetation that is
15 interspersed with residential, commercial, industrial or recreational development.
16
17 Development – any activity that materially affects the condition or use of dry land, land
18 under water, or any structure.
19
20 Development activities – means any construction, modification, extension or expansion
21 of buildings or structures; placement of fill or dumping; storage of materials; land
22 excavation; land clearing; land improvement; or any combination thereof, including the
23 subdivision of land. Any such activity may involve any residential, commercial,
24 industrial, institutional or transportation facilities or structures.
25
26 Development envelope – includes an individually owned lot, the lot coverage on that
27 individually owned lot, a road, a utility, a stormwater management measure, an onsite
28 sewage disposal measure, any area subject to human use such as an active recreation area,
29 any required buffers, and any additional acreage necessary to meet the requirements of
30 the Program.
31
32 Developer – a person who undertakes development activity as defined in this Ordinance;
33 or a person who undertakes development activity as defined in the Criteria of the
34 Commission.
35
36 Disability – A mental or physical impairment that substantially limits one or more major
37 life activities. The meaning of “disability” extends not only to individuals who currently
38 have a disability, but to those with a record of a mental or physical impairment that
39 substantially limits one or more major life activities, or who are perceived or regarded as
40 having a mental or physical impairment that substantially limits one or more major life
41 activities. It is the intent of this Ordinance that “disability” shall have the meaning
42 afforded to it by the Americans With Disabilities Act and regulatory and judicial
43 interpretations of that Act.
44
45 District – (See Zone).
46
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-17
Disturbance – an alteration or change to the land. It 1 includes any amount of clearing,
2 grading, or construction activity. Disturbance does not include gardening or maintaining
3 an existing grass lawn.
4
5 Documented breeding bird areas – forested areas where the occurrence of interior
6 dwelling birds, during the breeding season, has been demonstrated as a result of on-site
7 surveys using standard biological survey techniques.
8
9 Domiciliary Care – Any premise which admits aged or disabled persons for a fee to a
10 protective environment, who, because of advanced age or physical or mental disability,
11 are not gainfully employed.
12
13 Donation Bin – Any container or receptacle held out to the public as a place for people
14 to drop off donated items and to store such items until they are removed.
15
16 Drainage Ways – are defined as minor watercourses that are defined either by soil type
17 or by the presence of intermittent or perennial streams or topography that indicates a
18 swale where surface sheet flows join.
19
20 Dwelling – Any building or portion thereof occupied or intended to be occupied
21 exclusively for residence purposes, but not including a tent or room in a hotel or motel.
22
23 Dwelling, multi-family – A building designed for or used by three (3) or more families
24 provided that the number of families does not exceed the number of units provided.
25 Multi-family dwelling shall also include any "large group homes" for individuals
26 suffering from a "mental disorder" as those terms are defined in the General Health
27 Article of the Maryland Annotated Code.
28
29 Dwelling, single-family, detached – A residential building containing not more than one
30 (1) dwelling unit used by one family entirely surrounded by yards. Single family
31 dwelling shall also include any "group home" or "small group home" for, respectively,
32 persons affected by "developmental disabilities" or individuals suffering from a "mental
33 disorder" as those terms are defined in the Health General Article of the Maryland
34 Annotated Code.
35
36 Dwelling, two-family – A detached building designed for or used by not more than two
37 (2) families or housekeeping units. Included in this definition are what are commonly
38 known as duplexes.
39
40 Dwelling unit – a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for at least
41 one person, including permanent provisions for sanitation, cooking, eating, sleeping, and
42 other activities routinely associated with daily life. Dwelling unit includes a living
43 quarters for a domestic or other employee or tenant, an in-law or accessory apartment, a
44 guest house, or a caretaker residence.
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-18
Easement – A grant of one or more of the property rights 1 by the owner to, or for the use
2 by, the public, a corporation, or another person or entity.
3
4 Ecosystem – a more or less self-contained biological community together with the
5 physical environment in which the community's organisms occur.
6
7 Endangered species – means any species of fish, wildlife, or plants that have been
8 designated as endangered by regulation by the Department of Natural Resources.
9 Designation occurs when the continued existence of these species as viable components
10 of the State’s resources are determined to be in jeopardy. This includes any species
11 determined to be an “endangered” species pursuant to the Federal Endangered Species
12 Act, 16 U.S.C. §et seq., as amended.
13
14 Environmental Assessment – means a comprehensive report that describes the natural
15 features and characteristics of a proposed development site, the changes that will occur as
16 the result of proposed development activities on this site, the anticipated environmental
17 impacts and consequences of the proposed development, and mitigation measures to be
18 taken to minimize undesirable impacts to the environment.
19
20 Establishment – The planting or regeneration of native vegetation throughout the Buffer.
21
22 Excess stormwater run-off – All increases in stormwater resulting from:
23
24 a. An increase in the imperviousness of the site, including all additions to
25 buildings, roads, and parking lots;
26 b. Changes in permeability caused by compaction during construction or
27 modifications in contours, including the filling or drainage of small
28 depression areas;
29 c. Alteration of drainageways, or regrading of slopes;
30 d. Destruction of forest; or
31 e. Installation of collection systems to intercept street flows or to replace
32 swales or other drainageways
33
34 Exclusion – means an act of the Mayor and Council, approved by the Critical Area
35 Commission that exempts an area of the Town from the Zoning and Subdivision
36 provisions applicable only to the Critical Area Overlay District ("CAO").
37
38 Exemption – means an act of the Mayor and Council, approved by the Critical Area
39 Commission that relieves certain areas of the Town from the Buffer provisions of the
40 Critical Area Overlay District ("CAO").
41
42 Facade – The exterior elevation of a building exposed to public view or that wall viewed
43 by persons not within the building.
44
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-19
Family – An individual, or two or more persons related 1 by blood or marriage, or a group
2 of not more than three persons not related by blood or marriage, living together as a
3 single housekeeping group in a dwelling unit.
4
5 Farmers Market – An outdoor commercial establishment wherein agricultural products
6 are sold by one or more operators.
7
8 Fence – Any artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials
9 erected to enclose or screen areas of land.
10
11 Financial assurance – A performance bond, letter of credit, cash deposit, insurance
12 policy, or other instrument of security acceptable to the Town of Easton.
13
14 Fisheries activities – means commercial water dependent fisheries facilities including
15 structures for the packing, processing, canning, or freezing of finfish, crustaceans,
16 mollusks, and amphibians and reptiles and also including related activities such as
17 wholesale and retail sales, product storage facilities, crab shedding, off-loading docks,
18 shellfish culture operations, and shore-based facilities necessary for aquaculture
19 operations.
20
21 Floodplain – Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being
22 inundated by water from any source.
23
24 Floor area, gross – The sum of the areas of the several floors of a building, including
25 areas used for human occupancy in basements, attics, and penthouses, as measured from
26 the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the center line of party walls. It does not
27 include cellars, unenclosed porches, or attics not used for human occupancy, or any floor
28 space in accessory buildings or in the main building intended and designed for the
29 parking of motor vehicles in order to meet the parking requirements of this Ordinance, or
30 any such floor space intended and designed for heating and ventilating equipment and/or
31 air exchange. It shall include the horizontal area at each floor level devoted to stairwells
32 and elevator shafts, but not other vertical floor openings such as atriums.
33
34 Floor Area Ratio (FAR) – The gross floor area of the building or buildings on a lot
35 divided by the area of the lot. The floor area ratio requirement as set forth in the bulk
36 regulations for a zoning district determines the maximum floor area allowable for the
37 building or buildings (total gross floor area of both principal and accessory buildings) in
38 direct ratio to the gross area of the lot on which the buildings are constructed.
39
40 Forest – A biological community dominated by trees and other woody plants covering a
41 land area of 10,000 square feet or greater. Forest includes areas that have at least 100
42 trees per acre with at least 50% of those trees having two-inch or greater diameter at 4.5
43 feet above the ground and forest areas that have been cut, but not cleared. Forest does not
44 include orchards. Forest does include areas that have been cut but not cleared.
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-20
Forest Interior Dwelling Birds – Species 1 of birds which require relatively large forested
2 tracts in order to breed successfully (for example, various species of flycatchers,
3 warblers, vireos, and woodpeckers).
4
5 Forest management – means the protection, manipulation, and utilization of the forest to
6 provide multiple benefits, such as timber harvesting, water transpiration, wildlife habitat,
7 etc.
8
9 Forest practice – means the alteration of the forest either through tree removal or
10 replacement in order to improve the timber, wildlife, recreational, or water quality values.
11
12 Fully Established – means the Buffer contains as much diverse, native vegetation as
13 necessary to support a firm and stable riparian habitat capable of self-sustaining growth
14 and regeneration.
15
16 Funeral home – A building or part thereof used for human funeral services. Such
17 building may contain space and facilities for:
18
19 a. embalming and the performance of other services used in preparation of
20 the dead for burial;
21 b. the performance of autopsies and other surgical procedures;
22 c. he storage of caskets, funeral urns, and other related funeral supplies; and
23 d. the storage of funeral vehicles.
24
25 Funeral homes shall not include facilities for cremation. Where a funeral home is
26 permitted, a funeral chapel shall also be permitted.
27
28 Garage, private – A building for the private use of the owner or occupant of a principal
29 building situated on the same lot of the principal building for the storage of motor
30 vehicles with no facilities for mechanical service or repair of a commercial or public
31 nature.
32
33 Garage, public – A building designed and used for the storage of automotive vehicles
34 operated as a business enterprise with a service charge or fee being paid to the owner or
35 operator for the parking or storage of privately owned vehicles.
36
37 Garage, repair – A building designed and used for the storage, care, repair, or
38 refinishing of motor vehicles including both minor and major mechanical overhauling,
39 paint, and body work.
40
41 Grade – The average of the finished ground level at the center of all walls of a building.
42 In case walls are parallel to and within five (5) feet of a sidewalk, the ground level shall
43 be measured at the sidewalk.
44
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-21
Grandfathered – Describes the status accorded 1 certain properties and development
2 activities that are of record prior to the date of adoption of the Zoning Ordinance or
3 provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
4
5 Grandfathered parcel or grandfathered lot – in the Critical Area, means a parcel of
6 land that was created or a lot created through the subdivision process and recorded as a
7 legally buildable lot prior to December 1, 1985.
8
9 Granny Flat – A second dwelling unit either in or added to an existing single-family
10 detached dwelling, or in a separate accessory structure on the same lot as, and attached to,
11 the principal dwelling, for use as a complete, independent living facility with provision
12 within the accessory unit for cooking, eating, sanitation, and sleeping. Such a dwelling is
13 clearly accessory to the use of the main or principal dwelling.
14
15 Group Home – Any residential structure used to provide assisted community living for
16 persons with physical, mental, emotional, familial or social difficulties. More specific
17 definitions for Group Homes are given below:
18
19 Group Home For Developmentally Disabled Persons – A home designed to
20 accommodate up to eight developmentally disabled persons which is licensed by
21 the State of Maryland as a "public group home", a "non-profit private group
22 home" or an "alternative living unit" pursuant to Maryland Annotated Code
23 Health General Article Section 7-101 et seq.
24
25 Large Private Group Home For Persons Suffering From a Mental Disability
26 – A home designed to accommodate between nine and sixteen persons suffering
27 from a mental disability which is licensed by the State of Maryland as a "large
28 private group home" pursuant to Maryland Annotated Code Health General
29 Article Section 10-101 et seq.
30
31 Small Private Group Home For Persons Suffering From a Mental Disability
32 – A home designed to accommodate between four and eight persons suffering
33 from a mental disability which is licensed by the State of Maryland as a "small
34 private group home" pursuant to Maryland Annotated Code Health General
35 Article Section 10-101 et seq.
36
37 Specialized Group Home – A residential structure (other than those defined
38 above) used to provide assisted community living for persons with physical,
39 mental, emotional, familial or social difficulties.
40
41 Gross leasable area – The total floor area designed for tenant occupancy and exclusive
42 use, including basements, mezzanines, and upper floors, if any, expressed in square feet
43 and measured from the center line of joint partitions and from outside wall faces.
44
45 Ground Coverage – (See lot coverage).
46
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-22
Growth Allocation – means the number of 1 acres of land in the Critical Area that the
2 Town of Easton may use, or the County may allocate to municipal jurisdictions to use, to
3 create new Intensely Developed Areas and new Limited Development Areas. The
4 Growth Allocation acreage is five percent of the total Resource Conservation Area
5 acreage in Easton at the time the Critical Area Commission approved Easton’s original
6 Critical Area Program, not including tidal wetlands, plus additional acres included from
7 the County’s calculated amount [5%] of Resource Conservation Area that existed when
8 the Critical Area Commission approved Talbot County’s original Critical Area Program
9 [that the Town may request and the County may allocate].
10
11 Habitat Protection Areas – includes the Buffer, Non-Tidal Wetlands, Habitats of
12 Threatened and Endangered Species, Plant and Wildlife Habitats, Anadromous Fish
13 Spawning Propagation Waters and Habitats of Species in Need of Conservation, as
14 defined in COMAR 14.15.09.
15
16 Habitat Protection Plan – a plan that provides for the protection and conservation of the
17 species and habitats identified as Habitat Protection Areas in the Critical Area. The plan
18 shall be specific to the site or area where the species or its habitat is located and shall
19 address all aspects of a proposed development activity that may affect the continued
20 presence of the species. These include, but are not limited to, cutting, clearing, alterations
21 of natural hydrology, and increases in lot coverage. In developing the Plan, an applicant
22 shall coordinate with the Department of Natural Resources to ensure that the Plan is
23 adequate to provide for long-term conservation and can be effectively implemented on
24 the specific site.
25
26 Hazardous substances – Any substances or materials that, by reason of their toxic,
27 caustic, corrosive, abrasive, or otherwise injurious properties, may be detrimental or
28 deleterious to the health of any persons handling or otherwise coming into contact with
29 such material or substance, or any substance defined as a Hazardous Substance by State
30 or Federal Law.
31
32 Hazardous Tree – a tree with a structural defect, such as a crack, canker, weak branch
33 union, decay, dead wood, root damage, or root disease, that decreases the structural
34 integrity of the tree and which, because of its location, is likely to fall and cause personal
35 injury or property damage, including acceleration of soil erosion; or based on its location
36 in the landscape, a healthy tree that, with continued normal growth, will damage an
37 existing permanent structure or significantly increase the likelihood of soil erosion.
38 Hazardous tree does not include a tree for which the likelihood of personal injury,
39 property damage, or soil erosion can reasonably be eliminated or significantly diminished
40 with routine and proper arboricultural practices, such as regular watering, application of
41 fertilizer or mulch, and pruning; or by relocation of property that is likely to be damaged.
42
43 Health or Medical Clinic – An institution providing surgical or non-surgical treatment,
44 care, examination, diagnostic, rehabilitation or preventive health services to outpatients,
45 including, without limitation, mental health, family planning, inoculation and educational
46 service.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-23
1
2 Healthcare Staff Housing – A facility providing residential accommodations (including
3 cooking facilities) for physicians, nurses and other healthcare personnel employed within
4 the RH District. A Healthcare Staff Housing facility may not be owned by its
5 occupant(s).
6
7 Healthcare Student Dormitory – A facility providing residential accommodations
8 (including cooking facilities) for healthcare, medical or nursing students participating in
9 classes, coursework, internships, residencies or other education or training within the RH
10 District. A Healthcare Student Dormitory may not be owned by its occupant(s).
11
12 Hedge – A group of plants, planted in a row or grouping designed to have the same effect
13 as a fence.
14
15 Height – The vertical distance to the highest point of the structure measured from grade.
16
17 Helipad – An area, whether open land or part of a building, used for the landing and
18 take-off of helicopters.
19
20 Highly erodible soils – Soils with a slope greater than 15 percent; or those soils with a K
21 value greater than 0.35 and with slopes greater than 5 percent.
22
23 Historic District – shall mean a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites,
24 structures, or objects united historically, architecturally, archeologically, or culturally by
25 plan or physically development. An historic district shall include all property within its
26 boundaries as defined and designated by the Mayor and Town Council. Definitions
27 pertaining specifically to the Historic District are given below:
28
29 Alteration – shall mean any exterior change that would affect the historic,
30 archeological, or architectural significance of a designated site or structure,
31 any portion of which is visible or intended to be visible from a public way,
32 including, but not limited to, construction, reconstruction, moving, or
33 demolition.
34
35 Appurtenances and environmental settings – shall mean all that space of
36 grounds and structures thereon which surrounds a designated site or structure
37 and to which it relates physically or visually. Appurtenances and
38 environmental settings shall include, but not be limited to, walkways and
39 driveways (whether paved or not), trees, landscaping, pastures, croplands,
40 waterways, open space, setbacks, parks, public spaces, and rocks.
41
42 Certificate of Appropriateness – shall mean a certificate issued by the
43 Historic District Commission indicating its approval of plans for construction,
44 alteration, reconstruction, moving, or demolition of an individually designated
45 landmark, site, or structure or of a site or structure within a designated
46 preservation district.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-24
1
2 Demolition by neglect – shall mean any willful neglect in the maintenance
3 and repair of an individually designated landmark, site, or structure, or a site
4 or structure within a designated preservation district, not including any
5 appurtenances and environmental settings, that does not result from an
6 owner’s financial inability to maintain and repair such landmark, site, or
7 structure, and which results in any of the following conditions:
8
9 The deterioration of the foundations, exterior walls, roofs, chimneys,
10 doors, or windows, so as to create or permit a hazardous or unsafe
11 condition to exist; or
12
13 The deterioration of the foundations, exterior walls, roofs, chimneys,
14 doors, or windows, the lack of adequate waterproofing, or the
15 deterioration of interior features which will or could result in
16 permanent damage, injury, or loss of or loss to foundations, exterior
17 walls, roofs, chimneys, doors, or windows.
18
19 Exterior features – shall mean the architectural style, design, and general
20 arrangement of the exterior of an historic structure, including the nature and
21 texture of building material, and the type and style of all windows, doors, light
22 fixtures, signs, or similar items found on or related to the exterior of an
23 historic structure.
24
25 Historic Area Work Building Permit – shall mean a permit issued by the
26 Building Department upon receiving a Certificate of Appropriateness from the
27 Commission for all projects that the Town conducts, assists, licenses, or
28 permits that affect properties within a designated district or individually
29 designated sites or landmarks.
30
31 Landmark – shall mean any designated site or structure outside the
32 boundaries of a preservation district that is of exceptional historic,
33 archeological, or architectural significance.
34
35 Reconstruction – shall mean the process of reproducing by new construction
36 the exact form and detail of a vanished structure, or part thereof, as it appeared
37 at a specific period of time.
38
39 Restoration – shall mean the process of accurately recovering the form and
40 details of a property as it appeared at a specific period of time by means of
41 removal of later work and the replacement of work missing from that period.
42
43 Site – shall mean the location of an event of historic significance or a
44 structure, whether standing or ruined, which possesses historic, architectural,
45 archeological, or cultural significance.
46
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-25
Structure – shall mean a combination 1 of material to form a construction that
2 is stable, including but not limited to buildings, stadiums, reviewing stands,
3 platforms, staging, observation towers, radio towers, water tanks and towers,
4 trestles, bridges, piers, paving, bulkheads, wharves, sheds, coal bins, shelters,
5 fences, and display signs, visible or intended to be visible from a public way.
6 The term “structure” shall be construed as if followed by the works, “or part
7 thereof.”
8
9 Historic waterfowl staging and concentration area – means an area of open
10 water and adjacent marshes where waterfowl gather during migration and
11 throughout the winter season. These areas are historic in the sense that their
12 location is common knowledge and because these areas have been used regularly
13 during recent times.
14
15 Home-based business – A specialized type of Home Occupation with negligible or no
16 impact on the neighborhood in which it is located. Such an operation has no vehicular
17 traffic, no special deliveries, and has no sign to indicate that such a business is located on
18 the premises. Examples of home-based businesses include the situation whereby the
19 resident uses a home computer, telephone, and/or fax machine for such routine business
20 practices as billing, scheduling, and placing orders.
21
22 Homeless Shelter – A facility that provides temporary housing for individuals and
23 families who are temporarily homeless, or about to become homeless. A homeless shelter
24 also may provide meals and support services as needed to assist those who need a respite
25 from bills to save some funds so they can provide for themselves once again. These
26 services may be provided by trained staff and volunteers, and other community service
27 agencies. An individual’s length of stay is determined by their unique needs, and the
28 availability of transitional housing.
29
30 Home occupation – An occupation, profession, activity, or use that is clearly a
31 customary, incidental, and secondary use of a residential dwelling unit and which does
32 not alter the exterior of the property or affect the residential character of the
33 neighborhood. Included in this definition are home professional offices whereby the
34 office of an artist, writer, doctor, lawyer, dentist, architect, engineer, accountant, real
35 estate or insurance agent, salesman, surveyor or other similar offices is located within the
36 home of the practitioner.
37
38 Homeowners association – A private, nonprofit corporation of homeowners for the
39 purpose of owning, operating, and maintaining commonly owned properties.
40
41 Hospital – An institution specializing in giving clinical, temporary, and emergency
42 services of a medical or surgical nature to human patients and injured persons, and
43 licensed by state law to provide facilities and services in surgery, obstetrics, and general
44 medical practice. Hospitals may include various accessory and ancillary activities which
45 are customarily incidental to and in direct support of the primary healthcare mission of
46 the hospital, such as laboratories, pharmacies, cafeterias, gift shops, teaching, and
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-26
research, diagnostic, treatment or rehabilitation facilities 1 which are integrated with the
2 hospital facilities
3
4 Hotel (See also motel) – A facility offering transient lodging accommodations on a daily
5 rate to the general public and providing additional services, such as restaurants, meeting
6 rooms, and recreational facilities.
7
8 Houses of worship – A structure that people regularly attend to participate in or hold
9 religious services, meetings, and other activities.
10
11 Hydric soils – means soils that are wet frequently enough to periodically produce
12 anaerobic conditions, thereby influencing the species composition or growth, or both, of
13 plants on those soils.
14
15 Hydrophytic vegetation – means those plants cited in "Vascular Plant Species Occurring
16 in Maryland Wetlands" (Dawson, F. et al., 1985) which are described as growing in water
17 or on a substrate that is at least periodically deficient in oxygen as a result of excessive
18 water content (plants typically found in water habitats).
19
20 Impervious surface – A surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer of
21 material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water. It includes surfaces such as
22 compacted sand, limerock, or clay, as well as most conventionally surfaced streets, roofs,
23 sidewalks, parking lots, and other similar structures.
24
25 Immediate family – a father, mother, son, daughter, grandfather, grandmother,
26 grandson, or granddaughter.
27
28 Indoor Recreation Facility – A building or group of buildings whereby the primary
29 activity involved is the practice of such recreational activities as basketball, tennis,
30 racquetball, weight lifting, aerobics, swimming, etc.
31
32 Industrial park – A planned, coordinated development of a tract of land with two or
33 more separate industrial buildings. Such development is planned, designed, constructed,
34 and managed on an integrated and coordinated basis with special attention given to on35
site vehicular circulation, parking, utility needs, building design and orientation, and open
36 spaces and screening.
37
38 Industry, heavy – A use engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials
39 or products predominately from extracted or raw materials, or a use engaged in storage
40 of, or manufacturing processes using flammable or explosive materials, or storage or
41 manufacturing processes that potentially involve hazardous or commonly recognized
42 offensive conditions.
43
44 Industry, light – A use engaged in the manufacture, predominately from previously
45 prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication,
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-27
assembly, treatment, packaging, 1 incidental storage, sales, and distribution of such
2 products, but excluding basic industrial processing.
3
4 In-kind replacement – The replacement of a structure with another structure that is
5 smaller than or identical to the original structure in footprint area, width, length, and use.
6
7 Intensely Developed Area – An area of at least 20 acres or the entire upland portion of
8 the Critical Area within a municipal corporation, whichever is less, where residential,
9 commercial, institutional, or industrial developed land uses predominate; and a relatively
10 small amount of natural habitat occurs. These areas include an area with a housing
11 density of at least four dwelling units per acre and/or an area with public water and sewer
12 systems with a housing density of more than three dwelling units per acre.
13
14 Invasive species – a species that is non-native or alien to the ecosystem under
15 consideration whose introduction causes or is likely to cause economic or environmental
16 harm or harm to human health.
17
18 Junk – Articles that have outlived their usefulness in their original form, and are
19 commonly gathered up and sold to be converted into another product, either of the same
20 or of a different kind.
21
22 Junk Yard – Any land or building or part thereof used for the abandonment, sale,
23 storage, collecting or baling of paper, rags, scrap metals, other scrap or discarded
24 materials, or the abandonment, demolition, dismantling, storage, salvaging or sale of
25 automobiles or other vehicles not in running condition, or machinery, or parts thereof.
26
27 Kennel – Any building or buildings or land (and associated fencing) designed or
28 arranged for the care of dogs and/or cats belonging to the owner of the principal use, kept
29 for purposes of show, hunting, or as pets.
30
31 Kennel, commercial – An establishment licensed to operate a facility housing dogs, cats,
32 or other household pets and where grooming, breeding, boarding, training, or selling of
33 animals is conducted as a business.
34
35 K Value – the soil erodibility factor in the Universal Soil Loss Equation. It is a
36 quantitative value that is experimentally determined.
37
38 Land-based aquaculture – the raising of fish or shellfish in any natural or man-made,
39 enclosed or impounded, water body.
40
41 Land Clearing – means any activity that removes the vegetative ground cover.
42
43 Landfill – A type of operation in which refuse and earth or other suitable cover material
44 are deposited in alternate layers of specified depth in accordance with a definite plan on a
45 specified portion of open land, with each layer being compacted by force applied by
46 mechanical equipment.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-28
1
2 Landforms – Feature of the earth's surface created by natural causes.
3
4 Large shrub – A shrub that, when mature, reaches a height of at least six (6) feet.
5
6 Landward Edge – the limit of a site feature that is furthest away from a tidal water, tidal
7 wetland, or a tributary stream.
8
9 Legally developed – all physical improvements to a property that existed before Critical
10 Area Commission approval of a local Ordinance, or were properly permitted in
11 accordance with the provisions of the local Ordinance in effect at the time of
12 construction.
13
14 Limit of disturbance – the area of a development or redevelopment activity that includes
15 temporary disturbance and permanent disturbance.
16
17 Limited Development Area – means an area: with a housing density ranging from one
18 dwelling unit per five acres up to four dwelling units per acre; with a public water or
19 sewer system; that is not dominated by agricultural land, wetland, forests, barren land,
20 surface water, or open space; or that is less than 20 acres and otherwise qualifies as an
21 Intensely Developed Area under the definition in this Ordinance.
22
23 Living shoreline – means a suite of stabilization and erosion control measures that
24 preserve the natural shoreline and are designed to minimize shoreline erosion, maintain
25 coastal process, and provide aquatic habitat. Measures must include marsh plantings and
26 may include the use of sills, sand containment structures, breakwaters, or other natural
27 components.
28
29 Liquor Store – A business that sells alcoholic beverages for consumption off-premises.
30 For the purposes of this Ordinance, the term “liquor store” does not include grocery
31 stores or convenience stores in which beer and/or wine is offered for sale as a minor part
32 of an overall larger inventory of goods. It shall also not include a restaurant that is
33 otherwise operating in accordance with its approved liquor license and all other
34 provisions of this Ordinance.
35
36 Local significance – means development of a minor scale, which causes environmental
37 or economic consequences that are largely confined to the immediate area of the parcel of
38 land on which it is located; does not substantially affect the Critical Area Ordinance of
39 the Town of Easton; and is not considered to be major development as defined in this
40 Ordinance.
41
42 Lot – A parcel of land undivided by any street and occupied by, or designated to be
43 developed for, one (1) building or principal use and the accessory buildings or uses
44 customarily incidental to such building, use, or development, including such open spaces
45 and yards as are designed and arranged or required by this Ordinance for such building,
46 use, or development. (See Figure 1.1).
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-29
1
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-30
1
2
3 Figure 1.1
4
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-31
Lot area 1 – The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot.
2
3 Lot, corner – A lot having continuous frontage on two or more intersecting streets.
4 Notwithstanding any other provision of this Ordinance, corner lots shall be deemed to
5 have two fronts, two sides and no rear for the purpose of meeting setback requirements.
6
7 Lot coverage – the percentage of a total lot or parcel that is: occupied by a structure,
8 accessory structure, parking area, driveway, walkway, or roadway; or covered with a
9 paver, walkway gravel, stone, shell, impermeable decking, a paver, permeable pavement,
10 or other any manmade material. Lot coverage includes the ground area covered or
11 occupied by a stairway or impermeable deck, but does not include: a fence or wall that is
12 less than one foot in width that has not been constructed with a footer; a walkway in the
13 Buffer or expanded Buffer, including a stairway, that provides direct access to a
14 community or private pier; a wood mulch pathway; or a deck with gaps to allow water to
15 pass freely.
16
17 Lot depth – The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
18
19 Lot, flag – A lot with access provided to the bulk of the lot by means of a narrow
20 corridor.
21
22 Lot frontage – The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion nearest to any
23 public street or way. For the purpose of determining setback requirements of corner lots
24 and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage.
25
26 Lot, interior – An interior lot is a lot other than a corner lot.
27
28 Lot line – The boundary line of a lot (See Figure 1.1).
29
30 Lot line, front (See also yard, front) – The line separating the front of the lot from the
31 street. When a lot or building site is bounded by a public street and one or more
32 easements, the front lot line shall be the nearest street line (See Figure 1.1).
33
34 Lot line, rear – That lot line opposite to the front property line. Where the side property
35 lines of a lot meet in a point, the rear property line shall be a line not less than ten (10)
36 feet long, lying within the lot and parallel to the front property line (See Figure 1.1).
37
38 Lot line, side – Any lot line not a front or rear lot line (See Figure 1.1).
39
40 Lot of record – A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the Clerk of
41 Circuit Court, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which
42 has been so recorded.
43
44 Lot, through – A lot having its front and rear yards each abutting on a street.
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-32
Lot, width – The horizontal distance between 1 the side lot lines of a lot measured at the
2 minimum front and rear setback lines (for corner lots, it is the distance between each
3 front and side setback line) (See Figure 1.1).
4
5 Maintenance guarantee – A guarantee of facilities or work to ensure the correction of
6 any failures of any improvements required pursuant to this Ordinance and regulation, or
7 to maintain same.
8
9 Major Retail – A retail establishment in a single building, occupying more than 25,000
10 gross square feet of floor area.
11
12 Mall – A large enclosed collection of independent retail stores and services, with
13 associated shared parking areas, constructed and maintained by a management firm as a
14 unit.
15
16 Manufactured housing (See also mobile home) – A factory built, single-family
17 structure that is manufactured under the authority of 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5401, the National
18 Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act, is transportable in one or
19 more sections, is built on a permanent chassis, and is used as a place of human habitation;
20 but which is not constructed with a permanent hitch or other device allowing transport of
21 the unit other than for the purpose of delivery to a permanent site, and which does not
22 have wheels or axles permanently attached to its body or frame.
23
24 Manufactured housing park – A parcel of land under single ownership that has been
25 planned and improved for the placement of manufactured housing for dwelling purposes.
26
27 Marina – means any facility for the mooring, berthing, storing, or securing of watercraft,
28 but not including community piers and other non-commercial boat docking and storage
29 facilities.
30
31 Major development – means development of a scale that may cause State-wide,
32 regional, or inter-jurisdictional, environmental or economic effects in the Critical Area, or
33 which may cause substantial impacts to the Critical Area of a local jurisdiction. This
34 development includes, but is not limited to, airports, powerplants, wastewater treatment
35 plants, highways, regional utility transmission facilities, prisons, hospitals, public housing
36 projects, public beaches, and intensely developed park and recreation facilities.
37
38 Mean High Water Line (MHWL) – the average level of high tides at a given location.
39
40 Medical Laboratory – Any facility that offers or performs tests or examinations in
41 connection with the diagnosis and control of human diseases or the assessment of human
42 health, nutritional, or medical conditions or in connection with job-related drug and
43 alcohol testing. Medical Laboratories may perform medical, dental, optical,
44 pharmaceutical or related research, diagnostic testing, analytical or clinical work having a
45 direct relationship to the providing of healthcare services, including, but not limited to,
46 medical research, radiology, hematology, serology, immunology, allergy, biochemistry,
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-33
basal metabolism, microbiology, parasitology, 1 pathology, histology, cytology, toxicology
2 and pharmacology.
3
4 Medical Services – Facilities primarily engaged in furnishing outpatient medical, mental
5 health, surgical and other personal health services. These include, without limitation:
6 offices for physicians, chiropractors, dentists, optometrists, psychiatrists, nurse
7 practitioners, psychologists, home healthcare service providers (counseling services by
8 other than medical doctors, psychiatrists, or psychologists are included under the use
9 "Offices"); medical and dental laboratories; out-patient care facilities; emergency room
10 services; and allied health services. Associations or groups primarily engaged in
11 providing medical or other health services to members are included.
12
13 Mega-Church – A large, specialized type of house of worship which includes such non14
traditional accessory uses as retail sales, residential uses, amusement parks, and sports
15 and entertainment facilities, as an integrated part of the development.
16
17 Mean High Water Line – means the average level of high tides at a given location.
18
19 Micro-brewery – A facility in which beer is brewed for distribution and consumption
20 off-premises and which possesses the appropriate license from the State of Maryland.
21
22 Mitigation – means an action taken to compensate for adverse impacts to the
23 environment resulting from development, development activity, or a change in land use
24 or intensity.
25
26 Mini-warehouse – Storage facilities located within a totally enclosed structure(s) used
27 for the storage of nonflammable or non-explosive materials. Such facilities shall
28 primarily serve the overflow storage needs of residents.
29
30 Mobile Food Use – A food service operation that is vehicle-mounted or wheeled, a
31 portable structure, or watercraft and is capable of being readily moved. Uses that are
32 similar in nature but do not meet this definition, such as a trailer without wheels, are not
33 considered a mobile food use and therefore would be subject to the applicable use and
34 building regulations for the appropriate fixed structure.
35
36 Mobile home (See also manufactured housing) – A transportable, factory-built home,
37 designed to be used as a year-round residential dwelling and built prior to the enactment
38 of the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974,
39 which became effective June 15, 1976.
40
41 Mobile Medical Facility – A temporary use which involves a trailer or mobile
42 unit which houses medical equipment which is customarily moved from location
43 to location when needed.
44
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-34
Multiple use (See also shopping center) 1 – Two or more uses contained either within one
2 building or in more than one building on an approved lot provided that if any commercial
3 uses are involved, the total is less than 10,000 square feet gross floor area.
4
5 Motel (See also hotel) – A building or group of detached or connected buildings
6 designed or used primarily for providing sleeping accommodations for automobile
7 travelers and having a parking space adjacent to a sleeping room.
8
9 Museum – a building(s) and or site(s) used for the preservation, collection, restoration,
10 display, interpretation and/or demonstration of articles of cultural, historical and/or
11 scientific significance, and which may include areas devoted to galleries, exhibition halls,
12 classrooms, workshops, studios, curatorial storage and administrative offices.
13
14 Native plant – means a species that is indigenous to the physiographic area in Maryland
15 where the planting is proposed.
16
17 Natural features – means components and processes present in or produced by nature,
18 including but not limited to soil types, geology, slopes, vegetation, surface water,
19 drainage patterns, aquifers, recharge areas, climate, flood plains, aquatic life, and
20 wildlife.
21
22 Natural Heritage Area – means any communities of plants or animals which are
23 considered to be among the best Statewide examples of their kind, and are designated by
24 regulation by the Secretary of the Department of Natural Resources.
25
26 Natural regeneration – the natural establishment of trees and other vegetation with at
27 least 400 free-to-grow seedlings per acre, which are capable of reaching a height of at
28 least 20 feet at maturity.
29
30 Natural Vegetation – means plant communities that develop in the absence of human
31 activities.
32
33 Nature-dominated – a condition where landforms or biological communities, or both,
34 have developed by natural processes in the absence of human activities.
35
36 New development – means that for purposes of implementing specific provisions of this
37 Ordinance, new developments (as opposed to redevelopment) means a development
38 activity that takes place on a property with pre-development imperviousness (in IDA) or
39 lot coverage (LDA and RCA) of less than 15 percent as of December 1, 1985.
40
41 Nonconforming lot – A lot which lawfully existed prior to the adoption, revision, or
42 amendment of this Ordinance, but which fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or
43 amendment to conform to the use in which it is located.
44
45 Nonconforming structure – An otherwise legal building or structure that does not
46 conform with the lot area, yard, height, lot coverage, or other area regulations of this
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-35
Ordinance, or is designed or intended for 1 use that does not conform to the use regulations
2 of this Ordinance, for the district in which it is located either at the effective date of this
3 Ordinance or as a result of subsequent amendments to the Ordinance.
4
5 Nonconforming use – A lawful use of land that does not comply with the use regulations
6 for its zoning district but which complied with applicable regulations at the time the use
7 was established.
8
9 Non-point source pollution – pollution generated by diffuse land use activities rater than
10 from an identifiable or discrete facility. It is conveyed to waterways through natural
11 processes, such as rainfall, storm runoff, or groundwater seepage rather than by deliberate
12 discharge. Non-point source pollution is not generally corrected by "end-of-pipe"
13 treatment, but rather by changes in land management practices.
14
15 Non-renewable resources – resources that are not naturally regenerated or renewed.
16
17 Non-tidal wetland (See also wetland) – those areas regulated under Subtitle 9 of the
18 Environment Article that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a
19 frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does
20 support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
21 commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. The determination of whether an area is a
22 non-tidal wetland shall be made in accordance with the publication known as the
23 “Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands,” published in
24 1989, and as may be amended. Non-tidal wetlands do not include tidal wetlands regulated
25 under Title 16 of the Environment Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
26
27 Nursing Home (or Rest Home, Convalescent Home, or Home for the Aged) – A place
28 devoted primarily to the maintenance and operation of facilities for the treatment and care
29 of any person suffering from illness, disease, deformities, or injuries who do not require
30 extensive or intensive care such as provided in a general or other specialized hospital. A
31 nursing home provides medical, nursing, convalescent, or chronic care in addition to
32 room and board.
33
34 Office(s) – A building or portion of a building wherein services are performed involving
35 predominantly administrative, professional, or clerical operations.
36
37 Offsets – means structures or actions that compensate for undesirable impacts.
38
39 Open-section road – a road without curb and gutter.
40
41 Open space – Undeveloped land and water areas used for recreation, resource protection,
42 amenity, and/or buffers and protected from future development.
43
44 Open space, common – Open space within or related to a development, not in
45 individually owned lots or dedicated for public use, but which is designed and intended
46 for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of the development.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-36
1
2 Open storage – Outdoor storage that is neither screened nor buffered from view from
3 any public way.
4
5 Open Water – Tidal waters of the State that do not contain tidal wetlands and/or
6 submerged aquatic vegetation.
7
8 Outdoor recreation area – An area where such recreational activities as golf, tennis,
9 swimming, etc., are pursued out of doors.
10
11 Outdoor or Outside storage – The keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods, junk,
12 material, merchandise, or inoperable vehicles in the same place for more than 24 hours.
13 Goods or materials kept at an active construction site or automobiles, trailers, boats, etc.,
14 whose display is an essential part of the business shall not be considered outside storage.
15
16 Overburden – The strata or material in its natural state, before its removal by surface
17 mining, overlying a mineral deposit, or in between mineral deposits.
18
19 Overnight Care Facility – A facility that provides overnight accommodation of patients
20 for recovery, rehabilitation or extended-care treatment of medical, psychiatric or
21 psychological conditions or substance abuse and/or residential hospice care for terminally
22 ill patients.
23
24 Pad, development – The area of a lot, within a larger overall lot area that is devoted to
25 structures and septic systems. In general, where a development pad is prescribed the
26 remaining area of the lot must be maintained in natural vegetation.
27
28 Palustrine – means all non-tidal wetlands dominated by trees, shrubs, persistent
29 emergent plants, or emergent mosses or lichens and all such wetlands that occur in tidal
30 areas where the salinity due to ocean-derived salts is below one-half part per 1,000 parts
31 of water.
32
33 Park – Any public or private land available for recreational, educational, cultural, or
34 aesthetic use.
35
36 Parking lot or parking area – An area not within a building where motor vehicles may
37 be stored for the purposes of temporary, daily, or overnight off-street parking. The
38 parking area includes the required maneuvering space but not the ancillary access drive.
39
40 Parking, shared – The development and use of parking areas on two or more separate
41 properties for joint use by the businesses on those properties.
42
43 Parking space – An unobstructed space or area other than a street or alley that is
44 permanently reserved and maintained for the parking of one (1) motor vehicle.
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-37
Patient Hostel – A residential facility primarily 1 intended for the use of patients being
2 admitted or discharged from the hospital and their immediate families. The facility may
3 include a shared dining facility that is restricted to the use of the hostel occupants and
4 their guests.
5
6 Performance guarantee (See also maintenance guarantee) – A financial guarantee to
7 ensure that all improvements, facilities, or work required by this Ordinance will be
8 completed in compliance with the Ordinance, the Subdivision Regulations, and the
9 approved plans and specifications of a development.
10
11 Permanent Disturbance – a material, enduring change in the topography, landscape, or
12 structure that occurs as part of a development or redevelopment activity. Permanent
13 disturbance includes: Construction or installation of any material that will result in lot
14 coverage; Construction of a deck; grading that does not otherwise qualify as “temporary
15 disturbance”; and clearing of a tree, forest, or developed woodland that does not
16 otherwise qualify as “temporary disturbance.” Permanent disturbance does not include a
17 septic system on a lot created before local program approval if the septic system is
18 located in existing grass or clearing is not required.
19
20 Person – An individual, partnership, corporation, contractor, property owner, or any
21 other person or entity.
22
23 Personal Services – Establishments or places of business engaged in the provision of
24 frequently or recurrently needed services of a personal nature. Typical uses include
25 beauty and barber shops; grooming of pets; seamstresses, tailors, or shoe repairs; florists;
26 massage therapy; and laundromats and dry cleaning stations serving individuals and
27 households.
28
29 Photocopy service – A business that reproduces drawings, plans, maps, or other copy by
30 means of blueprinting or photocopying.
31
32 Physiographic features – The soils, topography, land slope and aspect, and local
33 climate that influence the form and species composition of plant communities.
34
35 Pier – any pier, wharf, dock, walkway, bulkhead, breakwater, piles or other similar
36 structure. Pier does not include any structure on pilings or stilts that was originally
37 constructed beyond the landward boundaries of State or private wetlands.
38
39 Planned unit development (PUD) – A development of land that is under unified control
40 and is planned and developed as a whole in a single development operation or
41 programmed series of development stages. The development may include streets,
42 circulation ways, utilities, buildings, open spaces, and other site features and
43 improvements.
44
45 Planning and Zoning Commission (or Planning Commission) – The Easton Planning
46 and Zoning Commission.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-38
1
2 Plant Habitat – A community of plants commonly identifiable by the composition of its
3 vegetation and its physiographic characteristics.
4
5 Port – A facility or area established or designated by the State or local jurisdiction for
6 purposes of waterborne commerce.
7
8 Portable on demand storage – (PODS) aluminum or steel cargo crates that can be
9 delivered to a location, loaded up, and hauled away to a warehouse for storage.
10
11 Principal building – A building in which the primary use of the lot on which the
12 building is located is conducted.
13
14 Principal structure – the primary or predominant structure on any lot or parcel. For
15 residential parcels or lots, the principal structure is the primary dwelling.
16
17 Principal use – The main use of land or structures, as distinguished from a secondary or
18 accessory use.
19
20 Print shop – A retail establishment that provides duplicating services using photocopy,
21 blueprint, and offset printing equipment, including collating of booklets and reports.
22
23 Private Clubs and Lodge – Any building which serves as a meeting place for a selected
24 membership, together with recreation and dining facilities which are not open to the
25 general public.
26
27 Program amendment – any change or proposed change to an adopted Ordinance that is
28 not determined by the Chairman of the Critical Area Commission to be an Ordinance
29 refinement.
30
31 Program refinement – any change or proposed change to an adopted Ordinance that the
32 Chairman of the Critical Area Commission determines will result in a use of land or
33 water in the Chesapeake Bay Critical Area or Atlantic Coastal Bays Critical Area in a
34 manner consistent with the adopted Ordinance, or that will not significantly affect the use
35 of land or water in the Critical Area. Ordinance refinement may include:
36
37 a. A change to an adopted Ordinance that results from State law;
38 b. A change to an adopted Ordinance that affects local processes and
39 procedures;
40 c. A change to a local ordinance or code that clarifies an existing provision;
41 and
42 d. A minor change to an element of an adopted Ordinance that is clearly
43 consistent with the provisions of State Critical Area law and all the
44 Criteria of the Commission
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-39
Project approvals – means the approval 1 of development, other than development by the
2 State or local government, in the Chesapeake Bay Critical Area by the appropriate local
3 approval authority. The term includes approval of subdivision plats and site plans;
4 inclusion of areas within floating zones; issuance of variances, special exceptions, and
5 conditional use permits; and issuance of zoning permits. The term does not include
6 building permits.
7
8 Property owner – A person holding title to a property or two or more persons holding
9 title to a property under any form of joint ownership.
10
11 Public Utility – Any activity or use which provides and offers such services to the
12 general public as vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems, storm sewers, water,
13 sewerage, sewage treatment, electricity, gas, or communications. Excluded from this
14 definition are the general offices for any entity which provides such services.
15
16 Public water-oriented recreation – Shore-dependent recreation facilities or activities
17 provided by public agencies which are available to the general public.
18
19 Reclamation – the reasonable rehabilitation of disturbed land for useful purposes, and
20 the protection of the natural resources of adjacent areas, including waterbodies.
21
22 Reconfiguration – A change of the configuration of an existing lot or parcel line of any
23 legal parcel of land or recorded legally buildable lot. An application for reconfiguration
24 may include a subdivision, a lot line adjustment, a boundary line adjustment, a replatting
25 request, or a revision of acreage to increase density.
26
27 Recycling collection station – A collection point for small refuse items, such as bottles
28 and newspapers, located either in a container or small structure.
29
30 Recycling processing center – A facility that is not a junkyard and in which recoverable
31 resources, such as newspapers, glassware, and metal cans, are collected, stored flattened,
32 crushed, or bundled. Such materials may then be transported off site to be recycled or
33 they may be recycled, reprocessed, and treated on site to return such products to a
34 condition in which they may again be used for production.
35
36 Redevelopment – the process of developing land which is or has been developed. For
37 purposes of implementing specific provisions of the Critical Area Chapter of this
38 Ordinance, redevelopment (as opposed to new development) means a development
39 activity that takes place on property with pre-development imperviousness (in IDA) or lot
40 coverage (in LDA and RCA) of 15 percent or greater.
41
42 Reforestation – The establishment of a forest through artificial reproduction or natural
43 regeneration.
44
45 Renewable resource – A resource that can renew or replace itself and, therefore, with
46 proper management, can be harvested indefinitely.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-40
1
2 Resource Conservation Area – an area that is characterized by nature dominated
3 environments, such as wetlands, surface water, forests, and open space; and resource–
4 based activities, such as agriculture, forestry, fisheries, or aquaculture. Resource
5 Conservation Areas include areas with a housing density of less than one dwelling per
6 five acres.
7
8 Resource utilization activities – any and all activities associated with the utilization of
9 natural resources such as agriculture, forestry, surface mining, aquaculture, and fisheries
10 activities.
11
12 Restaurant, carry-out/delicatessen – An establishment that sells prepared food and/or
13 beverages that are delivered to and/or consumed by customers off the premises.
14
15 Restaurant, fast food – An establishment that offers quick food service, which is
16 accomplished through a limited menu of items already prepared and held for service, or
17 prepared, fried, or griddled quickly, or heated in a device such as a microwave oven.
18 Orders are not generally taken at the customer's table, and food is generally served in
19 disposable wrapping or containers. Fast food restaurants may also include drive-thru
20 windows.
21
22 Restaurant, nightclub (See also Bar and Tavern) – A commercial establishment
23 dispensing alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises which also serves at
24 least two (2) complete meals per day and in which dancing is permitted or entertainment
25 is provided.
26
27 Restaurant, sit down – A business establishment whose principal business is the selling
28 of unpackaged food to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, in individual servings,
29 or in nondisposable containers, and where the customer consumes these foods while
30 seated at tables or counters located within the building.
31
32 Restoration – the act of returning a site or area to an original state or any action that
33 reestablishes all or a portion of the ecological structure and functions of a site or area.
34
35 Retail thrift or outlet store operated by a non-profit organization – A retail store in
36 which donated new or used products are sold to the public at a discounted price for the
37 purpose of generating income to support the activities of a non-profit organization.
38
39 Retirement Community – A residential facility for four or more elderly persons (aged
40 62 or older) within which are provided living and sleeping facilities, meal preparation,
41 laundry services, and room cleaning. Such facilities may also provide other services such
42 as transportation for routine social and medical appointments, and counseling.
43
44 Right-of-way – A strip or area of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
45 crosswalk, railroad, utilities, private or public ways of access, or other special uses.
46
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-41
Riparian habitat – a habitat that is strongly influenced 1 by water and which occurs
2 adjacent to streams, shorelines, and wetlands.
3
4 Road –
5 a. “Public Road" means a public thoroughfare under the jurisdiction of the
6 State, a county, a municipal corporation, or any other public body.
7 b. “Private Road” means a way open to vehicular ingress and egress
8 established as a separate tract for the benefit of certain, adjacent
9 properties. This definition shall not apply to private driveways.
10 a) “Road" does not include a drive aisle or driveway. “Road” includes both
11 public and private roads.
12
13 Satellite dish antenna – a round parabolic antenna intended to receive signals from
14 orbiting satellites and other sources.
15
16 School – A facility that provides a curriculum of elementary and secondary academic
17 instruction, including kindergartens, elementary schools, junior high schools, and high
18 schools.
19
20 Screening (See also buffer area) – The method by which a view of one site from
21 another adjacent site is shielded, concealed, or hidden. Screening techniques include
22 fences, walls, hedges, berms, or other features.
23
24 Seasonally flooded water regime – a condition where surface water is present for
25 extended periods, especially early in the growing season, and when surface water is
26 absent, the water table is often near the land surface.
27
28 Selection – the removal of single, scattered, mature trees or other trees from uneven29
aged stands by frequent and periodic cutting operations.
30
31 Service station (See also garage, repair) – Any premises where gasoline and other
32 petroleum products are sold and/or light maintenance activities such as engine tuneups,
33 lubrication, minor repairs, and carburetor cleaning are conducted. Service stations shall
34 not include premises where heavy automobile maintenance activities such as engine
35 overhauls, automobile painting, and body fender work are conducted.
36
37 Setback – A line beyond which no building or structure is permitted to extend. All
38 setbacks extend from property line to property line.
39
40 Shore erosion protection works – those structures or measures constructed or installed
41 to prevent or minimize erosion of the shoreline in the Critical Area.
42
43 Short-term housing – Any lease or other transfer of the right to occupy a primary or
44 accessory dwelling unit on the parcel other than a hotel, motel, inn, or bed-and-breakfast
45 for not less than one night and not exceeding four months.
46
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-42
1
2 Shopping center – A group of three (3) or more architecturally unified commercial
3 establishments with a total gross floor area of more than 10,000 square feet which are
4 planned, constructed, and managed as a total entity with customer and employee parking
5 provided on-site. A shopping center may either be a strip center or a campus-style center.
6 Strip centers describe all existing centers in Easton as of the year 2000 and new ones
7 shall be prohibited. Existing ones may be redeveloped and in the event that downtown8
scale and character commercial development is defined as a strip center, it shall be
9 permitted.
10
11 Sign – A structure or device designed or intended to convey information to the public in
12 written or pictorial form. More specific sign definitions are given below.
13
14 banner – Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material.
15
16 building sign – Any sign attached to any part of a building, as contrasted to a
17 freestanding sign.
18
19 commercial message – Any sign wording, logo, or other representation that,
20 directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business, product,
21 service, or other commercial activity.
22
23 decorative flag – A specific type of flag which is distinguished from the general
24 definition of "flag" in that it does not relate to any government, political
25 subdivision, or other entity. Such a flag shall contain no generally recognized
26 commercial symbol and no written message.
27
28 flag – Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or
29 symbols, used as a symbol of government, political subdivision, or other entity.
30
31 freestanding sign – A self-supporting sign not attached to any building, wall, or
32 fence, but in a fixed location. This does not include portable or trailer type signs.
33
34 incidental sign – A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary
35 to the use of the zone lot on which it is located, such as "no parking," "entrance,"
36 "loading only," "telephone," and other similar directives. No sign with a
37 commercial message legible from a position off the zone lot on which the sign is
38 located shall be considered incidental.
39
40 multiple signs – A group of signs clustered together in a single structure or
41 compositional unit. Multiple signs are used to advertise several occupants of the
42 same building or building complex.
43
44 nonconforming sign – Any sign that does not conform to the requirements of
45 this Section.
46
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-43
pennant – Any lightweight 1 plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not
2 containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually
3 in series, designed to move in the wind.
4
5 portable sign – Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other
6 permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not
7 limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; balloons used as
8 signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles
9 parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is used in the
10 normal day-to-day operations of the business.
11
12 projecting sign – Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner that its
13 leading edge extends more than six (6) inches beyond the surface of such building
14 or wall.
15
16 Reader Board – A portion of a sign containing changeable copy intended to
17 convey a message concerning products or services available on the premises on
18 which the sign is located. Excluded from this definition are signs displaying the
19 price of gasoline available on premise or announcements concerning or promoting
20 community or non-profit events.
21
22 Electronic Reader Board – a reader board that is capable of displaying
23 visual words, symbols, figures or images that can be electronically or
24 mechanically changed by remote or automatic means.
25
26 roof sign – Any sign affixed to or erected and constructed wholly on and over the
27 roof of a building or supported by the roof structure. The roof structure shall also
28 include fake roof structures.
29
30 sidewalk sign – A freestanding sign of six (6) square feet or less designed to
31 convey information to pedestrian rather than vehicular traffic. Such sign shall not
32 extend out from the building line more than three (3) feet and in no case nearer to
33 the curb than six (6) feet; and provided further that no sign having sharp or
34 dangerous projections shall be permitted.
35
36 street frontage – The lineal distance for which a building fronts on lot line of a
37 zone lot adjoins a public street, from one lot line intersecting said street to the
38 furthest distant lot line intersecting the same street.
39
40 temporary sign – Any sign that is used only temporarily and is not permanently
41 mounted.
42
43 Video Board – an electronic sign capable of creating the effect of motion or
44 animation
45
46
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-44
wall sign – Any sign attached parallel 1 to, but within six inches of, a wall, or
2 erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or
3 structure, which is supported by such wall or building, and which displays only
4 one sign surface.
5
6 window sign – Any sign, pictures, symbol, or combination thereof, designed to
7 communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale, or
8 service, that is placed inside a window or upon the window panes or glass and is
9 visible from the exterior of the window. This definition shall not include the
10 display of merchandise provided that such display does not contain any
11 advertising.
12
13 Significantly eroding areas – Areas that erode two feet or more per year.
14
15 Site plan – A plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete
16 dimensioning, the boundaries of a site and the location of all buildings, structures, uses,
17 and principal site development features proposed for a specific parcel of land.
18
19 Sketch plan – A conceptual plan prepared in accordance with the provisions of the
20 Town of Easton Subdivision Regulations, whose purpose is to provide the applicant with
21 an opportunity to resolve problems early in the development review process and to make
22 necessary modifications and revisions prior to incurring the expense of preparing a
23 preliminary and final plat.
24
25 Small shrub – A shrub that, when mature, reaches a height no greater than six feet.
26
27 Small Wind Energy System – A wind energy conversion system consisting of a single
28 wind turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion electronics, which has a rated
29 capacity of not more than 20 kW and whose primary intent is to generate power to on-site
30 consumption.
31
32 Solar Panel, Array – Ground mounted panels in excess of 100 square feet.
33
34 Solar Panel, Roof-Mounted – Solar panels that are structurally mounted to the roof of a
35 building or structure
36
37 Special Event – Periodic temporary or recurring events such as food sales for the benefit
38 of a non-profit organization, races, and gatherings which have the potential to attract to
39 private property, either by direct participation, or as spectators/customers, a large
40 gathering of people.
41
42 The following are not special events for the purposes of this chapter:
43
44 a. Events conducted entirely within dedicated rights-of-way where event
45 sponsors have secured all necessary permits, if applicable, from the
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-45
appropriate authority (i.e. State 1 Highways, County Roads Dept., Town
2 Public Assembly Permits, etc.)
3
4 b. Events conducted entirely within a building for which all necessary
5 permits have been secured; provided, that the events are within the scope
6 of the use for which the building was permitted;
7
8 c. Events conducted at fairgrounds or events conducted at parks or outdoor
9 spectator facilities for which the appropriate permit has been obtained,
10 provided that the outdoor event is within the scope of the permit;
11
12 d. An event which has all of the following characteristics:
13
14 1. Has no live amplified music,
15 2. Does not involve an admission fee either for participants or
16 spectators,
17 3. Is a one (1) day event conducted between the hours of seven a.m.
18 and eleven p.m.,
19 4. Does not involve overnight sleeping of participants or spectators,
20 5. Is not conducted more than one (1) calendar day in a thirty (30)
21 day period,
22 6. Is not accompanied by newspaper, radio or television advertising
23 or printed leaflets distributed to the public at large, and
24 7. Does not involve the sale of food or beverages.
25
26 Special Exception – A grant of a specific use that would not be appropriate generally or
27 without restriction and shall be based upon a finding that certain conditions governing
28 special exceptions as detailed in this Ordinance exist, that the use conforms to the
29 Comprehensive Plan for the Town of Easton and is compatible with the existing
30 neighborhood.
31
32 Special Medical Treatment Facility – A facility that has special equipment and
33 technicians to provide unique or specialized services for diagnosis or treatment of
34 patients.
35
36 Special Office Use – The use of certain historically and architecturally significant
37 structures for offices under the conditions outlined in Section 28 – 1007.4 (A) 6 of this
38 Ordinance.
39
40 Species in need of conservation – those fish and wildlife whose continued existence as
41 part of the State's resources are in question and which may be designated by regulation by
42 the Secretary of Natural Resources as in need of conservation pursuant to the
43 requirements of Natural Resources Article 10-2A-06 and 4-2A-03, Annotated Code of
44 Maryland.
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-46
Spoil pile – The overburden and reject 1 materials as piled or deposited during surface
2 mining.
3
4 Soil Conservation and Water Quality Plans – Land-use plans for farms that show
5 farmers how to make the best possible use of their soil and water resources while
6 protecting and conserving those resources for the future. It is a document containing a
7 map and related plans that indicate:
8
9 a. How the landowner plans to treat a farm unit;
10 b. Which best management practices the landowners plans to install to treat
11 undesirable conditions; and
12 c. The schedule for applying those Best Management Practices.
13
14 Stadium – A large, oval, round, or U-shaped, usually open structure, used for sports and
15 other entertainment events, with tiers of seating for thousands of spectators (as
16 differentiated from merely erecting bleachers at a park or ball field).
17
18 Steep slopes – means slopes of 15 percent or greater incline.
19
20 Storage Trailers – Refers to the use of any trailer portion of a tractor-trailer, cargo box,
21 or similar device that is parked or placed on site for the purpose of long-term storage of
22 goods and inventory. The term shall not include Portable on Demand Storage (PODS)
23 units, unless said PODS are located on site longer than specified for that use. It also does
24 not include such things as travel trailers, boat trailers, campers or recreational vehicles, or
25 any otherwise legally permitted storage sheds.
26
27 Story – That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the
28 surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, the space between such
29 floor and the ceiling above it. A basement shall be counted as a story if its ceiling is over
30 six (6) feet above the average level of the finished ground surface adjoining the exterior
31 walls of such story, or if it is used for business or dwelling purposes.
32
33 Street – A public way which provides a means of access to abutting property. The term
34 shall include road, street, avenue, drive, circle, highway, or similar term. More specific
35 street definitions may be found in the Town of Easton's Subdivision Regulations.
36
37 Street line – The line dividing a street from a lot.
38
39 Structure – building or construction materials, or a combination of those materials that
40 are purposely assembled or joined together on or over land or water. Structure includes a
41 temporary or permanent fixed or floating pier, piling, deck, walkway, dwelling, building,
42 boathouse, platform, gazebo, or shelter for the purpose of marine access, navigation,
43 working, eating, sleeping, or recreating. Among other things, structures include
44 buildings, mobile homes, walls, billboards, poster panels and fences in excess of forty45
eight (48) inches in height.
46
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-47
Subdivision – The division of a lot, tract, 1 or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots,
2 plats, sites, or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of
3 sale or of building development. It includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the
4 context, relates to the process of resubdividing or to the land or territory subdivided.
5
6 Substantial alteration – any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a principal
7 structure, where the proposed footprint equals or exceeds 50 percent of the existing
8 principal structure.
9
10 Supplemental Planting Plan – A description and landscape schedule that shows the
11 proposed species type, quantity, and size of plants to be located within a buffer if natural
12 regeneration does not meet the required stem density.
13
14 Tavern (See also bar and Restaurant, nightclub) – An establishment serving alcoholic
15 beverages in which the principal business is the sale of such beverages at retail for
16 consumption on the premises and where sandwiches and snacks are available for
17 consumption on the premises.
18
19 Temporary Disturbance – a short-term change in the landscape that occurs as part of a
20 development or redevelopment activity. “Temporary disturbance” includes: Storage of
21 materials that are necessary for the completion of the development or redevelopment
22 activity; Construction of a road or other pathway that is necessary for access to the site of
23 the development or redevelopment activity, if the road or pathway is removed
24 immediately after completion of the development or redevelopment activity and the area
25 is restored to its previous vegetative condition; and grading of a development site, if the
26 area is restored to its previous vegetative condition immediately after completion of the
27 development or redevelopment activity. Temporary disturbance does not include: a septic
28 system in a forest or developed woodland on a lot created before local program approval,
29 if clearing is required. Temporary disturbance also does not include a violation.
30
31 Temporary use – A use intended to be of limited, short-term duration (generally less
32 than one year) with the potential to pose detrimental impacts on surrounding properties if
33 allowed to proceed without Town review. Such impacts potentially cannot be determined
34 except on a case-by-case review. The duration of a temporary use varies and is relative
35 to the activity proposed. It may range from a few hours for a sale or special event to
36 several years for a construction office or staging area at a major construction project.
37
38 Thinning – a forest practice used to accelerate tree growth of quality trees in the shortest
39 interval of time.
40
41 Threatened species – Any species of fish, wildlife, or plants designated as such by
42 regulation by the Department of Natural Resources that appear likely, within the
43 foreseeable future, to become endangered, including any species of wildlife or plant
44 determined to be a “threatened” species pursuant to the federal Endangered Species Act,
45 16 U.S.C. § 1431 et seq., as amended.
46
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-48
Tidal Wetlands – State wetlands that are defined 1 as any land under the navigable waters
2 of the state below the Mean High Water Line, affected by the regular rise and fall of tide,
3 and private wetlands that defined as any land not considered "state wetlands" bordering
4 or lying beneath tidal waters, that is subject to regular or periodic tidal action and
5 supports aquatic growth. Private wetlands includes wetlands transferred by the state by a
6 valid grant, lease, patent, or grant confirmed by Article 5 of the Declaration of Rights of
7 the Constitution to the extent of the interest transferred. The term "regular or periodic
8 tidal action" means the rise and fall of the sea produced by the attraction of the sun and
9 moon uninfluenced by the wind or any other circumstance.
10
11 Topography – The existing configuration of the earth's surface including the relative
12 relief, elevations, and position of land features.
13
14 Tower (See also antenna) – A structure on which is attached antennas intended for
15 transmitting or receiving television, radio, telephone communications.
16
17 Townhouse – One of three or more residential buildings having a common or party wall
18 separating dwelling units.
19
20 Town – The Town of Easton.
21
22 Town Engineer – The Easton Engineer or his or her designee.
23
24 Town Planner (or Planner) – The designee of the Town Manager charged with the
25 responsibility for administering the Town's planning and zoning programs.
26
27 Transitional habitat – A plant community whose species are adapted to the diverse and
28 varying environmental conditions that occur along the boundary that separates aquatic
29 and terrestrial areas.
30
31 Transportation facilities – Anything that is built, installed, or established to provide a
32 means of transport from one place to another.
33
34 Tributary streams – Perennial and intermittent streams in the Critical Area that are so
35 noted on the most recent U.S. Geological Survey 7 1/2 minute topographic quadrangle
36 maps (scale l:24,000) or on more detailed maps or studies at the discretion of the Town of
37 Easton.
38
39 Understory – means the layer of forest vegetation typically located underneath the
40 forest canopy.
41
42 Understory tree – A tree that, when mature, reaches a height between 12 and 35 feet.
43
44 Unwarranted hardship – Means that without a variance, an applicant would be denied
45 reasonable and significant use of the entire parcel or lot for which the variance is
46 requested.”
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-49
1
2 Upland boundary – The landward edge of a tidal wetland or non-tidal wetland.
3
4 Utility transmission facilities – Fixed structures that convey or distribute resources,
5 wastes, or both, including but not limited to electrical lines, water conduits and sewer
6 lines.
7
8 Variance – A modification only of density, bulk, or area requirements where such
9 modification will not be contrary to the public interest and where owing to conditions
10 peculiar to the property, and not the results of any action taken by the applicant, a literal
11 enforcement of this Ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship or practical
12 difficulty.
13
14 Warehouse – A building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials.
15
16 Warehousing and distribution – A use engaged in storage, wholesale, and distribution
17 of manufactured products, supplies, and equipment, but excluding bulk storage of
18 materials that are inflammable or explosive or that create hazardous or commonly
19 recognized offensive conditions.
20
21 Wash plant – A facility where sand and gravel is washed during processing.
22
23 Water-based aquaculture – The raising of fish and shellfish in any natural, open, free24
flowing water body.
25
26 Water-dependent facilities – Structures or works associated with industrial, maritime,
27 recreational, educational, or fisheries activities that require location at or near the
28 shoreline within the Buffer. An activity is water-dependent if it cannot exist outside the
29 Buffer and is dependent on the water by reason of the intrinsic nature of its operation.
30 Such activities include, but are not limited to, ports, the intake and outfall structures of
31 power plants, water-use industries, marinas and other boat docking structures, public
32 beaches and other public water-oriented recreation areas, and fisheries activities.
33
34 Water-use industry – An industry that requires location near the shoreline because it
35 utilizes surface waters for cooling or other internal purposes.
36
37 Waterfowl – Birds which frequent and often swim in water, nest and raise their young
38 near water, and derive at least part of their food from aquatic plants and animals.
39
40 Wayside Stand – A structure of 400 square feet or less of floor area used seasonally for
41 the display and sale of locally grown agricultural products and containing no space for
42 customers within said structure.
43
44 Wetland – An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a
45 frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that, under normal circumstances, does
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-50
support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted 1 for life in saturated soil conditions,
2 commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
3
4 Wildlife corridor – A strip of land having vegetation that provides habitat and a safe
5 passageway for wildlife.
6
7 Wildlife habitat – Those plant communities and physiographic features that provide
8 food, water, cover, and nesting areas, as well as foraging and feeding conditions
9 necessary to maintain populations of animals in the Critical Area.
10
11 Winery – The use of property for the growing, fermentation, and/or processing of
12 grapes, berries, and other fruits grown on or off premises for the production of wine or
13 juice; packaging, bottling, re-fermentation of still-wine into sparkling wine, and storage
14 of wine; the sample and sale of—at wholesale or retail—wine, gifts, food, and associated
15 activities and related items; promotional events, guided tours, tasting rooms and festivals.
16
17 Yard – Any open space located on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and
18 unobstructed from the ground up, except for accessory buildings, or such projections as
19 are expressly permitted in these regulations. The minimum depth or width of a yard shall
20 consist of the horizontal distance between the lot line and the nearest point of the
21 foundation wall of the main building. (See Figure 1.3).
22
23 Yard, Front – A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines and
24 being the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the main building or
25 any projections thereof. On corner lots, the front yard shall be considered as parallel to
26 all streets.
27
28 Yard, rear – A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the rear
29 lot line and the nearest line of the building. Rear-yard depth shall be measured at right
30 angles to the rear line of the lot.
31
32 Yard, side – A yard between the side line of the lot and the nearest line of the building
33 and extending from the front yard to the rear yard, or in the absence of either of such
34 front or rear yards, to the front or rear lot lines. Side-yard width shall be measured at
35 right angles to side lot lines.
36
37 Zero lot line – The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one or more of
38 the building's sides rests directly on a lot line.
39
40 Zone – A portion of the territory of the Town, exclusive of streets, alleys, and other
41 public ways, within which certain uses of land, premises, and buildings are not permitted
42 and within which certain yards and open spaces are required and certain height limits are
43 established for buildings.
44
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE I
1-51
Zoning Administrator (or Zoning Inspector) 1 – The governmental official of the Town
2 of Easton charged with administering the Easton Zoning Ordinance or his or her
3 designee.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE II
2-1
1 ARTICLE II
2 PERMITTED USES
3
4 SECTION 28 – 201 PERMITTED USES
5
6 A. Consistent with the authority granted by Article 66B of the Maryland Code, the Town
7 Council has divided all lands within the corporate limits into the following zoning
8 districts. Articles IV through IX set forth the uses, standards and regulations for each
9 district. The uses, standards and location of each district are generally consistent with the
10 guidelines of the Comprehensive Plan for the Town.
11
12 Section 28 – 202 Table of Permitted Uses below lists the permitted, special exception,
13 accessory, and temporary uses for each base zoning district except the RH District, for
14 which the permitted uses are listed in Sections 28 – 413.3 through 28 – 415.5. Uses
15 marked with an asterisk (*) indicate that use is subject to supplemental performance
16 and/or development standards as detailed in Article X. Articles IV sets forth the purpose
17 and development standards for each base zoning district. Articles V through IX detail the
18 permitted uses and development standards for all special districts within the Town.
19
20 B. If any use is proposed which is not expressly identified in Articles IV through IX or
21 Table 2.1, Table of Permitted Uses, the Town Planner shall make a determination as to
22 which use it is most similar in character and may permit the unlisted use as a Special
23 Exception in any zone(s) in which the similar use is permitted. The unlisted use may not
24 be permitted in any zone in which the similar use is not permitted, either by right or by
25 Special Exception. An appeal of the Town Planner’s determination, relative to use
26 determination only, may be made directly to the Easton Planning and Zoning
27 Commission. Further appeals beyond that point shall follow the procedure prescribed for
28 such in Section 28 – 1303.3 of this Ordinance.
29
30 C. NEGATIVE USE RESRICTIONS AND RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS PROHIBITED
31 AS AGAINST PUBLIC POLICY
32
33 1. Purpose and Intent. The public health, safety, and general welfare of the Town of
34 Easton are compromised when private parties impose negative use restrictions and/or
35 restrictive covenants on real property in the Town which prohibit or have the
36 economic or practical effect of prohibiting the use of such real property for grocery
37 store purposes after a grocery store owner or operator has terminated grocery store
38 operation upon such real property. Such negative use restrictions and restrictive
39 covenants are separate and distinct from commercially reasonable non-compete
40 clauses included in shopping center development agreements whereby a landlord may
41 agree with a tenant that is a grocery store not to lease another space in the same
42 shopping center to a second grocery store in order to induce the first tenant to sign a
43 long-term lease as an anchor tenant at such shopping center development.
44
45 2. Prohibitions. A private agreement that purports to impose negative use restrictions
46 and/or restrictive covenants upon real property in the Town of Easton so as to prohibit
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE II
2-2
or have the economic or practical effect 1 of prohibiting the use of such real property
2 for grocery store purposes after a grocery store has terminated grocery store
3 operations on such real property, when such use would otherwise be permitted
4 (including as a special exception) under the Town's Zoning Code, shall be against
5 public policy, void, and unenforceable. The foregoing prohibition shall apply
6 whether the private agreement is incorporated in a deed restriction, restrictive
7 covenant, a lease or memorandum of lease, or any other instrument. This prohibition
8 applies to all such private agreements effective on or after September 18, 2017. This
9 prohibition shall not apply to an owner or operator of a grocery store that terminates
10 operations at a site for purposes of relocating the grocery store into a comparable or
11 larger store located within the Town of Easton within a quarter mile of the site where
12 the prior operation was terminated; provided that relocation and commencement of
13 the operation of the new grocery store at the new site occurs within two (2) years of
14 the sale, transfer, or lease of the prior site, and the negative use restriction or
15 restrictive covenant does not have a term in excess of three (3) years. If the new
16 grocery store is not relocated within the Town of Easton within a quarter mile of the
17 prior site within two (2) years, then the negative use restriction or restrictive covenant
18 shall not be enforceable. The fines that may be levied for violation of the Zoning
19 Code pursuant to Section 28-1308 of the Zoning Code shall not apply to such private
20 agreements entered into prior to the effective date of this section. However, all other
21 available legal remedies, including but not limited to declaratory judgment and/or
22 injunctive relief shall apply to all violations of this section including those entered
23 into prior to the effective date of this section.
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE II
2-3
1 TABLE 2.1
2 TABLE OF PERMISSIBLE USES
3
USE
A-1
R-7A
R-10A
R-10M
CR
CG
CL
I-1
I-2
BC
I
G/I
NOTES
A. RESIDENTIAL USES
1. Bed and Breakfast *
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
--
--
--
--
--
--
2. Boarding House
--
--
--
--
SE
SE
--
--
--
--
--
--
3. Domiciliary Care
--
SE
SE
SE
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
SE
4. Dwelling for Resident
Watchman or Caretaker
employed on premises
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
A
A
A
A
A
4. Family Day Care *
P
P
P
P
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
5. Granny Flats *
--
SE
SE
--
SE
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
6. Group Home For
Developmentally Disabled
Persons
P
P
P
P
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
SE
7. Home-based Business
P
P
P
P
P
P
--
--
--
--
--
--
8. Home Occupations *
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
--
--
--
--
--
--
9. Homeless Shelter *
--
--
--
--
SE
SE
--
SE
SE
SE
--
SE
Also permitted w/in
church facilities and may
be permitted as a
Temporary Use in any
district.
10. Kennel *
A
A
A
A
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
11. Large Private Group Home
For Persons Suffering From a
Mental Disability
SE
SE
SE
SE
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
SE
12. Manufactured Housing
Subdivision or Parks *
--
--
--
SE
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
Also possible via PUD
in any zone.
13. Mobile Home
--
--
--
SE
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
14. Multifamily Dwellings
(Apts/Condos/Townhouses) *
--
SE
SE
SE
SE
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE II
2-4
USE
A-1
R-7A
R-10A
R-10M
CR
CG
CL
I-1
I-2
BC
I
G/I
NOTES
15. Short-term housing
SE
SE
SE
--
SE
P
P
--
--
--
--
--
16. Single Family Detached
P
P
P
P
P
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
17. Small Private Group Home
for Persons Suffering From a
Mental Disability
SE
SE
SE
SE
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
SE
18. Specialized Group Home
--
--
--
--
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
--
SE
19. Two family or Duplex *
--
P
P
P
SE
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
B. COMMERCIAL USES
1. Adult Day Care
SE
SE
SE
SE
--
P
--
SE
SE
SE
--
--
2. Adult Oriented Business*
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
P
--
P
--
--
3. Animal Hospital or
Veterinary Clinic*
--
--
--
--
--
SE
SE
SE
SE
P
--
--
4. Antique Shops
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
--
--
--
--
--
5. Appliance Stores
--
--
--
--
SE
P
P
--
--
SE
--
--
6. Auction Houses
--
--
--
--
--
SE
--
--
--
SE
--
--
7. Auto Supplies
--
--
--
--
P
P
--
--
--
SE
--
--
8. Auto Sales or Showroom *
--
--
--
--
--
P
SE
--
--
--
--
--
9. Automotive Repair Garage *
--
--
--
--
--
SE
--
SE
SE
P
--
--
10. Bakery
--
--
--
--
P
P
--
P
--
SE
--
--
11. Banks, Drive-Thru
--
--
--
--
SE
P
P
SE
--
--
--
--
12. Banks, Brokers & Other
Financial Institutions
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
--
--
--
--
--
13. Bars or Taverns
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
14. Bistro
--
--
--
--
P
P
--
--
--
--
--
--
Also permitted outright
in the MXW Port Street,
Water View and Water’s
Edge Subdistricts.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE II
2-5
USE
A-1
R-7A
R-10A
R-10M
CR
CG
CL
I-1
I-2
BC
I
G/I
NOTES
15. Bowling Alley
--
--
--
--
--
P
P
--
--
--
--
--
16. Brew-pub *
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
--
--
--
--
--
17. Bulk Mailing Services
--
--
--
--
--
SE
P
P
SE
P
P
--
18. Business Services
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
P
--
P
--
--
19. Business Equipment Sales
& Service
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
SE
--
P
--
--
20. Candy, Nut, or Confections
Store
--
--
--
--
P
P
--
--
--
--
--
--
21. Car Wash
--
--
--
--
--
P
--
P
--
P
--
--
22. Catalog Showrooms
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
--
--
P
--
--
23. Catering*
--
--
--
--
P
P
--
P
--
P
--
--
24. Christmas Tree Sales *
T
T
T
T
--
T
--
--
--
--
--
T
25. Commercial Kennel *
SE
--
--
--
--
SE
--
SE
--
SE
--
--
26. Commercial Stable
SE
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
27. Commercial Parking Lot or
Garage
--
--
--
--
SE
SE
--
--
--
--
--
SE
28. Commercial Art
--
--
--
--
P
P
--
--
--
P
--
--
29. Construction Equipment
Sales or Rental
--
--
--
--
--
P
--
SE
P
SE
P
--
30. Construction Supply &
Services
--
--
--
--
--
P
--
--
SE
SE
SE
--
31. Contractor’s Office w/ no
outside storage
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
--
32. Contractor’s Office w/
outside storage
--
--
--
--
--
SE
--
P
P
P
P
--
33. Convenience Stores *
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
P
--
--
--
--
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE II
2-6
USE
A-1
R-7A
R-10A
R-10M
CR
CG
CL
I-1
I-2
BC
I
G/I
NOTES
34. Craft Beverage
Manufacturing*
SE
--
--
--
P
P
P
P
--
P
--
--
35. Day Care, Group *
SE
SE
SE
SE
--
P
--
SE
SE
SE
--
SE
36. Day Care, Small Group *
SE
SE
SE
SE
--
P
--
SE
SE
SE
--
SE
37. Drive-in Theater
--
--
--
--
--
SE
--
--
--
--
--
--
38. Drug Stores
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
--
--
--
--
--
39. Fabrics/Upholstery Stores
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
--
--
--
--
--
40. Farm Equipment, Trailer, or
Boat sales & service
--
--
--
--
--
P
--
SE
--
SE
--
--
41. Farmer's Cooperative
--
--
--
--
--
SE
SE
--
--
--
--
--
42. Farmer's Market *
SE
--
--
--
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
--
SE
Also possible as
temporary use in these
zones.
43. Formal Wear Rental
--
--
--
--
P
P
--
--
--
--
--
--
44. Funeral Homes
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
--
--
--
--
--
45. Furniture Sales or Rentals
--
--
--
--
SE
P
P
SE
--
SE
--
--
46. Gasoline/Service Station *
--
--
--
--
--
SE
--
--
--
--
--
--
47. Greenhouses, nurseries, etc.
--
--
--
--
--
P
--
--
--
--
--
--
48. Grocery Store
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
--
--
--
--
--
49. Hardware Stores/Home
Improvements/Building
Supplies
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
--
--
--
--
--
50. Hotels/Motels *
--
--
--
--
P
P
SE
--
--
--
--
--
51. Liquor Stores *
--
--
--
--
SE
SE
--
--
--
--
--
--
52. Major Retail *
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
Permitted as PUD only
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE II
2-7
USE
A-1
R-7A
R-10A
R-10M
CR
CG
CL
I-1
I-2
BC
I
G/I
NOTES
53. Mall
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
54. Marina
--
--
--
--
--
P
--
SE
SE
SE
SE
P
55. Meat/Seafood Market
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
--
--
--
--
--
56. Medical Services
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
P
--
P
--
--
57. Memorial Stone Sales
--
--
--
--
--
P
--
--
--
P
--
--
58. Mini-warehouses*
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
P
--
59. Multiple Uses *
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
60. Newspaper/Magazine Shop
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
P
--
--
--
--
61. Office(s)*
--
SE
SE
--
P
P
P
P
--
P
--
A
62. Personal Services
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
P
--
P
--
--
63. Pet Shops
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
--
--
--
--
--
64. Photography Studio
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
--
--
SE
--
--
65. Residential Use in a
Commercial Building *
--
--
--
--
P
SE
--
--
--
--
--
--
66. Restaurant, Fast Food
--
--
--
--
SE
SE
SE
SE
--
--
--
--
67. Restaurant, Carry
Out/Delicatessen
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
P
--
--
--
-
68. Restaurant, Night Club
--
--
--
--
P
P
--
--
--
--
--
--
69. Restaurant, Sit Down
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
SE
--
--
--
--
Restaurants with the
appropriate license for
off-site consumption of
wine, may offer sealed
bottles or cases of wine
for sale provided that if
this activity is desired, a
Special Exception shall
be required
70-. Retail sales of goods not
listed elsewhere in this Table,
provided the Town Planner
--
--
--
--
P
P
SE
--
--
--
--
--
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE II
2-8
USE
A-1
R-7A
R-10A
R-10M
CR
CG
CL
I-1
I-2
BC
I
G/I
NOTES
determines that there are no
serious adverse traffic, access,
or parking impacts.
71. Retail Thrift or Outlet Store
Operated by a Non-Profit
Organization *
--
--
--
--
--
P
--
SE
--
SE
SE
--
72. Shopping Center – campus
style *
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
Permitted only in PUD
District.1
73. Shopping Center – strip *
--
--
--
--
P
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
74. Tattoo Parlor
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
75. Travel Agent
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
--
--
--
--
--
76. Video Cassette Rentals
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
--
--
--
--
--
77. Viewing Booths and Live
Viewing Booths
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
78. Watch/Jewelry Sales &
Repair
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
--
--
--
--
--
79. Wayside Stands
SE/A
--
--
--
--
SE
SE
--
--
--
--
--
80. Wholesale, warehouse,
storage, & distribution
--
--
--
--
--
P
SE
P
P
P
P
--
81. Winery*
P
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
P
P
P
--
C. INSTITUTIONAL USES
1. Cemeteries or Columbarium
SE
SE
SE
--
--
P
SE
--
--
--
--
P
Also permitted as
accessory use to a House
of Worship
2. Civic, Service Clubs, &
Fraternal Organizations
SE
SE
SE
SE
P
P
P
--
--
SE
--
P
3. Community Centers or Civic
Centers
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
--
--
SE
--
P
4. Crematorium*
SE
SE
SE
--
--
P
SE
--
--
SE
--
P
5. Cultural Uses such as
museums, clubs, lodges, etc.
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
SE
--
SE
--
P
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE II
2-9
USE
A-1
R-7A
R-10A
R-10M
CR
CG
CL
I-1
I-2
BC
I
G/I
NOTES
6. Fire, Rescue, or Police
Stations
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
P
7. Hospitals
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
Permitted only in CM
District
8. Houses of Worship
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
P
9. Jail or Temporary Detention
Center
SE
--
--
--
--
--
--
SE
SE
SE
SE
P
10. Libraries
--
SE
SE
SE
P
SE
--
--
--
--
--
P
11. Mega-Church
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
Permitted only as a PUD
12. Nursing Homes
--
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
--
--
--
--
SE
13. Post Offices/Non-
Governmental Parcel or
Delivery Service
--
--
--
--
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
14. Research Facilities and
Laboratories
--
--
--
--
--
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
P
15. Retirement Community
--
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
--
--
--
--
--
SE
16. Schools, Colleges, &
Universities
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
17. Studios for the teaching of
art, music, dance, drama, crafts,
gymnastics or cheerleading, etc.
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
P
--
P
--
P
18. Museums
--
SE
--
--
P
P
P
SE
--
SE
--
P
D. RECREATIONAL -
ENTERTAINMENT USES
1. Archery Range
--
--
--
--
--
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
--
--
2. Arenas/Civic Centers
--
--
--
--
SE
SE
SE
SE
--
SE
--
P
3. Billiard Parlor/Pool Hall
--
--
--
--
P
P
--
--
--
--
--
--
4. Bowling Alleys
--
--
--
--
--
P
P
--
--
--
--
--
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE II
2-10
USE
A-1
R-7A
R-10A
R-10M
CR
CG
CL
I-1
I-2
BC
I
G/I
NOTES
5. Carnivals/Circuses/Public
Events *
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
6. Commercial Amusements or
Recreation
--
--
--
--
--
SE
--
--
--
--
--
--
7. Fitness Centers/Sports
Training Facilities/Health
Spa/Figure Salon
--
SE
SE
SE
P
SE
SE
P
--
p
--
--
8. Ice/Roller Rink
--
--
--
--
--
SE
SE
--
--
--
--
P
9. Indoor Pistol/Rifle Range
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
10. Indoor Recreation Facilities
for Swimming, Tennis,
Basketball, etc. *
--
SE
SE
SE
--
SE
SE
--
--
--
--
P
11. Outdoor shooting sports
such as Trap, Skeet, Sporting
Clays, etc.
SE*
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
12. Outdoor Recreation Areas
such as Country Clubs, Golf,
Tennis, or Swim Clubs *
SE
SE
SE
SE
--
SE
SE
--
--
--
--
P
13. Parks and Recreation Areas
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
14. Stadium
--
--
--
--
--
SE
SE
SE
--
SE
--
SE
15. Tent/Special Events
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
16. Theater, Movie House,
Cinema – Indoor
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
--
--
--
--
--
E. INDUSTRIAL USES
1. Airport
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
SE
SE
SE
SE
--
2. Agriculture, controlledenvironment
P
--
--
--
--
SE
SE
P
P
P
P
SE
3. Bakery, manufacturing
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
P
--
4. Blacksmith Shop
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
SE
SE
SE
P
--
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE II
2-11
USE
A-1
R-7A
R-10A
R-10M
CR
CG
CL
I-1
I-2
BC
I
G/I
NOTES
5. Bottling or distribution
stations for beverages
--
--
--
--
--
P
--
P
P
P
P
--
6. Brick Yard
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
SE
SE
SE
--
7. Concrete Mixing
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
SE
--
SE
--
8. Electric generating or steam
power plant
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
9. Feed and Grain Mill
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
SE
--
SE
--
10. Forge or foundry works
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
SE
--
SE
--
11. Industrial Park *
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
P
--
12. Industry, heavy *
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
P
--
P
--
13. Industry heavy w/ no
potentially hazardous or
commonly recognized offensive
conditions *
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
SE
--
SE
--
14. Industry, light *
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
P
--
15. Machine shops & structural
steel fabricating
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
P
--
16. Meat packing or storage
(excluding stockyards or
slaughter houses)
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
SE
--
SE
--
17. Micro-brewery
--
--
--
--
--
SE
--
P
P
P
P
--
18. Printing and publishing
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
P
--
19. Research, experimental, or
testing laboratories excluding
high explosives, toxic, or
radioactive materials
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
P
--
20. Saw Mills
T
--
--
--
--
--
--
SE
P
SE
P
--
21. Stone or monument works
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
SE
SE
--
--
22. Storage, & distribution of
Sand & Gravel
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
SE
--
SE
--
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE II
2-12
USE
A-1
R-7A
R-10A
R-10M
CR
CG
CL
I-1
I-2
BC
I
G/I
NOTES
23. Storage & sales of grain,
livestock feed, & solid fuel
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
SE
--
SE
--
24. Trucking & freight stations,
terminals, & storage yards
(excluding flammable liquids)
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
SE
P
SE
P
--
25. Underground storage &
distribution of inflammable
liquids
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
SE
--
SE
--
26. Warehousing, storage &
distribution
--
--
--
--
--
P
SE
P
P
P
P
--
27. Welding shops
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
SE
SE
SE
SE
--
28. Wholesale and retail sales
of products manufactured or
stored on the premises in
conjunction with any other
principal permitted use
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
P
--
F. MISCELLANEOUS USES
1. Agriculture *
P
P
P
P
--
--
P
P
P
P
P
P
2. Buildings in excess of height
or size limitations
--
--
--
--
--
--
SE
--
--
--
--
SE
3. Garage or yard sales *
T
T
T
T
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
4. Garage, private or shed *
A
A
A
A
A
A
--
--
--
--
--
--
5. Helipads
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
Permitted only as
Accessory Uses to
airports, hospitals, police
stations, or other public
services.
6. Mobile Food Uses *
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
7. Mobile Medical Facility
--
--
--
--
--
T
--
T
--
T
--
T
Also possible Temporary
Use in the CM District.
8. Other uses, not listed
elsewhere, that are clearly
incidental and customary to and
associated with a permitted use.
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE II
2-13
USE
A-1
R-7A
R-10A
R-10M
CR
CG
CL
I-1
I-2
BC
I
G/I
NOTES
9. PODS*
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
10. Public Utilities
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
11. Radio or television stations
--
--
--
--
SE
P
SE
SE
SE
SE
--
--
12. Recycling Processing
Center
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
SE
P
SE
P
SE
13. Recycling Collection
Station
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
P
SE
P
P
P
P
SE
14. Sewage treatment plants
SE
--
--
--
--
--
--
SE
SE
SE
SE
--
15. Small Wind Energy
Turbine *
A
A
A
A
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
A
16. Solar Panels, Roof
mounted
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
17. Solar Panels, Ground
Mounted*
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
18. Solid waste landfill
SE
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
SE
--
SE
--
19. Special Office Use *
--
SE
SE
--
SE
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
20. Stable or barn
A
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
21. Storage of boats, travel
trailers, motorcycles, jet-skis or
similar recreationally used
vehicles *
A
A
A
A
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
22. Storage Trailers
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
23. Swimming Pool *
A
A
A
A
A
--
--
--
--
--
--
--
This use refers to private
swimming pools
accessory to residential
uses, as opposed to a
public or quasi-public
swimming pool.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE II
2-14
USE
A-1
R-7A
R-10A
R-10M
CR
CG
CL
I-1
I-2
BC
I
G/I
NOTES
24. Temporary Sales at the
location of non-profit
organizations
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
The maximum duration
of such sales shall be
three days. No good
may be sold which is
prohibited to be sold in
general in the Town of
Easton.
25. Tower *
--
--
--
--
--
P
--
P
--
P
P
--
26. Visitor Center
--
--
--
--
P
P
P
--
--
--
--
P
28. Donation Bins *
--
--
--
--
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
SE
--
1
2 Table 2.1 Notes:
3
4 * - DENOTES A USE SUBJECT TO SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS (SEE SECTION 28 –
5 1007)
6
7 A – DENOTES A USE THAT IS PERMITTED ONLY ACCESSORY TO A PERMITTED
8 USE. NOTE THAT THESE ONLY REPRESENT THE MORE COMMON ACCESSORY
9 USES. OTHER USES MAY BE PERMITTED, ONLY AS ACCESSORY TO A PRINCIPAL
10 PERMITTED USE, IF THE TOWN PLANNER DETERMINES THAT THE PROPOSED
11 ACCESSORY USE IS COMMONLY ASSOCIATED WITH THE PRINCIPAL PERMITTED
12 USE AND THAT IT WILL CLEARLY BE INCIDENTAL TO SAID PRINCIPAL USE.
13
14 P - DENOTES A USE THAT IS PERMITTED BY RIGHT
15
16 SE - DENOTES A USE PERMITTED WITH A SPECIAL EXCEPTION
17
18 T - DENOTES A USE PERMITTED WITH A TEMPORARY USE PERMIT (SEE SECTION
19 28 – 1306)
20
21 -- - DENOTES A PROHIBITED USE
22
23 1 - SHOPPING CENTERS WHICH WERE PREVIOUSLY APPROVED AS SPECIAL
24 EXCEPTIONS OR PMR DISTRICTS SHALL BE TREATED AS APPROVED PUD
25 DISTRICTS. ANY CHANGES TO SUCH SHOPPING CENTERS SHALL BE REVIEWED
26 AS PER THE REQUIREMENTS FOR AMENDMENTS TO APPROVED PUD DISTRICTS.
27
28 THIS TABLE INDICATES PERMITTED USES IN BASE ZONES ONLY EXCLUDING THE
29 RH DISTRICT. FOR USES PERMITTED IN THE RH DISTRICT, SEE SECTIONS 28 – 413.3
30 THROUGH 28 – 413.5. FOR USES PERMITTED IN SPECIAL (OVERLAY AND
31 FLOATING) ZONES, SEE ARTICLES V – IX
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE III
3-1
1 ARTICLE III
2 SITE PLAN REVIEW
3
4 SECTION 28 – 301 SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS
5
6 28 – 301.1 PURPOSE
7
8 The purpose of site plan review is to ensure that certain proposed uses and structures and
9 their enlargement and replacement shall conform to the regulations set forth in this
10 Ordinance.
11
12 28 – 301.2 GENERAL
13
14 A. Prerequisite to the issuance of a building permit, a site plan shall be submitted to
15 the Town Planner for review by the Planning Commission for multi-family
16 commercial, industrial, and institutional structures of 5,000 or more square feet
17 gross floor area.
18
19 B. All new construction involving institutional, commercial, and industrial structures
20 of less than 5,000 square feet gross floor area shall be subject to approval by the
21 Town Planner or the Planner's designee during the building permit review
22 process. The Town Planner, Planner's designee, or the applicant may require
23 Planning Commission site plan review as provided for in Subsection 28 – 301.3.
24
25 C. The site plan format and informational requirements for institutional, commercial,
26 or industrial structures of 5,000 square feet or greater are as outlined in
27 Subsection 28 – 301.3 below.
28
29 D. For applications involving multi-family, institutional, commercial, or industrial
30 structures less than 5,000 square feet, some informational requirements may be
31 waived at the discretion of the Town Planner or designee. In addition, if
32 warranted by the simplicity of the request, the review process may be modified
33 such that the application may be reviewed as per the standards and procedures for
34 a single-family home.
35
36 E. Site plan submission is not required for single-family, two-family or duplex
37 dwelling units unless planned as part of a Planned Unit Development, or
38 specifically required elsewhere in this Ordinance.
39
40 F. Where the submission of a site plan for a proposed use or development activity is
41 required under this section, the site plan shall not be approved unless:
42
43 1. the site plan meets the design principles and standards and required
44 improvements set forth in this Ordinance, the Town Comprehensive Plan,
45 the Town of Easton Subdivision Regulations, and other ordinances,
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE III
3-2
regulations, and poli 1 cies established by the Town of Easton;
2
3 2. the site plan avoids or minimizes adverse impacts upon features (whether
4 on-site or off-site) of historical, cultural or ecological significance;
5
6 3. the proposed use or development activity will not substantially increase
7 traffic hazards due to traffic generated by the proposed use, the location of
8 curb cuts or the layout of internal traffic circulation;
9
10 4. the site plan and the proposed use or uses do not cause any adverse impact
11 upon the health or safety of persons residing or working in the area
12 surrounding the site or upon the character of the neighborhood
13 surrounding the site; and
14
15 5. the site plan improves the water quality of the Chesapeake Bay or its
16 tributaries.
17
18 G. Contiguous property owner notification is required for all site
19 plans which require Planning Commission review.
20
21 1. The Town Planner shall notify all owners of property located within 400
22 feet of any portion of the subject property.
23
24 2. This notification shall be the responsibility of the Town Planner and the
25 notice shall be provided 14 days in advance of the meeting at which the
26 Sketch level site plan is scheduled to be discussed by the Planning
27 Commission. Notice shall be provided by First Class mail and shall be
28 sent by the Planning Office. The Town Planner shall also post the subject
29 property at least 14 days prior to the meeting at which the sketch site plan
30 is scheduled to be reviewed by the Planning Commission.
31
32 3. The cost of notification shall be borne by the applicant for site plan rev.
33
34 Any site plan which does not satisfy the above stated requirements can and shall
35 be denied by the Planning Commission or the Town Planner.
36
37 28 – 301.3 SUBMISSION PROCEDURE
38
39 Site plan approval for any use or structure requiring such review and approval under this
40 Section involves a three (3) step process, Sketch, Preliminary, and Final Site
41 plans. Sketch, Development Site plans and Final Site plans shall be prepared by a
42 registered professional engineer, registered architect, registered landscape architect,
43 registered land surveyor, or professional planner (AICP) who is operating within the
44 scope of his license with respect to the services provided. Applicants are also advised to
45 contact other governmental agencies (e.g. Easton Utilities, Maryland State Highway
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE III
3-3
Administration, Maryland Department 1 of Natural Resources, etc.) to obtain information
2 as early as possible concerning any additional requirements those agencies may impose
3 as a result of the proposed development. The information and format of the various plans
4 shall be as follows:
5
6 A. Sketch Plan
7
8 A preliminary consultation shall be held with the Planning Commission to discuss the
9 general concept, use and design of the proposal. Twelve (12) copies of a generalized
10 sketch or plat of the proposed site plan shall be submitted to the Town Planner who shall
11 schedule the preliminary consultation for the next available Planning Commission
12 meeting. Such sketch plan shall consist of:
13
14 1. Location map,
15
16 2. Boundary,
17
18 3. Topography,
19
20 4. General proposed land uses drawn to scale, and
21
22 5. The Forest Stand Delineations as detailed in the Town of Easton’s Forest
23 Conservation Ordinance.
24
25 6. The location of any easements, rights-of-way or any other encumbrances
26 which pertain to the property subject to the site plan review.
27
28 7. Conditions of concern, for example, water courses, wetlands, floodplains, or
29 other environmentally sensitive features.
30
31 8. Locations of refuse collection, exterior lighting, fencing, and all pedestrian
32 walkways and sidewalks.
33
34 9. General location and description (i.e. intended function, proposed species,
35 etc.) of proposed landscaping.
36
37 10. Location of parking including layout and landscaping.
38
39 11. Conceptual building elevations or renderings illustrating the character, scale,
40 and materials of all proposed structures. Such elevations or renderings shall
41 be sealed by a licensed professional as described above. Architecture should
42 be in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan and Architectural Guidelines
43 adopted by the Planning Commission.
44
45 12. A statement describing the extent to which the application complies with the
46 Recommended Design Principles for Easton set forth in the Comprehensive
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE III
3-4
1 Plan.
2
3 The Planning Commission shall review and return comments following this
4 preliminary consultation. The applicant shall incorporate the Planning
5 Commission’s comments and re-file the sketch plan. This process shall be
6 repeated until approval is obtained. At that time the applicant may proceed to file
7 a Development site plan.
8
9 B. Development Site Plan
10
11 A minimum of four (4) paper copies and one (1) reproducible copy of the site plan
12 prepared in accordance with the following standards shall be submitted to the Town
13 Planner for review. The Town Planner will route the plans to the Town Engineer’s office
14 and any other agency which may have an interest in a given application (e.g. Other
15 Utility companies, the Easton Volunteer Fire Department, Easton Police Department,
16 State Highway Administration, etc.). The Town Planner will consolidate all agency
17 comments and communicate with the applicant until all concerns have been satisfied.
18
19 1. Vicinity map showing relationship to surroundings, including existing,
20 proposed, or mapped streets within 1,000 feet and municipal boundaries
21 within 1,000 feet of the tract.
22
23 2. Each sheet numbered and the relationship shown to total number of sheets.
24
25 3. Dimensions in feet and decimal parts.
26
27 4. North arrow.
28
29 5. Boundary survey or survey of record of the property showing courses,
30 distances and area.
31
32 6. Detailed plans drawn at a scale that is legible, preferably on one (1) sheet.
33
34 7. Existing contours with intervals not more than one (1) foot. Elevations shall
35 be based on the United States Geological Survey or equivalent adjusted
36 datum. (Source of contour data referenced on site plan; include a benchmark
37 with elevation and location on the plan.)
38
39 8. Location, width and names of existing platted streets or other public streets,
40 railroad and utility rights of way, parks, open space areas, and municipal
41 corporation lines within or adjoining the tract.
42
43 9. Proposed public improvements, highways, or other major improvements
44 planned on or near the site.
45
46
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE III
3-5
10. Rights of wa 1 y for all drainage purposes and utilities
2
3 11. All existing and proposed utilities, including location, grade and size of:
4
5 a. Storm drain (including invert elevations and profiles).
6
7 b. Sewerage facilities (including invert elevations and profiles).
8
9 c. Catch Basins.
10
11 d. Drainage ways, channels.
12
13 e. Pumping Stations.
14
15 f. Water mains.
16
17 g. Street Lights.
18
19 h. Electric, telephone, and/or cable television lines.
20
21 i. Fire hydrants.
22
23 j. Direction or, distance to and size of nearest water mains and sewers if
24 not located on or adjacent to the site.
25
26 12. Conditions on adjoining lands; direction and gradient of ground slope,
27 embankments, retaining walls, railroads and towers or other influences when
28 identified by the applicant or Town Planner to be of concern.
29
30 13. Locations of all existing or proposed buildings, structures, parking facilities
31 and other improvements. Submission shall include a scale dimension from the
32 property line to the proposed building.
33
34 14. If alteration is made to an existing building, structure, or other improvement,
35 dotted lines shall denote features or locations to be abandoned and solid lines
36 shall denote proposed features.
37
38 15. Building setback lines.
39
40 16. Signature and seal of registered land surveyor, registered professional
41 engineer, registered architect, registered landscape architect or professional
42 planner (AICP), responsible for the accuracy of the site plan.
43
44 17. Drainage calculations and certification.
45
46 18. Legend which clearly indicates existing and proposed improvements and
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE III
3-6
natural features. 1 The legend or title block must include the following
2 information:
3
4 a. Zoning district.
5
6 b. Tax map and parcel number.
7
8 c. Developer’s name and address
9
10 d. Owner’s name and address.
11
12 e. Scale.
13
14 f. Date of drawing; date and type of revisions.
15
16 g. Utility symbols.
17
18 h. Name of projects.
19
20 19. Notes which identify:
21
22 a. Board of Appeals’ case number/approval date (if applicable)
23
24 b. Projected building schedule:
25
26 i. Start
27
28 ii. Finish
29
30 c. Number of parking spaces:
31
32 i. Existing
33
34 ii. Proposed
35
36 iii. Required
37
38 d. Number of residential units by type (if applicable).
39
40 e. Residential density in units per acre (if applicable).
41
42 20. Location of refuse collection, exterior lighting, fencing, and all pedestrian
43 walkways and sidewalks.
44
45 21. The location, size, height, number, and orientation of all proposed signs.
46
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE III
3-7
22. Landscaping plan and legend prepared in accordance 1 with Section 28 – 1014
2 of this Ordinance.
3
4 23. If residential development, include homeowner's association documentation
5 when common open space and buffer areas are provided.
6
7 24. Certificates and statements.
8
9 25. Sedimentation and erosion control plan.
10
11 26. The Forest Conservation Plan and Forest Conservation Worksheet shall be
12 submitted in accordance with the provisions of the Town of Easton's Forest
13 Conservation Ordinance.
14
15 27. Renderings or sketches which accurately depict the architecture of any
16 proposed structures.
17
18 C. Final Site Plan
19
20 The developer or engineer shall furnish the Town Planner with "As Built" mylar
21 reproducible drawings at the completion of the project indicating infrastructure and
22 structures. These drawings shall include a signature block and certification indicating
23 that all improvements associated with the project have been constructed or installed in
24 accordance with the approved development site plan. A falsely certified final site plan
25 shall represent a violation of this Ordinance and be subject to the penalties prescribed for
26 such actions, in addition to whatever punitive actions may be brought to bear upon the
27 person signing the site plan by any professional association involved with the design
28 professional’s field of practice (i.e. engineering, surveying, landscape architecture, etc.).
29
30 D. Amendments to Approved Site Plans
31
32 Any amendment to an approved site plan, as determined by the Town Planner to be
33 insignificant shall be reviewed and approved or denied by the Town Planner. Major or
34 significant changes shall be subject to Planning Commission review and approval.
35
36 28 – 301.4 EFFECT OF SITE PLAN APPROVALS
37
38 A. Sketch Plan
39
40 Sketch Plan approval shall confer upon the applicant the following rights for a period of
41 at least two (2) years, or for a longer period is determined by the Planning Commission:
42
43 1. The total number of residential dwelling units, and the general type (townhouses,
44 garden apartments, etc.)
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE III
3-8
2. The amount 1 and type of non-residential gross floor area.
2
3 The Planning Commission shall indicate the following which shall not vest, but still be
4 presumed to be valid at Preliminary Site Plan Approval subject to engineering and
5 environmental considerations:
6
7
8 1. The classification and location of major roads.
9
10 2. The general location of the different uses and density by land-use area.
11
12 B. Development Site Plan
13
14 Development Site Plan approval shall confer upon the applicant the following rights for a
15 two (2) year period from the date of the preliminary approval
16
17 1. That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary approval was granted
18 shall not be changed.
19
20 2. That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the expiration date
21 of preliminary approval the whole, or a section, or sections of the preliminary site
22 plan; and
23
24 3. That the applicant may apply for and the Planning Commission may grant
25 extensions on such preliminary approval for additional periods of at least (1) year
26 but not to exceed a total extension of two (2) years.
27
28 C. Final Site Plan
29
30 Final Site Plan approval shall confer upon the applicant the following rights:
31
32 1. The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval granted and all
33 other rights conferred upon the developer pursuant to preliminary approval
34 whether conditionally or otherwise shall not be changed for a period of three (3)
35 years after the date of final approval.
36
37 2. If the developer has followed the standards prescribed for Final Site Plan
38 approval, the Planning Commission may extend such period of protection for
39 extensions of one (1) year, but not to exceed three (3) extensions.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-1
1 ARTICLE IV
2 ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
3
4 SECTION 28 – 401 A-1 - AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
5
6 28 – 401.1 PURPOSE
7
8 The A-1 Agricultural District is intended for properties for which Town sewer service has
9 not yet been extended. Upon the provision of such service, the Town Council may
10 establish the appropriate zoning for these properties. Regulations and standards stated
11 herein allow low density residential development as well as a full range of agricultural
12 and related activities. Any parcel of land that, for whatever reason, has no zoning
13 classification shall be zoned A-1.
14
15 28 – 401.2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
16
17 The following minimum development standards shall be observed in the A-1 District:
18
19 A. Lot Standards
20
21 1. Minimum lot sizes – All lots hereafter established shall not be less
22 than one (1) acre.
23
24 2. Lot frontage – Each lot hereafter established shall have a minimum
25 frontage on a public street or way of thirty (30) feet.
26
27 B. No more than one principal use shall be permitted on an individual lot.
28
29 C. Off-street parking shall be provided for all uses in accordance with the
30 standards of Section 28 – 1001
31
32 D. Minimum setbacks – Each main structure, all accessory structures and any
33 use, shall be set back a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any public or private
34 access-way and/or navigable waters; and eight (8) feet from all other lot lines,
35 except that boat-houses, docks, and wharves may be erected on a shoreline,
36 eight (8) feet from any other boundary line and fences may be located on the
37 rear and side lot lines but no closer to the front lot line than the minimum front
38 setback.
39
40 E. Height limitations – thirty-five (35) feet.
41
42 F. Lot coverage – Within the Building Envelope 100% coverage shall be
43 permitted. Outside of the Building Envelope, all buildings and structures shall
44 not exceed ten (10%) percent of the balance of the lot area.
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-2
SECTION 1 28 – 402 R-7A - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
2
3 28 – 402.1 PURPOSE
4
5 It is the purpose of this district to encourage the residential development and
6 redevelopment of certain established areas of the Town of Easton. The district will
7 provide land areas for high and medium density residential development with a variety of
8 housing types including multi-family dwellings in a manner that respects the existing
9 character of the older, developed parts of the district.
10
11 28 – 402.2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
12
13 The following minimum development standards shall be observed in the R-7A District:
14
15 A. The minimum lot size for all uses hereafter established shall be 7,500 square
16 feet, except as modified below:
17
18 1. Minimum lot sizes – Up to 50% of the lots within an R-7A
19 subdivision may be less than the required minimum lot size. Of these
20 smaller lots, 75% must have a minimum lot size of at least 5,000
21 square feet.
22
23 2. Lot frontage – Each lot hereinafter established shall have a minimum
24 frontage on a public street or way of thirty (30) feet. However, houses
25 served by rear alleys may front directly onto parks or public open
26 space, which shall have perimeter sidewalks.
27
28 B. No more than one principal use shall be permitted on an individual lot
29
30 C. Off-street parking shall be provided for all uses in accordance with the
31 standards of Section 28 – 1001.
32
33 D. Minimum setbacks for all uses and structures shall be:
34
35 1. Front setback – For lots recorded after January 1, 1993 the front
36 setback requirement is fifteen (15) feet. For lots recorded before
37 January 1, 1993 the front setback requirement shall be twenty-five (25)
38 feet. In each new subdivision, the Planning and Zoning Commission
39 may impose the former, greater, setback if it finds that such setback is
40 necessary to better insure compatibility with the neighborhood within
41 which the lot(s) is located.
42
43 2. Rear setback – twenty-five (25) feet (except for fences).
44
45 3. Side setback – two side setbacks – eight (8) feet (except for fences).
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-3
1
2 E. Height limitations – thirty-five (35) feet.
3
4 F. Building Envelope – All lots shall have a minimum building envelope of sixty
5 (60) feet deep by thirty (30) feet wide.
6
7 G. Lot coverage – Within the building envelope 100% of the land area may be
8 covered with buildings or structures. Outside of the building envelope
9 permitted accessory structures may be constructed in accordance with the
10 supplemental standards pertaining to said use. In total, such accessory
11 structures may not occupy more than fifty (50%) percent of the rear yard area.
12 This provision shall not be construed to permit any accessory structures to be
13 located in the established front yard.
14
15 H. For single family dwellings the maximum density permitted in the R-7A
16 district shall be 3.5 dwelling units per acre. A density increase is permitted
17 where the subdivision proposal provides on-site or off-site housing
18 opportunities for low- or moderate-income households, as defined by the
19 Town of Easton Affordable Housing Board. When off-site housing provision
20 is proposed, the Commission shall require evidence that these units will in fact
21 be constructed by a certain date. For each affordable unit provided under this
22 subsection, one additional building lot or dwelling unit shall be permitted, up
23 to a maximum 15% increase in dwelling units. For multi-family dwellings the
24 maximum density shall be eight (8) dwelling units per acre. The maximum
25 permitted density for two-family dwellings shall be two (2) du/lot provided
26 said lot is expanded in accordance with Section 28 – 1007.1. A. (9).
27
28 SECTION 28 – 403 R-10A - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
29
30 28 – 403.1 PURPOSE
31
32 It is the purpose of this district to provide for the continued development of existing and
33 new residential areas within the Town of Easton. The district will provide land areas
34 suitable for medium density residential use with a variety of housing types.
35
36 28 – 403.2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
37
38 The following minimum development standards shall be observed in the R-10A District:
39
40 A. The minimum lot size for all uses shall be 10,000 square feet except as
41 modified below.
42
43 1. Minimum lot sizes – Up to 50% of the lots within an R-10A
44 subdivision may be less than the required minimum lot size. Of
45 these smaller lots, 75% must have a minimum lot size of at least
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-4
1 7,000 square feet.
2
3 2. Lot frontage – Each lot hereinafter established shall have a
4 minimum frontage on a public street or way of thirty-five (35) feet.
5 However, houses served by rear alleys may front directly onto
6 parks or public open space, which shall have perimeter sidewalks
7
8 B. No more than one principal use shall be permitted on an individual lot.
9
10 C. Off-Street Parking shall be provided for all uses in accordance with the
11 standards of Section 28 – 1001.
12
13 D. Minimum setbacks for all uses and structures:
14
15 1. Front setback – For lots recorded after January 1, 1993 the front
16 setback requirement is fifteen (15) feet. For lots recorded before
17 January 1, 1993 the front setback requirement shall be thirty (30)
18 feet. In each new subdivision, the Planning and Zoning
19 Commission may impose the former, greater, setback if it finds
20 that such setback is necessary to better insure compatibility with
21 the neighborhood within which the lot(s) is located.
22
23 2. Rear setback – thirty (30) feet (except for fences).
24
25 3. Side setback – two side setbacks are required of eight (8) feet each
26 (except for fences).
27
28 E. Height Limitations – thirty-five (35) feet.
29
30 F. Building Envelope – All lots shall have a minimum building envelope of
31 fifty-five (55) feet deep by thirty (30) feet wide
32
33 G. Lot coverage – Within the building envelope 100% of the land area may
34 be covered with buildings or structures. Outside of the building envelope
35 permitted accessory structures may be constructed in accordance with the
36 supplemental standards pertaining to said use. In total, such accessory
37 structures may not occupy more than fifty (50%) percent of the rear yard
38 area. This provision shall not be construed to permit any accessory
39 structures to be located in the established front yard
40
41 H. For single family dwellings the maximum density permitted in the R-10A
42 district shall be 3.5 dwelling units per acre. A density increase is
43 permitted where the subdivision proposal provides on-site or off-site
44 housing opportunities for low- or moderate-income households, as defined
45 by the Town of Easton Affordable Housing Board. When off-site housing
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-5
provision is proposed, the Commission 1 shall require evidence that these
2 units will in fact be constructed by a certain date. For each affordable unit
3 provided under this subsection, one additional building lot or dwelling unit
4 shall be permitted, up to a maximum 15% increase in dwelling units. For
5 multi-family dwellings the maximum density shall be five (5) dwelling
6 units per acre. The maximum permitted density for two-family dwellings
7 shall be two (2) du/lot provided said lot is expanded in accordance with
8 Section 28 – 1007.1.A.(9).
9
10 SECTION 28 – 404 R-10M - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
11
12 28 – 404.1 PURPOSE
13
14 It is the intent of this district to provide for the continued development of existing and
15 new residential areas. The district will provide land area suitable for medium density
16 residential use with a variety of housing types including mobile homes (as a special
17 exception).
18
19 28 – 404.2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
20
21 The following minimum development standards shall be observed in the R-10M District:
22
23 A. The minimum lot size for all uses shall be 10,000 square feet.
24
25 1. Minimum lot sizes – All lots hereafter established shall be not less
26 than 10,000 square feet in area.
27
28 2. Lot frontage – Each lot hereinafter established shall have a
29 minimum frontage on a public street or way of thirty-five (35) feet.
30
31 B. No more than one principal use shall be permitted on an individual lot.
32
33 C. Off-street parking shall be provided for all uses in accordance with the
34 standards of Section 28 – 1001.
35
36 D. Minimum setbacks for all uses and structures:
37
38 1. Front setback – For lots recorded after January 1, 1993 the front
39 setback requirement is fifteen (15) feet. For lots recorded before
40 January 1, 1993 the front setback requirement shall be thirty (30)
41 feet. In each new subdivision, the Planning and Zoning
42 Commission may impose the former, greater, setback if it finds
43 that such setback is necessary to better insure compatibility with
44 the neighborhood within which the lot(s) is located.
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-6
2. Rear setback – thirty (30) 1 feet yard (except for fences).
2
3 3. Side setbacks – two side setbacks are required of eight (8) feet
4 each (except for fences).
5
6 E. Height Limitations – thirty-five (35) feet.
7
8 F. Building Envelope – All lots shall have a minimum building envelope of
9 fifty-five (55) feet deep by fifty-four (54) feet wide.
10
11 G. Lot coverage – Within the building envelope 100% of the land area may
12 be covered with buildings or structures. Outside of the building envelope
13 permitted accessory structures may be constructed in accordance with the
14 supplemental standards pertaining to said use. In total, such accessory
15 structures may not occupy more than fifty (50%) percent of the rear yard
16 area. This provision shall not be construed to permit any accessory
17 structures to be located in the established front yard.
18
19 H. For single family dwellings the maximum density permitted in the R-10M
20 district shall be one (1) dwelling unit per lot. For multi-family dwellings
21 the maximum density shall be five (5) dwelling units per acre. For mobile
22 home subdivisions or parks the maximum permitted density shall be six
23 (6) units per acre. The maximum permitted density for two-family
24 dwellings shall be two (2) du/lot provided said lot is expanded in
25 accordance with Section 28 – 1007.1.A.(9).
26
27 SECTION 28 – 405 CR - CENTRAL BUSINESS COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
28
29 28 – 405.1 PURPOSE
30
31 The purpose of this district is to provide appropriate locations for select commercial
32 activities within the Town of Easton's Central Business District. Provision is made for
33 the accommodation of a wide range of business pursuits, retail sales and office and
34 service activities which serve the needs of citizens of the region. The district is designed
35 to preserve, and to encourage the continued development of the Central Business Area
36 consistent with the unique land use mix which currently exists.
37
38 Uses which may be potentially detrimental to a neighborhood for such reasons as odor,
39 smoke, dust, fumes, fire, vibration, noise or hazardous conditions because of fire or
40 explosion shall not be permitted.
41
42 28 – 405.2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
43
44 The following minimum development standards shall be observed in the CR District:
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-7
1 A. Lot Standards
2
3 1. Minimum lot size – All lots hereafter established shall be not less
4 than 5,000 square feet.
5
6 2. Minimum lot dimensions – All lots hereafter established shall have
7 depth of at least sixty (60) feet.
8
9 3. Lot frontage – All lots hereafter established shall have a minimum
10 frontage on a public street or way of at least thirty (30) feet.
11
12 B. Off-Street Parking shall not be required for uses within the CR Zoning
13 District.
14
15 C. Minimum setback requirements for all lots and uses:
16
17 1. Front setback – All structures shall conform with a setback line as
18 established by the Town Council or twenty-five (25) feet from the
19 front property line in the event that no setback line is so
20 established.
21
22 2. Rear setback:
23
24 a. in previously developed areas in the CR commercial zone
25 the existing or established rear building line of that block;
26
27 b. all buildings hereafter constructed in areas without an
28 established rear building line in that block shall be setback
29 fifteen (15) feet from the rear property line (except for
30 fences).
31
32 3. Side setbacks – none.
33
34 D. Height limitations – fifty (50) feet.
35
36 E. Building structure size – not to exceed twenty-five thousand (25,000)
37 square feet of gross floor area, except by Special exception.
38
39 F. Building envelope – All lots shall have a minimum building envelope of
40 twenty (20) feet deep by thirty (30) feet wide.
41
42 G. Lot coverage – by all buildings and structures shall not exceed seventy
43 (70%) percent.
44
45 H. Maximum density for any residential uses permitted by right or as a
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-8
special exception shall be 1 in accordance with the development standards
2 of the R-7A District (Section 28 – 402.2).
3
4 I. All on-site lighting unless approved otherwise by the Planning
5 Commission shall be low cut-off shielded luminaries at 18’ height and
6 light shall not shine off-site at levels greater than 1-foot candle.
7
8 J. All off-street loading and unloading areas shall be screened from view by
9 permanent, decorative screens or natural plantings, a minimum of eight (8)
10 feet in height, as per the requirements of Section 28 – 1014 of this
11 Ordinance.
12
13
14 SECTION 28 – 406 CG - GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
15
16 28 – 406.1 PURPOSE
17
18 The purpose of this district is to provide appropriate locations for a broad range of
19 intensive commercial activities. Provision is made for the accommodation of a wide
20 range of business pursuits, including retail, wholesale, storage and contracting activities.
21
22 Uses which may be potentially detrimental to a neighborhood for such reasons as odor,
23 smoke, dust, fumes, fire, vibration, noise or hazardous conditions because of fire or
24 explosion shall not be permitted.
25
26 28 – 406.2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
27
28 The following minimum development standards shall be observed in the CG District:
29
30 A. Lot Standards:
31
32 1. Minimum lot size – All lots hereafter established shall be not less
33 than 20,000 square feet
34
35 2. Lot frontage – Each lot hereafter established shall have a minimum
36 frontage on a public street or way of sixty (60) feet.
37
38 B. Off-Street Parking shall be provided for all uses in accordance with the
39 standards of Section 28 – 1001.
40
41 C. Setback requirements for all lots and uses:
42
43 1. Front setback – All structures shall be setback at least twenty-five
44 (25) feet.
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-9
2. Rear setback – All structures shall 1 be setback at least fifteen (15)
2 feet from the rear property line (except for fences).
3
4 3. Side setbacks – A minimum of two side yards of ten (10) feet each
5 (except for fences).
6
7 D. Building Envelope – All lots shall have a minimum building envelope of
8 twenty (20) feet deep by thirty (30) feet wide.
9
10 E. Height limitations – fifty (50) feet.
11
12 F. Lot coverage – by all buildings and structures shall not exceed fifty (50%)
13 percent.
14
15 G. All on-site lighting unless approved otherwise by the Planning
16 Commission shall be low cut-off shielded luminaries at 18’ height and
17 light shall not shine off-site at levels greater than 1-foot candle.
18
19 H. All off-street loading and unloading areas shall be screened from view by
20 permanent, decorative screens or natural plantings, a minimum of eight (8)
21 feet in height.
22
23 I. All areas not devoted to buildings or parking areas shall be landscaped and
24 maintained in accordance with Section 28 – 1014 of this Ordinance.
25
26 SECTION 28 – 407 CL - LIMITED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
27
28 28 – 407.1 PURPOSE
29
30 The purpose of this district is to provide appropriate locations for select commercial
31 activities. Provision is made for the accommodation of a wide range of business pursuits,
32 retail sales, and office and service activities which serve the needs of citizens of the
33 region.
34
35 Uses which may be potentially detrimental to a neighborhood for such reasons as odor,
36 smoke, dust, fumes, fire, vibration, noise or hazardous conditions because of fire or
37 explosion shall not be permitted.
38
39 28 – 407.2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
40
41 The following minimum development standards shall be observed in the CL District:
42
43 A. Any development within the CL District requires Site Plan review and
44 approval in accordance with Section 28 – 301.
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-10
B. The minimum lot size for all uses 1 hereafter established shall be sixty
2 thousand (60,000) square feet.
3
4 C. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of
5 Section 28 – 1001 and shall be located in the rear or side yard.
6
7 D. All lots hereafter established shall have a minimum frontage on a public
8 street or way of at least two hundred (200).
9
10 E. Minimum setbacks for all structures shall be as follows:
11
12 1. Front – forty (40) feet from the property line
13
14 2. Side – ten (10) feet on each side of the property line (except for
15 fences).
16
17 3. Rear – fifteen (15) feet from the property line (except for fences).
18
19 4. There shall be maintained a landscaped buffer of seventy-five (75)
20 feet on any lot line adjacent to residentially zoned property in
21 accordance with the provisions of Section 28 – 1014 of this
22 Ordinance.
23
24 F. Height limitations – fifty (50) feet.
25
26 G. Lot coverage by all buildings and structures shall not exceed thirty-five
27 (35%) percent of the lot area.
28
29 H. There shall be no outdoor storage of any goods or merchandise on any lot
30 or open areas, nor shall any products be displayed in open areas.
31
32 I. All on-site lighting unless approved otherwise by the Planning
33 Commission shall be low cut-off shielded luminaries at 18’ height and
34 light shall not shine off-site at levels greater than 1-foot candle.
35
36 J. All off-street loading and unloading areas shall be screened from view by
37 permanent decorative screens or natural planting, either of which shall be
38 a minimum of eight (8) feet in height, in accordance with the provisions of
39 Section 28 – 1014 of this Ordinance.
40
41 K. All areas not devoted to buildings or parking areas shall be landscaped and
42 maintained in accordance with Section 28 – 1014 of this Ordinance.
43
44
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-11
SECTION 28 – 1 408 B C – BUSINESS COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
2
3 28 – 408.1 PURPOSE
4
5 The purpose of this district is to provide areas for light industrial, service/business
6 commercial and related uses which can operate in a clean and quiet manner. Certain
7 public facilities needed to serve the district and adjoining residential and commercial
8 districts are permitted. Regulations are designed to protect abutting or surrounding
9 districts; to establish standards for intensity of use and to guide the character of
10 development. In keeping with the purpose of this district, no use may be permitted which
11 may be detrimental to the area because of odor, smoke, dust, fumes, fire, noise,
12 explosion, or open storage.
13
14 28 – 408.2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
15
16 The following minimum development standards shall be observed in the BC District:
17 A. The minimum size for all uses hereafter established shall be 40,000 square feet.
18
19 B. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Section
20 28 – 1001.
21
22 C. All lots hereafter established shall have a frontage on a public street of way of at
23 least one hundred (100) feet.
24
25 D. Minimum setbacks for all uses shall be as follows:
26
27 1. Front – forty (40) feet from the property line.
28
29 2. Side – ten (10) feet on each side of the property line (except for fences).
30
31 3. Rear – thirty (30) feet from the property line (except for fences).
32
33 E. Height limitations – thirty-five (35) feet.
34
35 F. Building Envelope – all lots shall have a minimum building envelope of thirty
36 (30) feet deep by eighty (80) feet wide.
37
38 G. Lot coverage by all buildings and structures shall not exceed fifty (50%) percent
39 of the lot area.
40
41 H. There shall be no open storage on any lot or open areas, nor shall any products be
42 displayed in open areas. All outside storage shall be adequately screened and
43 landscaped in accordance with provisions of Section 28 – 1014 of this Ordinance.
44
45 I. All on-site lighting unless approved otherwise by the Planning Commission shall
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-12
be low cut-off shielded luminaries 1 at 18’ height and light shall not shine off-site at
2 levels greater than 1-foot candle.
3
4 J. All off-street loading and unloading areas shall be screened from view by
5 permanent decorative screens or natural planting, either of which shall be a
6 minimum of eight (8) feet in height, in accordance with the provisions of Section
7 28 – 1014 of this Ordinance
8
9 K. All areas not devoted to buildings or parking areas shall be landscaped and
10 maintained in a suitable manner, in accordance with the provisions of Section 28
11 – 1014 of this Ordinance.
12
13 SECTION 28 – 409 I – INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
14
15 28 – 409.1 PURPOSE
16
17 The purpose of this district is to provide areas for industrial and related uses which can
18 operate in a clean and quiet manner, with an emphasis on reserving land for uses of a
19 truly industrial nature. Certain public facilities needed to serve the district and adjoining
20 residential and commercial districts are permitted. Regulations are designed to protect
21 abutting or surrounding districts; to establish standards for intensity of use and to guide
22 the character of development. In keeping with the purpose of this district, no use may be
23 permitted which may be detrimental to the area because of odor, smoke, dust, fumes, fire,
24 noise, explosion, or open storage.
25
26 28 – 409.2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
27
28 The following minimum development standards shall be observed in the I District:
29
30 A. The minimum lot size for all uses hereafter established shall be 40,000 square
31 feet.
32
33 B. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Section
34 28 – 1001.
35
36 C. All lots hereafter established shall have a frontage on a public street or way of at
37 least one hundred (100) feet.
38
39 D. Minimum setbacks for all uses shall be as follows:
40
41 1. Front – twenty-five (25) feet from the property line.
42
43 2. Side – ten (10) feet on each side of the property line (except for fences).
44 A setback of twenty-five (25) feet shall be maintained from any adjacent
45 residentially zoned property.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-13
1
2 3. Rear – thirty (30) feet from the property line (except for fences). A
3 setback of twenty-five (25) feet shall be maintained from any adjacent
4 residentially zoned property.
5
6 E. Height limitations – forty (40) feet.
7
8 F. Building Envelope – All lots shall have a minimum building envelope of thirty
9 (30) feet deep by eighty (80) feet wide.
10
11 G. Lot coverage by all buildings and structures shall not exceed fifty (50%) percent
12 of the lot area.
13
14 H. All storage areas shall be adequately screened and landscaped in accordance with
15 provisions of Section 28 – 1014 of this Ordinance.
16
17 I. All on-site lighting unless approved otherwise by the Planning Commission shall
18 be low cut-off shielded luminaries at 18’ height and light shall not shine off-site at
19 levels greater than 1-foot candle.
20
21 J. All off-street loading and unloading areas shall be screened from view by
22 permanent decorative screens or natural planting, either of which shall be a
23 minimum of eight (8) feet in height, in accordance with the provisions of Section
24 28 – 1014 of this Ordinance.
25
26 K. All areas not devoted to buildings or parking areas shall be landscaped and
27 maintained in a suitable manner, in accordance with the provisions of Section 28
28 – 1014 of this Ordinance.
29
30 L. Sidewalks shall be constructed along any public right-of-way (except for alleys)
31 adjacent to the site along the entire frontage(s) of the property. To the extent
32 practicable, walkways shall be constructed on the site to tie building entrances
33 and/or pedestrian pathway systems into existing or proposed public sidewalk
34 systems.
35
36 SECTION 28 – 410 I-1 - SELECT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
37
38 28 – 410.1 PURPOSE
39
40 The purpose of this district is to provide areas for industrial and related uses which can
41 operate in a clean and quiet manner. Certain public facilities needed to serve the district
42 and adjoining residential and commercial districts are permitted. Regulations are
43 designed to protect abutting or surrounding districts; to establish standards for intensity of
44 use and to guide the character of development. In keeping with the purpose of this
45 district, no use may be permitted which may be detrimental to the area because of odor,
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-14
1 smoke, dust, fumes, fire, noise, explosion, or open storage.
2
3 28 – 410.2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
4
5 The following minimum development standards shall be observed in the I-1 District:
6
7 A. The minimum lot size for all uses hereafter established shall be 40,000 square
8 feet.
9
10 B. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Section
11 28 – 1001
12
13 C. All lots hereafter established shall have a frontage on a public street or way of at
14 least one hundred (100) feet.
15
16 D. Minimum setbacks for all uses shall be as follows:
17
18 1. Front – forty (40) feet from the property line.
19
20 2. Side – ten (10) feet on each side of the property line (except for fences).
21
22 3. Rear – thirty (30) feet from the property line (except for fences).
23
24 E. Height limitations- thirty-five (35) feet.
25
26 F. Building Envelope - All lots shall have a minimum building envelope of thirty
27 (30) feet deep by eighty (80) feet wide
28
29 G. Lot coverage by all buildings and structures shall not exceed fifty (50%) percent
30 of the lot area.
31
32 H. There shall be no open storage on any lot or open areas, nor shall any products be
33 displayed in open areas. All outside storage shall be adequately screened and
34 landscaped in accordance with provisions of Section 28 – 1014 of this Ordinance.
35
36 I. All on-site lighting unless approved otherwise by the Planning Commission shall
37 be low cut-off shielded luminaries at 18’ height and light shall not shine off-site at
38 levels greater than 1-foot candle.
39
40 J. All off-street loading and unloading areas shall be screened from view by
41 permanent decorative screens or natural planting, either of which shall be a
42 minimum of eight (8) feet in height, in accordance with the provisions of Section
43 28 – 1014 of this Ordinance.
44
45 K. All areas not devoted to buildings or parking areas shall be landscaped and
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-15
maintained in a suitable manner, in accordance 1 with the provisions of Section 28
2 – 1014 of this Ordinance.
3
4 SECTION 28 – 411 I-2 - GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
5
6 28 – 411.1 PURPOSE
7
8 The purpose of this district is to provide areas for industrial uses which have limited
9 effects upon surrounding land uses. Uses permitted in this district include those related
10 to fabricating, warehousing and wholesale distribution. The I-2 District is envisioned as
11 the appropriate classification for certain areas which may be annexed into the Town in
12 the future, and for those uses which may have some aspect generally viewed as
13 objectionable, but which use is necessary in a balanced community.
14
15 28 – 411.2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
16
17 A. The minimum lot size for all uses hereafter established shall be 40,000 square
18 feet.
19
20 B. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Section
21 28 – 1001.
22
23 C. All lots hereafter established shall have a frontage on a public street or way of at
24 least one hundred (100) feet.
25
26 D. Minimum setbacks for all uses shall be as follows:
27
28 1. Front – forty (4) feet from the property line.
29
30 2. Side – two (2) side yards of ten (10) feet each (except for fences).
31
32 3. Rear – thirty (30) feet from the property line (except for fences).
33
34 E. Height limitations – thirty-five (35) feet.
35
36 F. Building Envelope – All lots shall have a minimum building envelope of thirty
37 (30) feet deep by eighty (80) feet wide.
38
39 G. Lot coverage by all buildings and structures shall not exceed thirty-five (35%)
40 percent of the lot area.
41
42 H. There shall be no open storage on any lot or open areas, nor shall any products be
43 displayed in open areas. All outside storage shall be adequately screened and
44 landscaped in accordance with Section 28 – 1014 of this Ordinance.
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-16
I. All on-site lighting unless approved 1 otherwise by the Planning Commission shall
2 be low cut-off shielded luminaries at 18’ height and light shall not shine off-site at
3 levels greater than 1-foot candle.
4
5 J. All off-street loading and unloading areas shall be screened from view by
6 permanent decorative screens or natural planting, either of which shall be a
7 minimum of eight (8) feet in height, in accordance with Section 28 – 1014 of this
8 Ordinance.
9
10 K. All areas not devoted to buildings or parking areas shall be landscaped and
11 maintained in accordance with Section 28 – 1014 of this Ordinance.
12
13 SECTION 28 – 412 G/I – GOVERNMENTAL/INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT
14
15 28 – 412.1 PURPOSE
16
17 The G/I Governmental/Institutional District is intended to accommodate a wide-range of
18 institutional, cultural, and governmental uses. Although such uses may be permitted in a
19 number of other Zoning Districts, the G/I District is one in which those are the only such
20 uses deemed appropriate therein.
21
22 28 – 412.2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
23
24 The following minimum development standards shall be observed in the G/I District:
25
26 A. Lot standards:
27
28 1. Minimum lot sizes – All lots hereafter established shall be not less than
29 40,000 square feet in area.
30
31 2. Lot frontage – Each lot hereafter established shall have a minimum
32 frontage on a public street or way of one hundred (100) feet.
33
34 B. No more than one principal use shall be permitted outright on an individual lot.
35 Multiple permitted uses that are complimentary and customarily found in
36 combination may be approved for the same lot via the Special Exception process,
37 as specified in Section 28 – 1303.5 B of this Ordinance
38
39 C. Off-Street Parking and Loading – Off-street parking and loading shall be provided
40 for all uses in accordance with the standards of Section 28 – 1001, subject to the
41 following:
42
43 1. Joint Use off-site parking shall be permitted in the RH District in
44 accordance with Section 28 – 1001.4 of the Ordinance. During site plan
45 review and approval, the Planning Commission may approve off-site
46 and/or shared parking arrangements for uses located adjacent to the G/I
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-17
1 District.
2
3 D. Setback requirements for all lots and uses:
4
5 1. Front setback – All structures shall be setback at least forty (40) feet from
6 the front property line.
7
8 2. Rear setback – All structures shall be setback at least thirty (30) feet from
9 the rear property line (except for fences).
10
11 3. Side setbacks – A minimum of two side yards of fifteen (15) feet each
12 (except for fences).
13
14 E. Height limitations – fifty (50) feet. The Planning Commission may approve
15 buildings up to sixty (60) feet in height during site plan review.
16
17 F. Lot coverage – by all buildings and structures shall not exceed fifty percent
18 (50%).
19
20 SECTION 28 – 413 RH – REGIONAL HEALTHCARE DISTRICT
21
22 28 – 413.1 PURPOSE; CRITERIA FOR ESTABLISHMENT
23
24 A. The RH Regional Healthcare District is intended to provide for and encourage a
25 regional hospital and related healthcare facilities in a campus setting and to
26 identify and recognize the importance of such institutions and related uses to
27 continue to be located within and serving the Town. These regulations are also
28 intended to protect adjacent properties from the potential adverse impacts of such
29 facilities by establishing development standards to which hospital and related uses
30 must conform. The District is intended to include amenities, services, and uses
31 offered primarily for patients and their families, healthcare providers,
32 administrators, employees, visitors and other users of facilities located within the
33 District.
34
35 The logical, orderly and appropriate expansion and development of regional
36 healthcare facilities in the Town that will meet the long range healthcare needs of
37 the community are public necessities and are in the interests of the health,
38 prosperity and welfare of the citizens of Easton, Talbot County and the Mid-
39 Shore area
40
41 B. The RH District is a base zoning district and may be established anywhere within
42 Town limits, provided the following criteria are satisfied:
43
44 1. The land area proposed for inclusion in the RH District is at least fifty (50)
45 acres in overall size, with all of the land or parcels proposed for inclusion
46 in such District being contiguous to one another or separated only by a
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-18
1 public street or other public right-of-way;
2
3 2. All of the land area proposed for inclusion in the RH District is served or
4 will be served at the time of physical development by public sewer and
5 water systems; and
6
7 3. A RH District may be expanded in increments of less than 50 acres,
8 provided that the additional land is contiguous to or abutting an existing
9 RH District.
10
11 4. As a condition of establishment of each RH District, initial building
12 construction within such District shall include construction of at least the
13 first phase of an acute care hospital.
14
15 C. The provisions of this RH District, where in conflict with other provisions of the
16 Zoning Ordinance, shall prevail.
17
18 28 – 413.2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
19
20 Any development within the RH District requires Site Plan review and approval in
21 accordance with Section 28 – 301. The following minimum development standards shall
22 be observed in the RH District:
23
24 A. Lot standards:
25
26 1. Minimum Lot Sizes – Each lot hereafter established shall be not less than
27 ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
28
29 2. Lot Frontage – Each lot hereafter established shall have a minimum
30 frontage on a public or private street or way of sixty (60) feet.
31
32 B. Minimum Building Envelope – Each lot hereafter established shall have a
33 minimum building envelope of sixty (60) feet deep by forty (40) feet wide.
34
35 C. Minimum Setback Requirements for All Lots and Uses (except as specifically
36 provided below):
37
38 1. Front – thirty (30) feet from the property line.
39
40 2. Side – fifteen (15) feet from the property line (except for fences).
41
42 3. Rear – fifteen (15) feet from the property line (except for fences).
43
44 4. Additional setback requirements – Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
45 following expanded setbacks shall apply to certain circumstances and
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-19
1 locations in the RH District:
2
3 a. Where any building is erected or altered to exceed thirty-five (35)
4 feet in height, the required thirty (30) foot front setback shall be
5 increased one (1) foot for every foot of building height over thirty6
five (35) feet, excluding roof structures and architectural features
7 permitted above the height limit by Section 28 – 1003.
8
9 b. Where any building is erected or altered to exceed thirty-five (35)
10 feet in height, the required fifteen (15) foot rear and side setbacks
11 shall be increased one (1) foot for every foot of building height
12 over thirty-five (35) feet, excluding roof structures and
13 architectural features permitted above the height limit by Section
14 28 – 1003.
15
16 c. From property zoned other than RH and from Route 50:
17
18 i. All principal structures shall be setback at least one19
hundred fifty (150) feet; and
20
21 ii. All parking areas and accessory structures shall be setback
22 at least one-hundred (100) feet.
23
24 d. From public roads and highways (excluding Route 50) existing on
25 the date of establishment of the RH District or their reconfigured
26 alignment, if applicable (collectively, the “Existing Public
27 Roads”):
28
29 i. All principal structures shall be setback at least seventy five
30 (75) feet from Existing Public Roads; and
31
32 ii. All parking areas and accessory structures shall be setback
33 at least twenty-five (25) feet from Existing Public Roads.
34
35 5. The setbacks established under (1) through (4) above shall not apply to
36 storm water management or treatment facilities, swales, inlets, pipes and
37 other conveyances, which shall be subject to a minimum setback of five
38 (5) feet from any street line or property line. Notwithstanding the
39 foregoing, storm water ponds and basins shall be subject to a minimum
40 setback of twenty-five (25) feet from any street line or property line,
41 except County roads, which shall have a fifty (50) foot setback. Except as
42 specifically required by subsection 4(d), no part of any parking and
43 maneuvering space shall be closer than ten (10) feet to any street line or
44 property line.
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-20
6. Adjustment of setbacks for 1 hospital and medical services and covered
2 walkways:
3
4 a. The setbacks required under (1) through (4) above shall not apply
5 between a hospital and (i) any building(s) housing Medical
6 Services or (ii) any parking garage structure that are constructed on
7 separate lots of record and may connect, abut or be located closer
8 than permitted by such setbacks.
9
10 b. The setbacks required under (1) through (4) above shall not apply
11 to covered walkways connecting buildings located on separate lots
12 of record.
13
14 D. The provisions of Sections 28 – 1005 and 28 – 1006 shall also apply to the RH
15 District.
16
17 E. Height limitations:
18
19 1. A hospital building shall have a maximum of six (6) occupied stories and
20 shall be limited to one hundred ten (110) feet in height. The height of a
21 hospital building shall be measured as the average vertical distance
22 between finished ground level at each corner of the front façade and the
23 highest point of the structure excluding a rooftop helipad and related
24 stairway/elevator tower and other roof structures and architectural features
25 permitted above the height limit by Section 28 – 1003.
26
27 2. All other structures and facilities shall be limited to sixty (60) feet in
28 height, excluding roof structures and architectural features permitted
29 above the height limit by Section 28 – 1003. Such heights shall be
30 measured in accordance with the generally applicable definitions and
31 provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
32
33 3. The maximum height of each building in the RH District shall be subject
34 to Federal Aviation Administration restrictions and regulations.
35
36 F. Lot Coverage – Subject to the following exception, not more than 40% of the area
37 of each lot shall be covered by buildings and structures (excluding surface
38 parking). The Lot Coverage on any single lot within a RH District may exceed
39 40% of such lot provided such excess of Lot Coverage on such lot does not cause
40 the total Lot Coverage on all lots within such RH District to exceed 40% of the
41 area of the lots comprising the District. Any application for site plan approval
42 shall determine and specify the cumulative area of Lot Coverage existing and/or
43 approved within such RH District. The Board of Appeals may not modify the
44 cumulative Lot Coverage limitation for any RH District by variance.
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-21
G. Open Space – Subject to the following exception, 1 at least 15% of the area of each
2 lot shall be Open Space. The Open Space area on any single lot within a RH
3 District may be less than 15% of such lot, provided such reduction of Open Space
4 on such lot does not cause the total Open Space for all lots within such RH
5 District to fall below 15% of the area of the lots comprising the District. Any
6 application for site plan approval shall determine and specify the cumulative area
7 of Open Space existing, approved and remaining within such RH District. The
8 Board of Appeals may not modify the cumulative Open Space requirement for
9 any RH District by variance.
10
11 H. Intensity Limitation – Subject to the following exception, the Floor Area Ratio for
12 all lots in each RH District shall not exceed 0.25. The Floor Area Ratio for any
13 single lot within a RH District may be greater than 0.25, provided such excess
14 floor area on such lot does not cause the total Floor Area Ratio for all lots within
15 such RH District to exceed 0.25 of the total area comprising the District. Any
16 application for site plan approval shall determine and specify the cumulative
17 Gross Floor Area and Floor Area Ratio existing and/or approved within such RH
18 District. The Board of Appeals may not modify the cumulative Floor Area Ratio
19 limitation for any RH District by variance.
20
21 I. On-Site Lighting – All on-site lighting, unless approved by the Planning
22 Commission, shall be low cut-off luminaries at 18’ height and light shall not shine
23 off-site at levels greater than 1-foot candle. In areas where necessary, and
24 specifically for the helipad, helipad walkway, and emergency room receiving
25 area, lighting in excess of 4-foot candle power, as required by state and federal
26 regulations, shall be permitted.
27
28 J. Off-Street Parking and Loading – Off-street parking and loading shall be provided
29 for all uses in accordance with the standards of Section 28-1001, subject to the
30 following:
31
32 1. Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with
33 the generally applicable standards and procedures of the Zoning
34 Ordinance regarding parking except as specifically modified by the
35 Planning Commission pursuant to Section 28 – 1001.3 (C).
36
37 2. Joint Use off-site parking shall be permitted in the RH District in
38 accordance with Section 28 – 1001.4 of the Ordinance. During site plan
39 review and approval, the Planning Commission may approve off-site
40 and/or shared parking arrangements for uses located adjacent to the RH
41 District and zoned Governmental/Institutional.
42
43 K. Signage – Signage within an RH District shall be developed in accordance with a
44 General Signage Plan approved and/or modified by the Planning Commission for
45 each RH District. The size, location, height and number of signs constructed
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-22
within a RH District shall comply with the General 1 Signage Plan applicable at the
2 time of construction of such signs. In light of the master-planned, campus style
3 development permitted by a RH District and the importance of providing for
4 efficient direction and movement of patients and visitors throughout the campus,
5 the General Signage Plan shall provide for the planning, design, and
6 implementation of signs that are coordinated and compatible throughout a RH
7 District. The General Signage Plan shall comply with Section 28 – 1101 of the
8 Zoning Ordinance except as such provisions are modified by the Planning
9 Commission through approval of such General Signage Plan. The Planning
10 Commission may permit deviations from Section 28 – 1101 with respect to the
11 number, type and/or size of signs, including up to the following:
12
13 1. One freestanding sign at each State road frontage, the area of which may
14 not exceed 250 square feet and the height of which may not exceed 15’;
15
16 2. Identification signs for the name of the regional medical campus on not
17 more than three facades of a hospital, so long as the area of the signs does
18 not exceed 12% of the area of each façade and the area of each sign does
19 not exceed 400 square feet; and
20
21 3. Identification signs for the name(s) of a business or office complex or
22 tenant(s) on not more than two facades of a structure two or more stories
23 in height, so long as the area of each of the signs does not exceed the
24 lesser of 10% of the façade or 300 square feet.
25
26 28 – 413.3 PERMITTED USES
27
28 A building may be erected, altered or used, and a lot may be occupied or used, in whole
29 or in part, for any of the following uses, provided that such uses shall comply with the
30 RH District Development Standards, and all other applicable provisions of the Zoning
31 Ordinance.
32
33 A. Agricultural Uses
34
35 1. Agricultural cultivation;
36
37 2. Horticultural and/or floricultural production and/or wholesale operations;
38
39 3. Maintenance of land that is fallow, conservation reserved, or set aside due
40 to Soil Conservation service best management practices, crop rotation or
41 federal, state or local government programs, subject to all other applicable
42 Town rules and regulations regarding weed control, meadows and
43 property maintenance;
44
45 4. Orchards;
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-23
1
2 5. Silviculture, including Christmas tree farms;
3
4 6. Sod production; and
5
6 7. Viticulture and vineyards.
7
8 B. Commercial Uses
9
10 1. Alternative medical practices, such as acupuncture or massage or aquatic
11 therapy;
12
13 2. Ambulance services;
14
15 3. Day Care facilities (Adult, Family, Small Group and/or Group);
16
17 4. Drug and/or alcohol treatment and counseling services;
18
19 5. Health or Medical Clinics;
20
21 6. Health agencies and hospice or home healthcare services;
22
23 7. Healthcare research uses or facilities;
24
25 8. Healthcare uniform sales and rentals;
26
27 9. Helipads (only for use by helicopters involved in emergency rescue
28 operations or transporting critical patients, personnel or supplies);
29
30 10. Hospital, medical, surgical and dental supply businesses (wholesale and
31 retail);
32
33 11. Medical laboratories
34
35 12. Medical services;
36
37 13. Offices for:
38
39 a. Healthcare related business or professionals;
40
41 b.Insurance or health maintenance organizations, and
42
43 c. Administrative offices for any use permitted in the RH District;
44 14. Production and sales of prosthetics and/or durable medical equipment;
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-24
15. Rehabilitation se 1 rvices, including exercise facilities;
2
3 16. Special Medical Treatment Facilities;
4
5 17. Tissue banks; and
6
7 18. Other uses, as approved by special exception by the Board of Appeals, not
8 specifically permitted by Section 28 – 413.4, that facilitate, support and/or
9 are directly related to the provision of medical or healthcare services,
10 provided that such uses shall be similar to uses permitted by right in this
11 District (other than Helipads and Hospitals) in general character and, more
12 specifically, similar in terms of locational requirements, operational
13 characteristics, visual impact and traffic generation.
14
15 C. Institutional uses
16
17 1. Educational institutions or classrooms (including university, college,
18 vocational and trade schools) for healthcare related instruction and/or
19 research;
20
21 2. Hospitals; and
22
23 3. Nursing homes.
24
25 D. Residential uses
26
27 1. Assisted Living facilities;
28
29 2. Domiciliary Care facilities;
30
31 3. Healthcare staff housing;
32
33 4. Healthcare student dormitories;
34
35 5. Overnight Care facilities; and
36
37 6. Patient hostels.
38
39 E. Industrial uses
40
41 1. Warehousing directly and primarily related to one or more permitted uses.
42
43 F. Miscellaneous uses
44
45 1. Energy centers (including boilers, chillers, emergency generators, coTOWN
OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-25
1 generators, solar generation, etc.);
2
3 2. Parking (surface and/or structured, including commercial garages and
4 shared parking for multiple uses located within and/or adjacent to the RH
5 District);
6
7 3. Private utility, infrastructure and maintenance facilities;
8
9 4. Public utility uses and structures;
10
11 5. Covered walkways (at grade or elevated) connecting buildings containing
12 permitted uses; and
13
14 6. Accessory Uses and Structures that are clearly incidental to and
15 customarily found in connection with a permitted use or structure.
16
17 28 – 413.4 ANCILLARY USES
18
19 The following uses are also permitted to provide services or support for patients,
20 employees, visitors and other users of permitted uses. These are intended as ancillary
21 uses and shall be planned, sized, and designed primarily to serve the needs of patients,
22 employees, visitors and other users of facilities located within the RH District.
23
24 These uses shall be located within structures containing one or more of the permitted uses
25 listed in Section 28 – 413.4 and shall not have signage designed to attract patrons from
26 outside the RH District
27
28 1. Automatic teller machines;
29
30 2. Barber and beauty shops;
31
32 3. Bookstores;
33
34 4. Confectionary stores;
35
36 5. Convenience stores;
37
38 6. Financial institutions;
39
40 7. Florist shops;
41
42 8. Gift shops;
43
44 9. Houses of Worship;
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-26
1 10. Libraries;
2
3 11. Newspaper/magazine shops;
4
5 12. Pharmacies and drug stores;
6
7 13. Restaurants and cafeterias; and
8
9 14. Other accessory and ancillary uses and structures.
10
11 28 – 413.5 TEMPORARY USES
12
13 The following temporary uses are also permitted within the RH District:
14
15 1. Mobile medical facilities
16
17 2. The following temporary uses permitted by the Town Planner in accordance with
18 Section 28 – 1306 for a duration not to exceed 15 days:
19
20 a. Tents and special events; and
21
22 b. Public events; and
23
24 3. Additional temporary uses permitted by the Planning Commission in accordance
25 with Section 28 – 1306.
26
27 28 – 413.6 PROHIBITIED USES
28
29 Shopping centers and all other uses not permitted by Sections 28 – 413.4, 28 – 413.5, or
30 28 – 413.6 are prohibited in the RH District.
31
32 28 – 413.7 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS; PROCESSES
33
34 A. All uses within the RH District shall comply with applicable rules and regulations
35 of the Maryland Department of Health and Mental Hygiene.
36
37 B. All projects shall be designed to ensure safety in the area surrounding each
38 structure or facility, which may include road improvements and additional traffic
39 control devices (e.g., signal lights, signs, pavement marking, etc.).
40
41 C. For any lot in the RH District that receives site plan approval for development, all
42 areas of such lot shall be landscaped and maintained in accordance with Section
43 28 – 1014. All other areas of the RH District may remain in a natural condition
44 subject to all other applicable Town rules and regulations regarding weed control,
45 meadows and property maintenance.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-27
1
2 D. Subdivisions and/or site plans for projects within the RH District shall comply
3 with the Town’s subdivision regulations and/or the site plan review and approval
4 procedures and requirements of Article III.
5
6 E. Development within any RH District should be guided by the following design
7 principles, which will be considered by the Town Planning Commission during
8 site plan review:
9
10 1. The colors, designs and materials used throughout any RH District should
11 be complementary to establish and maintain a visually-coordinated
12 campus appearance with a recognizable image as a distinct place while
13 maintaining a design that is appropriate to the context of Easton.
14 Intriguing design character should be encouraged through the creative use
15 of materials and design details. Building elements should create focal
16 points and establish hierarchy. Rooftop mechanical equipment should be
17 screened or located so it is not visible. Design elements of large buildings
18 should be varied and articulated to visually and dimensionally interrupt
19 the bulk of the buildings. Color schemes should tie building elements
20 together, relate separate buildings within an RH District to each other, and
21 should be used to enhance the architectural form of a building
22
23 2. Accessory structures, service areas and mechanical equipment should be
24 designed as integral components of the site.
25
26 3. Pedestrian access should be provided and incorporated into the site and
27 building design. Landscaped, tree-lined walkways should be used as
28 connections between buildings, buildings to streets or buildings to parking
29 areas. Site design should incorporate recessed sitting areas into the walk
30 or pathway system.
31
32 4. Landscaping should create and define street image, entranceways, screen
33 storage and loading areas, provide buffers adjacent to residential uses,
34 shade parking lots and integrate the building design with the site design.
35
36 5. Where appropriate, open space amenities should be included as part of the
37 overall site plan by providing small areas for active or passive use by
38 employees such as picnic tables, benches and other areas for sitting, eating
39 or meeting. Spaces between a hospital and adjacent buildings constructed
40 with reduced setbacks should include a courtyard or other pedestrian41
oriented site feature.
42
43 6. Circulation and parking should reinforce safe and efficient pedestrian and
44 vehicular movement. The main entrances should serve as the dominant
45 ingress and egress points for the District. Curb cuts should be consolidated
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-28
1 to the extent practicable.
2
3 7. Signage should serve as a focal point for information to identify the
4 location and nature of uses within an RH District. Signage design should
5 improve the visual continuity of the area; it should not serve as a
6 distraction. The design and materials of a sign should complement and be
7 similar to those used for the buildings.
8
9 8. A bus shelter (or shelters) shall be provided to afford bus riders the
10 opportunity to wait for their bus in a structure that protects them from
11 inclement weather. The location of such shelter(s) shall be shown on the
12 site plan at the sketch plan level.
13
14 Lighting fixtures should be designed to provide continuity with an RH District. Lighting
15 levels should be appropriate for the use proposed. The illumination of buildings and site
16 features (parking lots, walkways, entrances, etc.) should not exceed the needed level and
17 should be appropriately sized for its purpose.
18
19 SECTION 28 – 414 MIXED-USE WATERFRONT DISTRICT (MXW)
20
21 28 – 414.1 PURPOSE
22
23 A. The purpose of this district is to advance the vision of the Town of Easton for
24 Easton Point as expressed in the Town’s Comprehensive Plan, as amended, which
25 includes the Port Street Small Area Plan (collectively, the “Plan”). In accordance
26 with the spirit and intent of that Plan, Easton Point is envisioned as an area
27 appropriate for infill development and redevelopment of a mixed-use nature, with
28 a wide variety of uses possible, including residential, commercial, institutional
29 and open space. The intent IS NOT to require an exact duplicate of the uses as
30 depicted on the Plan, but rather to encourage such development or redevelopment
31 that is consistent with the Plan from a use and character perspective.
32
33 B. Permitted uses will enable the creation of a neighborhood/destination that caters
34 to new residents, provides sources of employment, serves as a tourist destination,
35 and provides public open spaces and Waterfront access. Particular attention shall
36 be given to impacts on the Tred Avon River, the headwaters of which this zoning
37 district borders.
38
39 C. In recognition that different parts of the Zoning District have different design and
40 development goals and objectives, four Zoning Sub-Districts are established for
41 the purpose of differentiating various development standards applicable in these
42 areas. If a parcel of land is divided by a sub district boundary line at the time of
43 enactment of this code or by subsequent amendments thereto, the appropriate
44 standards and uses for each sub district shall apply on the portion of the parcel
45 covered by that sub district. Notwithstanding the above, where a parcel is divided
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-29
between the Water View and 1 Inland sub districts, the Planning Commission may
2 consider the entire parcel to be within the Inland sub-district. The sub-districts
3 are depicted on Map 28-414.11 and their purposes are as follows:
4
5 1. Water’s Edge Sub-District – This sub-district is applied to the land located
6 adjacent to and within 100’ (or more in certain circumstances) of the edge
7 of the Tred Avon River. The purpose of the regulations applying to this
8 sub-district is to:
9
10 a. Encourage and sustain the development of water-dependent and
11 water-related land uses and those supporting commercial uses
12 which are designed in such a way as to enliven the district;
13
14 b. Preserve the open and relaxed pattern of building in which the
15 placement of buildings affords views throughout the waterfront
16 area as opposed to the more formal pattern of building evident in
17 urban or town centers;
18
19 c. Ensure the preservation of the broad view sheds out over the water
20 especially from Port Street at the approach to the waterfront;
21
22 d. Create a destination where the public has space to gather for
23 recreation, special events, and to readily walk through common
24 areas to and between commercial activities;
25
26 e. Allow for limited residential development consistent with the
27 scope and scale of buildings envisioned in this sub-district; and
28
29 f. Promote the emergence of naturalized open spaces and systems
30 for the management of storm and flood waters.
31
32 2. Water View Sub-District – This sub-district is applied to land adjacent to
33 the Water’s Edge Sub-District and extending landward to encompass lands
34 within 500’ of the Tred Avon River. The purpose of the regulations
35 applicable to this sub-district is to:
36
37 a. Serve as a visual transition area between the lower density
38 Water’s Edge and the higher density Inland and Port Street Sub-
1 Map 28-414.1 depicts the entirety of Easton Point, however it should be noted that some
parcels are not within the Town of Easton’s jurisdiction at the time of enactment of this
Ordinance. While it is envisioned that should they eventually Annex into the Town they would
be zoned in accordance with this Map, they cannot be until such time as that action occurs.
Additionally, some parcels that are already under the Town’s jurisdiction and improved, may not
ultimately be zoned MXW.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-30
1 Districts;
2
3 b. Encourage the development of intermediate density mixed-uses to
4 include residential development and certain non-residential uses
5 that are compatible with and supportive of residential
6 development; and
7
8 c. Promote a unified open space and green landscape pattern that
9 affords ready public access to trails, the shoreline, sidewalks, and
10 green open spaces.
11
12 3. Inland Sub-District – This sub-district is applied to land located greater
13 than 500’ from the edge of the Tred Avon River. The purpose of this sub14
district is to:
15
16 a. Encourage the development of high-density residential, mixed
17 uses, and non-residential uses that are compatible with and
18 supportive of residential development; and
19
20 b. Provide developers with the maximum flexibility available in the
21 MXW to encourage suitable infill, redevelopment and new
22 development projects.
23
24 4. Port Street Corridor Sub-District – This sub-district is applied to lands
25 within 180’ parallel to and on either side of Port Street. The purpose of
26 this sub-district is to:
27
28 a. Create an urban-scale streetscape;
29
30 b. Promote an urban design that will ultimately serve to visually
31 connect or link the waterfront to Easton’s Downtown; and
32
33 c. Allow for mixed uses with an emphasis on multi-family, live34
work units and small commercial uses.
35
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-31
1
2
3
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-32
1 28 – 414.2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
2
3 A. Development shall require site plan approval by the Easton Planning
4 Commission in accordance with the standards of Section 28-301 of the Town
5 Code (notwithstanding the threshold staff-Planning Commission division as
6 all site plans in the MXW Zoning District are subject to Planning Commission
7 review). In addition to the standards required in 28 – 301, the Planning
8 Commission shall consider the following in their review of site plans:
9
10 1. Whether or not the proposed project is consistent with the Plan, and to
11 the extent that it varies from said Plan, whether or not the proposed
12 project is consistent with the vision, spirit and intent expressed in that
13 document. Projects deemed to be inconsistent with the Plan shall be
14 denied unless and until said Plan is amended in such a way as to make
15 the proposed project consistent with the Plan. Consistency shall refer
16 to both the proposed use, as well as architectural or design
17 considerations.
18
19 2. Whether or not the proposed use is likely to generate potentially
20 adverse impacts to neighboring or nearby properties in the form of
21 undue noise, smoke, odors, traffic, inadequate or excessive drainage,
22 etc., and if finding that such potential exists, whether or not such
23 impacts are determined to be sufficiently ameliorated as part of the
24 proposed project.
25
26 28 – 414.3 PERMITTED USES
27
28 A. Uses permitted in this Zoning District shall be permitted in the various sub29
districts in accordance with the following table:
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-33
MXW Sub-Districts
Water’s Notes
Edge
Water
View
Inlan
d
Port
Street
A. Residential Uses
1. Bed & Breakfast* -- P -- P
2. Multi-Family Dwellings* P P P P The supplemental
standards related to
setbacks and adjacency
shall not apply in the
MXW.
a. Home Occupation*
A
A
A
A
b. Live-Work Unit
A
A
A
A
A single unit (e.g.,
studio, loft, or one
bedroom) consisting of
both a
commercial/office and a
residential component
that is occupied by the
same resident. The
live/work unit shall be
the primary dwelling of
the occupant.
c. Piers
A
--
--
--
3.Single Family Detached*
--
P
P
--
Max. house size of
2,500 sq. ft. & Max. lot
size of 7,200 sq. ft.
(Max lot size may be
averaged for projects of
10 or more lots)
a. Day Care (Family)*
--
SE
SE
--
b. Home Occupation*
--
A
A
--
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-34
c. Live-Work Unit
--
A
A
--
See Definition under
multi-family uses above.
d. Swimming Pools
--
A
A
--
4. Two- family or Duplex Units*
P
P
P
P
a. Home Occupation*
A
A
A
A
b. Live-Work Unit
A
A
A
A
See definition under
multi-family uses above.
c. Piers
A
--
--
--
d. Swimming Pools
--
A
A
A
B. Commercial Uses
1. Antiq ue Shops
--
P
--
P
2. Artisan Shop and Gallery (Art,
Blacksmithing, Boat Building, Glass
Blowing, Sail Making, Woodworking)
P
P
--
P
3. Bistro
P
P
--
P
4. Candy, Nut, or Confections Stores
P
P
--
P
5. Coffee Shop, Ice Cream Parlor,
Bakery
P
P
--
P
6. Commercial Parking (Lot or
Garage)
--
SE
SE
SE
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-35
7. Craft beverage Manufacturing
P
P
--
P
8. Healthy Lifestyle Center
--
P
P
P
A facility which
provides medically
supervised services
intended to promote
overall well-being,
addressing such areas as
exercise, nutrition, stress
management, etc., to
produce individuallytailored
health
improvement and
exercise plans.
9. Hotels*
--
P
P
--
a. C
o
n
f
e
r
e
n
c
e
C
e
n
t
e
r
s
--
A
A
--
b. Gift - Retail Shop
--
A
A
--
c. Fitness Centers/Health
Spa/Figure Salon
--
A
A
--
1
0
P
P
--
--
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-36
.
M
a
r
i
n
a
a. B
o
a
t
R
e
p
a
i
r
F
a
c
i
l
i
t
y
A
A
--
--
Boat Storage Facility (Out
of Water )
SE
SE
--
--
b. Piers
c.
A
--
--
--
Limited to 35'-0" in
height
d. Recreational Boating
A
--
--
--
e. Water-Oriented Activities
(Water Taxis, Charter
Boats, Canoe-Kayak
Launches)
A
--
--
--
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-37
1
1
.
M
a
r
k
e
t
'
s
(
F
a
r
m
e
r
,
M
e
a
t
o
r
S
e
a
f
o
o
d
)
P P -- P
12. Museums
P
P
P
P
13. Newspaper/Magazine Shop
--
P
P
P
14. Offices
A
P
SE
P
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-38
15. Personal Services (Beauty, Barber,
Seamstress, Tailors, Shoe Repair and
Florist), provided such services are of
a neighborhood scale.
--
P
--
P
16. Restaurant, Carry-out or Sit-down
P
P
--
P
17. Retail Shop Small < 2,500 Sq. Ft.
A
P
--
P
18. Retail Shop Small < 5,000 Sq. Ft.
--
P
--
P
19. Visitor Center
P
P
--
P
C. Institutional Uses
1. Community/Civic Center
--
P
P
P
2. Fire, Rescue, or Police Station
SE
SE
SE
SE
3. Houses of Worship
--
SE
SE
SE
4. Retirement Community
--
P
P
P
D. Recreational - Entertainment
Uses
1. Indoor Recreation Facility (Music
and Dance Studios, Gymnasiums)*
--
P
P
P
2. Outdoor Recreation Areas (Country
Clubs, Swim Clubs and Yacht Clubs)*
P
P
--
--
a. P
i
e
r
s
A
--
--
--
b. Water-Oriented Activities
(Water Taxis, Charter
Boats, Canoe-Kayak
Launches)
A
--
--
--
3
P
P
P
P
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-39
.
P
a
r
k
s
a
n
d
R
e
c
r
e
a
t
i
o
n
A
r
e
a
s
E. Miscellaneous Uses
1. Buildings or structures in excess of
25,000 square feet
SE
SE
SE
SE
2. Swimming Pools (Commercial or
Public)
--
SE
SE
SE
1
2 Key:
3
4 P – denotes a use that is permitted outright within the sub-district
5 SE – denotes a use which is possible with a Special Exception within the sub-district
6 A – denotes a use that is permitted as Accessory to another permitted use in the sub-district
7 -- - denotes a use that is prohibited within the sub-district
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-40
An * following the use indicates that 1 the listed use is also subject to supplemental standards,
2 which can be found in Section 28 – 1007 of this Code
3
4 28 – 414.4 PROHIBITED USES
5
6 A. Uses not listed above are prohibited throughout this Zoning District.
7
8 B. Planned Unit Developments (PUDs) and Planned Healthcare (HC) applications
9 are not permitted and shall not be considered for properties in this Zoning District.
10
11 C. Retail equal to or in excess of 5,000 square feet of gross floor area.
12
13 28 – 414.5 SITE PLANNING STANDARDS
14
15 The following minimum site planning standards shall be observed:
16
17 A. Lot Standards
18
19 1. Sub district Development Standards – The following development
20 standards may vary by sub district as indicated in the Table below. All
21 other development standards specified shall apply throughout the district.
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
Sub-District Areas
Standard
Water’s Edge
(Salmon)
Water View
(Yellow)
Inland
(Green)
Port Street Corridor
(Blue)
Minimum Lot
Size*
½ Acre ¼ Acre
5,000 square
feet
5,000 square feet
Maximum
Height and
Story**
30’ (1.5 Story)
40’ (2.5
Story)
50’ (3 story) 40’ (2.5 story min, 3 story max)
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-41
Lot Coverage
(by Buildings &
Structures)
20% 30% 40% 50%
Water’s Edge
Setback***
25’ Minimum N/A N/A N/A
Front
Setback****
5’ Minimum
15’ Maximum
5’ Minimum
15’
Maximum
5’ Minimum
15’
Maximum
The minimum setback from Port
Street shall be 29 feet from the
centerline of Port on the northern
side of the street and 41 feet from
the centerline on the southern side.
The maximum setback shall be 39
feet from the centerline of Port on
the northern side and 51 feet from
the centerline on the southern side.
Minimum Side
Setback
5’ N/A N/A N/A
1
2 * For subdivisions of 10 or more lots, the minimum lot size may be replaced
3 by an average lot size of the specified dimension.
4 ** Height and stories in the Zoning District shall be measured from Base
5 elevation.
6 *** The Water’s Edge setbacks are measured from the line of mean high tide.
7 **** Measured from the property line
8
9 2. Minimum Lot Dimensions – All lots hereafter established shall have a
10 depth of at least sixty (60) feet.
11
12 3. Lot Frontage - All lots hereafter established shall have a minimum
13 frontage on a public street or way of at least 24 feet.
14
15 4. Maximum Density – For any residential uses shall be as follows:
16
17 a. If residential use is part of a vertically-mixed use project (i.e., non18
residential uses are present on the ground floor with residential
19 units on non-ground floors), there shall be no limit on the
20 residential density.
21
22 b. If the sole use proposed for a given project is residential, the
23 maximum permitted density shall be 30 du/ac.
24
25 5. Base Elevation – The base elevation for structures in the Zoning District
26 shall be a minimum of the base flood elevation plus 24 inches. The base
27 flood elevation (BFE) must be determined for each project by a Civil
28 Engineer, based on current Maryland DFIRM maps and the Town of
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-42
1 Easton’s Floodplain Management Code.
2
3 6. The front yard required for a dwelling in any zone which permits
4 residences may ibe reduced in the case of a dwelling to be located between
5 two (2) existing dwellings which lack the required front yard and which
6 are less than one hundred (100) feet apart. In such a case the front yard
7 depth shall be not less than that of the deeper adjoining lot.
8
9 7. On corner lots, all sides of the lot which face a street must comply with the
10 applicable front setback.
11
12 B. Vehicular and Pedestrian Connectivity Standards
13
14 1. Lots shall be interconnected to all adjoining lots by providing the means to
15 extend – connect on-site; sidewalks, pedestrian paths, service – access
16 roads.
17
18 2. Alleys shall be provided or dedicated for vehicle passageway within a
19 block and access to garages, accessory buildings, and trash areas along the
20 rear edges of lots. Each alley shall include at least two points of
21 ingress/egress into the block, with a paved or gravel surface ranging
22 between 16 to 20 feet in width. The Planning Commission shall have the
23 authority to waive this requirement when it is determined that the
24 provision or dedication of an alley is not practicable for the proposed
25 project.
26
27 C. Off-Street Parking Standards
28
29 1. Off-street parking shall be required for uses within the Zoning District, in
30 accordance with the provisions of 28-1001 of the Town
31 Code. Furthermore, given the proximity to the headwaters of the Tred
32 Avon River, all pavement used for parking areas shall be
33 pervious. Alternately such parking areas shall be designed so as to
34 achieve equivalent sediment runoff reduction as would be achieved with
35 the use of pervious pavement, as determined by the Town Engineer. Any
36 pervious pavement shall comply with maintenance and inspection
37 requirements of the Town.
38
39 2. Shared off-street parking amongst multiple users, is encouraged in the
40 Zoning District. To that end, any portion of off-street parking
41 requirements may be satisfied off-site on land within 500 feet of the
42 subject property. In such cases, evidence of the right to utilize such off43
off-street parking spaces shall be provided at the time of site plan review.
44
45 3. Parking for Residences, Employee and Business vehicles shall be
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-43
designated and shall 1 be located in a manner to not compete with patron
2 and visitor parking.
3
4 4. Off-street parking may not be located between the water’s edge and the
5 waterfront façade of any principal building, nor between the front property
6 line and the front building façade, nor in any side yard. If the Planning
7 Commission determines that there are no practicable alternatives, in the
8 Water’s Edge sub-district, parking in side yards may be permitted.
9
10 5. Setbacks for any portion of a parking lot or access drive shall be 3’ for
11 residential uses and 10’ for non-residential uses, measured from the
12 property line. Mixed-use projects shall adhere to the non-residential
13 setback standard. The Planning Commission may waive or modify these
14 setback requirements when doing so may promote connectivity and the
15 efficient utilization of space.
16
17 6. The maximum setback requirements may be waived by the Planning
18 Commission for an area not to exceed 90% of the frontage in order to
19 accommodate courtyards.
20
21 7. Bicycle Parking spaces shall be required for all non-residential uses and
22 structures. A minimum of one bicycle parking space shall be required for
23 each 20 parking spaces.
24
25 a. Bicycle parking spaces may be provided or bicycle racks. Bicycle
26 spaces shall be at least 2 feet 6 inches in width and 6 feet in length,
27 with a minimum overhead vertical clearance of 7 feet. Racks and
28 other fixtures used to provide for nonresidential uses must be
29 securely affixed to the ground and allow for the bicycle to locked
30 and chained.
31
32 b. Where bicycle spaces are required by 28-414.3.3 (G), the spaces
33 may be indoors or outdoors and shall be located within 50 feet of
34 the primary building entrance. Outdoor bicycle parking spaces
35 shall not be located behind any wall or landscaping, or other visual
36 obstruction lying between the principal building and the bicycle
37 spaces. If required bicycle spaces are not visible from the street,
38 signs must be posted indicating their location. Outdoor areas used
39 for required bicycle parking shall have an improved hardened
40 surface, and shall be drained and well lighted. Common areas
41 located within offices and commercial facilities or located on
42 balconies or within residential dwelling units shall not be counted
43 toward required parking.
44
45 8. In the Water’s Edge or Water View sub-districts, off-street parking may be
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-44
provided beneath the ground 1 floor of the structure. When such parking is
2 provided, the area of such parking shall not be considered a story, and the
3 structure above this parking area shall be entitled to the full number of
4 stories specified for the sub-district.
5
6 a. Under-structure parking shall be designed such that all front
7 facades shall be enclosed and provide a façade(s) that is
8 architecturally compatible with the overall building.
9
10 b. If located in a floodplain, the under-structure parking shall be
11 screened from view through the use of berms and/or landscaping.
12
13 D. Site Loading and Unloading Area Standards
14
15 1. All site loading and unloading areas shall be fully screened from view by
16 architectural design feature or by permanent, decorative screens or natural
17 plantings, a minimum of eight (8) feet in height.
18
19 E. Water Front Access Standards
20
21 1. All lots fronting on the Tred Avon River shall dedicate a public access
22 easement to the Town of Easton, over, under and across all strips of land
23 adjacent to the water. Such required access easement shall be a minimum
24 of 15”-0’ wide, or that increased width determined as acceptable and
25 appropriate by the Planning Commission. The purpose of requiring such
26 access easements is to provide and maintain unrestricted public access
27 along the entire water frontage of such lots.
28
29 F. Lighting Standards
30
31 1. All on-site lighting shall be low cut-off shielded luminaries at a maximum
32 15’ height and light shall not shine off-site at levels greater than 1-foot
33 candle. All on-site lighting shall be decorative lamps consistent with the
34 design elements of the area.
35
36 G. Underground Utilities
37
38 1. All new, replacement and/or modified utility facilities shall be located
39 underground.
40
41 28 – 414.6 ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS
42
43 Building design and construction shall meet the minimum requirements of the
44 International Code Council’s International Green Construction Code or be US Green
45 Building Council (USGBC) LEED rated, Bronze standard, or a generally accepted
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-45
equivalent standard, provided, however 1 that formal LEED certification shall not be
2 required.
3
4 A. Building Massing (Shape, Form and Size)
5
6 1. For buildings with ground level commercial or mixed use, floor-to-ceiling
7 height shall be a minimum of 14 feet at ground level and 10 feet for upper
8 stories.
9
10 For buildings with ground level non-commercial use, floor-to-ceiling
11 height shall be a minimum of 10 feet for the ground floor and 9 feet for
12 upper stories.
13
14 2. Massing and scale of larger buildings shall generally be broken down into
15 smaller and varied volumes or wrapped linearly in a series of smaller
16 pedestrian-scaled buildings with doors and windows.
17
18 3. Buildings exceeding two stories shall incorporate a base, middle, and cap
19 described as follows:
20
21 a. The base shall include an entry way with transparent windows and
22 a molding or reveal placed between the first and second stories or
23 over the second story. The molding or reveal shall have a depth of
24 at least two inches and a height of at least four inches.
25
26 b.The middle may include windows and/or balconies; and
27
28 c. The cap shall include the area from the top floor to the roof of the
29 building and including a cornice, eave, parapet or overhang.
30
31 4. Regulating lines and rhythms shall be included to create a pedestrian32
scaled environment, including horizontal lines, transoms, cornices, eaves,
33 recesses, courts and arcades that provide human scale to façades.
34
35 5. A clear pattern of building openings shall be provided. Windows,
36 balconies, and bays should unify a building’s street wall and add
37 considerably to a façade’s three-dimensional quality.
38
39 6. Major architectural expressions in the façade such as; corner massing,
40 oversized windows-entrances, towers, chimneys, roof form and dormers,
41 shall be employed to demarcate gateways, intersections and anchor key
42 locations.
43
44 7. Window sills, moldings, and cornices shall align with those of adjacent
45 buildings. The bottom and top line defining the edge of the windows (the
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-46
“windowsill alignment”) 1 shall vary not more than two feet from the
2 alignment of surrounding buildings. If the adjoining buildings have
3 windowsill alignments that vary by more than two feet from one another,
4 the proposed building shall align with one of the adjoining buildings.
5
6 B. Ground-Floor Design
7
8 1. All buildings in the Zoning District shall have their principal entrance
9 opening to a street, square, plaza, or sidewalk. The principal entrance
10 shall not open to a parking lot. Pedestrian access from the public sidewalk,
11 street right-of-way, or driveway to the principal structure shall be provided
12 through an improved surface. Easements shall be provided to facilitate
13 pedestrian access between parking lots and street frontages.
14
15 2. The ground floor of the entryway shall align with the sidewalk elevation.
16 Sunken terraces or stairways to a basement shall not constitute entryways
17 for purposes of this section. It is not the intent of this section to preclude
18 the use of below-grade entryways, provided that such entryways shall not
19 constitute a principal entryway.
20
21 C. Façade Design
22
23 1. Any façade which is oriented to the water’s edge or
24 Boardwalk/promenade, shall be treated as a front façade.
25
26 2. Building design shall be done in a manner to not have an apparent rear
27 façade. Façades facing a rear property line shall be designed to be a
28 secondary front and or side façade.
29
30 3. Solid walls shall not exceed 20 feet in length.
31
32 4. All building façades should be responsive to the context of the
33 surrounding environment and neighboring buildings.
34
35 5. Exterior materials shall consist of materials that are traditional, durable
36 and environmentally sustainable. The following l ist of materials is
37 intended to serve as examples for the desired design aesthetic.
38 Addi t ional materials may be proposed, subject to review and
39 approval by the Planning Commission:
40
41 a. Roofing
42
43 1. Sawn shingles or composition shingles ; standing seam
44 metal; slate; or cedar shakes.
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-47
1 b.Soffits
2
3 1. Composition board with smooth finish, tongue-and4
groove wood boards, or fiber-cement panels.
5
6 c. Gutters and Downspouts
7
8 1. Half-round or ogee profile gutters with round or
9 rectangular downspouts in copper, painted or pre-finished
10 metal.
11
12 d. Cladding
13
14 1. Smooth-finish wood or fiber cement lap siding, 6- to 8-
15 inch exposure or random-width cut shingles.
16
17 2. Sand-molded o r smooth-finish b r i c k in Common,
18 Engl i sh or Flemish Bond patterns.
19
20 3. Civic uses may look to incorporate more contemporary
21 materials, such as steel and/ or curtain-wall glazing
22
23 e. Windows
24
25 1. Painted wood or composite, or clad wood or vinyl; true
26 divided light or sash with traditional exterior muntin profile
27 (7/8 inch wide).
28
29 f. Doors
30
31 1. Wood, fiberglass, or steel with traditional stile-and-rail
32 proportions and raised panel profiles, painted or stained.
33
34 g. Shutters
35
36 1. Wood or composite, sized to match window sash and
37 mounted with hardware to either be or appear to be
38 operable.
39
40 h. Columns
41
42 1. Architecturally-correct classical proportions and
43 details in wood, fiberglass, or composite material.
44
45 2. More informal square wooden box columns.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-48
1
2 i. Railings
3
4 1. Milled wood or composite top and bottom rails with square
5 or turned baluster.
6
7 2. Wrought iron or solid bar stock square metal picket.
8
9 D. Windows and Entryways
10
11 1. Windows above the ground floor shall have a ratio of height to width of at
12 least 2:1.
13
14 2. The uses on the ground floor shall be visible from and/or accessible to the
15 street through the use of windows and doors on at least 50% of the length
16 of the first-floor street frontage. At least 60% or more than 90% of the
17 total surface area of the front elevation shall be in public entrances and
18 windows (including retail display windows). Where windows are used,
19 they shall be clear, non-reflective glass.
20
21 3. Ribbon windows and extensive use of mirrored glass are prohibited.
22
23 4. All street-level retail uses with sidewalk frontage shall be furnished with
24 an individual entrance and direct access to the sidewalk in addition to any
25 other access that may be provided.
26
27 5. Doors shall be recessed into the face of the building to provide a sense of
28 entry and to add variety to the streetscape. An entryway shall not be less
29 than one square foot for each 1,000 square feet of floor area, and in all
30 cases shall not be less than 15 square feet.
31
32 6. Canopies, awnings, and similar appurtenances may be constructed at the
33 entrance to any building and may encroach into any required front setback.
34 Any such feature shall have a minimum depth of 5 feet, and shall have a
35 minimum clearance height above the sidewalk of 8 feet and a maximum
36 clearance height above the sidewalk of 13 feet 6 inches.
37
38 E. Porches
39
40 1. Minimum porch depth is 6 feet.
41
42 2. Minimum height from ground level to porch floor is 3 feet.
43
44 F. Color Selections
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-49
1. The color palette for projects in the 1 Zoning District shall generally be
2 designated as follows:
3
4 a. Façade surface colors shall recall natural materials, and avoid
5 bright, artificial or metallic colors
6
7 b. Accent colors shall be muted blues, greens, yellows, browns, and
8 shades of white, beige, and gray
9
10 c. Materials, such as brick should typically be left unpainted.
11
12 d. Façades should contain no more than three colors
13
14 28 – 414.7 LANDSCAPING AND LANDSCAPING FEATURES
15
16 Landscaping shall be required for all development in accordance with the provisions of
17 28 – 1014 of the Town Code.
18
19 28 – 414.8 BUILDING INFRASTRUCTURE
20
21 Such as heating, ventilation, air conditioning, generators and other equipment -
22 appliances, shall be fully screened from view by architectural design features.
23
24 28 – 414.9 REFUSE, SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING STORAGE
25
26 All building containment area(s) for the storage of refuse, solid waste and recycling, shall
27 be fully screened from view and integrated into the architectural design.
28
29 28 – 414.10 RESTURAUNT SEATING
30
31 Seating in restaurants shall be regulated as follows:
32
33 A. Indoor seating shall be limited to 1 seat per 15 square feet (net)
34
35 B. Outdoor seating shall be limited to 100% of Total Indoor Seating and
36 must be specified on site plans submitted for approval so that such areas
37 are appropriately considered for calculation of such things as number of
38 required parking spaces, the kitchen size and the restroom fixture counts.
39
40
41 28 – 414.11 SIGNAGE STANDARDS
42
43 A. Premise Identification
44
45 1. Address-suite numbers, shall be installed on building and dwelling walls
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-50
in a position to be plainly legible 1 and visible from the street or road
2 fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background.
3
4 a. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters.
5
6 b. Numbers-letter shall be a minimum of 3 inches high with a
7 minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch.
8
9 c. Rear entrance identification shall be provided on all non10
residential structures.
11
12 B. Façade Signage
13
14 1. Building Wall, Projecting and Suspended Signs shall have the following
15 features
16
17 a. Signage area shall not exceed one (1) square foot of sign area for
18 each lineal foot of building frontage of the front façade.
19
20 b. For a building facing more than one street, an additional one (1)
21 square foot of sign area shall be permitted for every lineal foot of
22 building frontage on the side street(s).
23
24 c. Numbers-Letter shall be a minimum of 6 inches high with a
25 minimum stroke width of 1.25 inch.
26
27 d. Signs shall not project more than thirty inches (30”) from the
28 building façade surface.
29
30 e. Shall have molded perimeter frames plus carved and or raised
31 letters for a minimum of 50% of the numbers, letters and or
32 symbols on the signage.
33
34 f. All lit on-site signs shall be illuminated indirectly by external
35 fixtures with steady, stationary, shielded light sources directed
36 solely onto the sign without causing glare. Light bulb, strips or
37 tubes used for illuminating a sign shall not be visible from adjacent
38 public rights-of-way or residential properties.
39
40 g. Signage shall consider the visibility and approach to the site from
41 both the vehicular and pedestrian experience.
42
43 C. Site Signage
44
45 1. Monument Sign shall be low freestanding signage, not exceeding fifty
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IV
4-51
(50) square feet (per side) in area. The 1 top shall not be more than five (5)
2 feet in height. Signs shall be placed on a continuous base.
3
4 2. One sidewalk sign shall be permitted for each tenant. Such sign shall be
5 located in front of the business being advertised, must provide six (6) feet
6 of unobstructed sidewalk, and shall be removed from the sidewalk daily at
7 (or before) the close of business.
8
9 D. Prohibited Signage
10
11 1. Signage, not listed above are prohibited.
12
13 2. No alcohol sales licensee may display any advertisement or sign on the
14 outside façade of the licensed premises upon which appears any brand
15 name of an alcoholic beverage product.
16
17 28 – 414.12 OPERATING STANDARDS
18
19 A. Storefront Windows for all commercial uses shall not be obstructed, contain
20 signage and or lighting projecting toward the public way and shall allow natural
21 light into the interior spaces. These storefront windows shall be used for display
22 and or connection between the commercial use and the public way.
23
24 B. All outdoor music conducted on private property shall end no later than 10:00 p.m
25
26
27
28
29
i Definitions:
Story – That part of a building between the surface of a floor and the ceiling immediately above.
Half-story – An uppermost story usually including dormer windows, in which a sloping roof replaces the upper part
of the front wall, provided that the minimum slope of such roof is four units vertical to 12 units horizontal.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-1
1 ARTICLE V
2 CRITICAL AREA
3
4 SECTION 28 – 501 CHESAPEAKE BAY CRITICAL AREA OVERLAY DISTRICT
5
6 28 – 501.1 CHESAPEAKE BAY CRITICAL AREA OVERLAY DISTRICT
7
8 The purpose of this article is to merely reflect state law and not to impose any greater
9 restrictions
10
11 28 – 501.2 IMPLEMENTATION OF CRITICAL AREA ORDINANCE PURPOSE
12 AND GOALS
13
14 A. Goals
15
16 The goals of the Easton Critical Area Ordinance are to accomplish the following:
17
18 1. Minimize adverse impacts on water quality that result from pollutants that are
19 discharged from structures or run off from surrounding lands;
20
21 2. Conserve fish, wildlife, and plant habitat; and
22
23 3. Establish land use policies for development in the Critical Area which
24 accommodate growth as well as address the environmental impacts that the
25 number, movement, and activities of people may have on the area.
26
27 B. The Easton Critical Area Ordinance
28
29 1. The Easton Critical Area Ordinance consists of the Easton Critical Area
30 Ordinance text and the Official Critical Area Map(s). Related provisions may
31 be found in the Easton Subdivision Regulations and the Easton Zoning
32 Ordinance.
33
34 C. Regulated activities and applicability
35
36 1. Any applicant for a permit or license to pursue activities within the Critical
37 Area, including but not limited to, development or redevelopment, grading,
38 sediment and erosion control, timber harvesting, shoreline erosion control,
39 installation of a septic system and drain field, operation of a waste collection
40 or disposal facility, operation of a commercial or private marina or other
41 water-related commercial or industrial operation (whether public or private),
42 mining (whether surface or sub-surface) or quarrying, farming or other
43 agriculture-related activities shall have such permits or licenses issued by the
44 duly appointed local approving authority after review to determine
45 compliance with the Easton Critical Area Ordinance
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-2
1
2 D. Critical Area Overlay District Map
3
4 1. The Official Critical Area Overlay District Map is maintained in force as part
5 of the Official Zoning Map for Easton. The Official Critical Area Map
6 delineates the extent of the Critical Area Overlay District that shall include:
7
8 a. All waters of and lands under the Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries
9 to the head of tide as indicated on the State wetland maps, and all state
10 and private wetlands designated under Title 16 of the Environment
11 Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland; and
12
13 b. All land and water areas within 1,000 feet beyond the landward
14 boundaries of state or private wetlands and the heads of tides
15 designated under Title 16 of the Environment Article of the Annotated
16 Code of Maryland.
17
18 2. Within the designated Critical Area Overlay District, all land shall be assigned
19 one of the following land management and development area classifications:
20
21 a. Intensely Developed Area (IDA).
22
23 b. Limited Development Area (LDA).
24
25 c. Resource Conservation Area (RCA).
26
27 E. General requirements
28
29 1. Development and redevelopment shall be subject to the Habitat Protection
30 Area requirements prescribed in this Ordinance.
31
32 2. Reasonable accommodations for the needs of disabled citizens.
33
34 a. An applicant seeking relief from the Critical Area standards contained
35 in this Ordinance in order to accommodate the reasonable needs of
36 disabled citizens shall have the burden of demonstrating by a
37 preponderance of evidence the following:
38
39 1. The alterations will benefit persons with a disability within the
40 meaning of the Americans with Disabilities Act;
41
42 2. Literal enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance would
43 result in discrimination by virtue of such disability or deprive a
44 disabled resident or user of the reasonable use and enjoyment
45 of the property;
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-3
1
2 3. A reasonable accommodation would reduce or eliminate the
3 discriminatory effect of the provisions of this Ordinance or
4 restore the disabled resident's or user's reasonable use or
5 enjoyment of the property;
6
7 4. The accommodation requested will not substantially impair the
8 purpose, intent, or effect, of the provisions of this Ordinance as
9 applied to the property; and
10
11 5. The accommodation would be environmentally neutral with no
12 greater negative impact on the environment than the literal
13 enforcement of the statute, ordinance, regulation or other
14 requirement; or would allow only the minimum environmental
15 changes necessary to address the needs resulting from the
16 particular disability of the applicant/appellant.
17
18 b. The Planning Commission shall determine the nature and scope of
19 any accommodation under this Ordinance and may award different or
20 other relief than requested after giving due regard to the purpose,
21 intent, or effect of the applicable provisions of this Ordinance. The
22 Planning Commission may also consider the size, location, and type of
23 accommodation proposed and whether alternatives exist which
24 accommodate the need with less adverse effect.
25
26 c. The Planning Commission may require, as a condition of approval,
27 that upon termination of the need for accommodation, that the property
28 be restored to comply with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
29 Appropriate bonds may be collected or liens placed in order to ensure
30 Easton’s ability to restore the property should the applicant fail to do
31 so.
32
33 28 – 501.3 INTENSELY DEVELOPED AREAS
34
35 A. Development standards
36
37 For all development activities in the Intensely Developed Areas, the applicant
38 shall identify any environmental or natural feature described below and meet all
39 of the following standards:
40
41 1. Development activities shall be designed and implemented to minimize
42 destruction of forest and woodland vegetation;
43
44 2. All roads, bridges, and utilities are prohibited in a Habitat Protection Area,
45 unless no feasible alternative exists. If a road, bridge, or utility is
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-4
authorized; t 1 he design, construction, and maintenance shall:
2
3 a. Provide maximum erosion protection;
4
5 b. Minimize negative impact on wildlife, aquatic life, and their
6 habitats; and
7
8 c. Maintain hydrologic process and water quality.
9
10 3. All development activities that must cross or affect streams shall be
11 designed to:
12
13 a. Reduce increases in flood frequency and severity that are
14 attributable to development;
15
16 b. Retain tree canopy so as to maintain stream water temperature
17 within normal variation;
18
19 c. Provide a natural substrate for stream beds; and
20
21 d. Minimize adverse water quality and quantity impacts of storm
22 water.
23
24 4. All development and redevelopment activities shall include storm water
25 management technologies that reduce pollutant loadings by at least 10
26 percent below the level of pollution on the site prior to development or
27 redevelopment as provided in Critical Area 10% Rule Guidance Manual
28 – Fall 2003 and as may be subsequently amended.
29
30 28 – 501.4 LIMITED DEVELOPMENT AREAS
31
32 A. Development standards
33
34 For all development activities in the Limited Development Areas, the applicant
35 shall identify any environmental or natural feature described below, and shall
36 meet all of the following standards:
37
38 1. Development and redevelopment shall be subject to the water-dependent
39 facilities requirements of this Ordinance;
40
41 2. Roads, bridges, and utilities are prohibited in a Habitat Protection Area
42 unless no feasible alternative exists. If a road, bridge, or utility is
43 authorized; the design, construction and maintenance shall:
44
45 a. Provide maximum erosion protection;
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-5
1
2 b. Minimize negative impacts on wildlife, aquatic life and their
3 habitats; and
4
5 c. Maintain hydrologic processes and water quality.
6
7 3. All development activities that must cross or affect streams shall be
8 designed to:
9 a. Reduce increases in flood frequency and severity that are
10 attributable to development;
11
12 b.Retain tree canopy as to maintain stream water temperature within
13 normal variation;
14
15 c. Provide a natural substrate for stream beds; and
16
17 d.Minimize adverse water quality and quantity impacts of storm
18 water.
19
20 4. If there is a wildlife corridor system identified by the Wildlife Heritage
21 Service on or near the site which can be enhanced by additional plantings,
22 the applicant shall incorporate a wildlife corridor system that connects the
23 largest undeveloped or most vegetative tracts of land within and adjacent
24 to the site in order to provide continuity of existing wildlife and plant
25 habitats with offsite habitats. The wildlife corridor system may include
26 Habitat Protection Areas identified in this Ordinance. Easton shall ensure
27 the maintenance of the wildlife corridors by requiring the establishment of
28 conservation easements, restrictive covenants, or similar instruments
29 approved by the Town Attorney through which the corridor is preserved
30 by public or private groups, including homeowners associations, nature
31 trusts and other organizations, if present.
32
33 5. Development on slopes 15 percent or greater, as measured before
34 development, shall be prohibited unless the project is the only effective
35 way to maintain or improve the stability of the slope and is consistent with
36 the policies and standards for Limited Development Areas.
37
38 6. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, for storm water runoff,
39 lot coverage is limited to 15% of a lot or parcel or any portions of a lot or
40 parcel that are designated Limited Development Area.
41
42 a. If a parcel or lot of one-half acre or less in size existed on or
43 before December 1, 1985, then lot coverage is limited to twenty44
five percent (25%) of the parcel or lot.
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-6
b. If a parcel or lot greater than one acre 1 in size existed on or before
2 December 1, 1985, then lot coverage is limited to fifteen percent
3 (15%) of the parcel or lot.
4
5 c. If an individual lot one acre or less in size is part of a subdivision
6 approved after December 1, 1985, then lot coverage may exceed
7 fifteen percent (15%) of the individual lot; however the total lot
8 coverage for the entire subdivision may not exceed fifteen percent
9 (15%).
10
11 d. Lot coverage limits provided in §a. and §b. above may be
12 exceeded, upon findings by the Planning Commission or its
13 designee that the following conditions exist:
14
15 1. The lot or parcel is legally nonconforming. A lot or parcel
16 legally developed as of July 1, 2008 may be considered
17 legally nonconforming for the purposes of lot coverage
18 requirements.
19
20 2. Lot coverage associated with new development activities
21 on the property have been minimized;
22
23 3. For a lot or parcel one-half acre or less in size, total lot
24 coverage does not exceed the lot coverage limits in §a. by
25 more than twenty-five percent (25%) or five hundred
26 square feet (500 square feet), whichever is greater;
27
28 4. For a lot or parcel greater than one-half acre and less than
29 one acre in size, total lot coverage does not exceed the lot
30 coverage limits in §(b) or five thousand, four hundred and
31 forty-five (5,445) square feet, whichever is greater;
32
33 5. The following table summarizes the limits set forth in §(1)
34 through §(4) above:
35
36 Table A.6.d.(5) Lot Coverage Limits
Lot/Parcel Size (Square Feet) Lot Coverage Limit
0 – 8,000 25% of parcel + 500 SF
8,001 – 21, 780 31.25% of parcel
21,780 – 36,300 5,445 SF
36,301 – 43,560 15% of parcel
37
38
39 e. If the Planning Commission or its designee makes the findings set
40 forth in §d. above and authorizes an applicant to use the lot
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-7
coverage 1 limits set forth in that paragraph, the applicant shall:
2
3 1. Demonstrate that water quality impacts associated with
4 runoff from the development activities that contribute to lot
5 coverage have been minimized through site design
6 considerations or the use of best management practices to
7 improve water quality; and
8
9 2. Provide on-site mitigation in the form of plantings to offset
10 potential adverse water quality impacts from the
11 development activities resulting in new lot coverage. The
12 plantings shall be equal to two times the area of the
13 development activity.
14
15 3. If the applicant cannot provide appropriate stormwater
16 treatment and plantings due to site constraints, then the
17 applicant shall pay a fee to Easton in lieu of performing the
18 on-site mitigation. The amount of the fee shall be $1.50 per
19 square foot of the required mitigation.
20
21 7. The alteration of forest and developed woodlands shall be restricted and
22 shall be mitigated as follows:
23
24 a. The total acreage in forest and developed woodlands within
25 Easton in the Critical Area shall be maintained or preferably
26 increased;
27
28 b. All forests and developed woodlands that are allowed to be
29 cleared or developed shall be replaced in the Critical Area on not
30 less than an equal area basis
31
32 c. If an applicant is authorized to clear more than 20 percent of a
33 forest or developed woodlands on a lot or parcel, the applicant
34 shall replace the forest or developed woodlands at 1.5 times the
35 areal extent of the forest or developed woodlands cleared,
36 including the first 20 percent of the forest or developed woodlands
37 cleared.
38
39 d. An applicant may not clear more than 30 percent of a forest or
40 developed woodlands on a lot or parcel, unless the Board of
41 Appeals grants a variance and the applicant replaces forest or
42 developed woodlands at a rate of 3 times the areal extent of the
43 forest or developed woodlands cleared.
44
45 e. If an applicant is authorized to clear any percentage of forest or
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-8
developed 1 woodlands associated with a subdivision or site plan
2 approval, the remaining percentage shall be maintained through
3 recorded, restrictive covenants or similar instruments approved by
4 Easton.
5
6 8. The following are required for forest or developed woodlands clearing as
7 required in §7. above:
8
9 a. The applicant shall ensure that any plantings that die within
10 twenty-four (24) months of installation shall be replaced. A
11 performance bond in an amount determined by Easton shall be
12 posted to assure satisfactory replacement as required in §7. above
13 and plant survival;
14
15 b. A permit issued by Easton before forest or developed woodlands
16 is cleared. Clearing forests and developed woodlands before
17 obtaining a Easton permit is a violation; any forests and developed
18 woodlands cleared before obtaining a Easton permit shall be
19 replanted at three times the areal extent of the cleared forest or
20 developed woodlands;
21
22 c. Clearing of forest or developed woodlands that exceed the
23 maximum area allowed in §7. above shall be replanted at three
24 times the areal extent of the cleared forest or developed
25 woodlands;
26
27 d. If the areal extent of the site limits the application of the
28 reforestation standards in this section the applicant may be allowed
29 to plant offsite at the required ratio or pay a fee in lieu of planting
30 at a rate of $1.50 per square foot.
31
32 9. If no forest is established on proposed development sites, these sites shall
33 be planted to provide a forest or developed woodlands cover of at least 15
34 percent (15%).
35
36 a. The applicant shall designate, subject to the approval of the Town
37 of Easton, a new forest area on a part of the site not forested; and
38
39 b. The afforested area shall be maintained as forest cover through
40 easements, restrictive covenants or other protective instruments
41 approved by the Easton Town Attorney.
42
43 28 – 501.5 RESOURCE CONSERVATION AREAS
44
45 A. Development standards
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-9
1
2 For all development activities and resource utilization in the Resource
3 Conservation Areas, the applicant shall meet all of the following standards:
4
5 1. Land use management practices shall be consistent with the policies and
6 criteria for the Habitat Protection Area provisions of this Ordinance.
7
8 2. Land within the Resource Conservation Area may be developed for
9 residential uses at a density not to exceed one dwelling unit per 20 acres.
10
11 3. Development activity within the Resource Conservation Areas shall be
12 consistent with the requirements and standards for Limited Development
13 Areas as specified in this Ordinance.
14
15 4. Nothing in this Section shall limit the ability of a participant in any
16 agricultural easement program to convey real property impressed with
17 such an easement to family members provided that no such conveyance
18 will result in a density greater than one dwelling unit per 20 acres.
19
20 28 – 501.6 LAND USE AND DENSITY
21
22 A. Permitted uses
23
24 1. Permitted uses in the Critical Area shall be limited to those uses allowed
25 by the underlying zoning classification as modified by Table A.1. and the
26 supplemental use standards in Part 6 provided such uses meet all standards
27 established by the Critical Area Overlay Zone.
28
29 Table A.1. Permitted Uses
LEGEND:
P = Permitted if allowed in the underlying zoning district
PC = Permitted with conditions if allowed in the underlying zoning district
NP = Not permitted
Land Use
Management
Designation
Item Use Description IDA LDA RCA
1.00 RESIDENTIAL
1.10 Accessory Dwelling Unit P P PC
2.00 INSTITUTIONAL
2.10 Existing institutional uses P P PC
2.20 New institutional uses P P NP
2.30 Cemetery P P PC
2.40 Group Home P P PC
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-10
LEGEND:
P = Permitted if allowed in the underlying zoning district
PC = Permitted with conditions if allowed in the underlying zoning district
NP = Not permitted
Land Use
Management
Designation
Item Use Description IDA LDA RCA
2.50 Day Care P P PC
3.00 COMMERCIAL
3.10 Existing commercial uses P P PC
3.20 New commercial uses P P NP
3.30 Home occupation P P PC
3.40 Bed and breakfast facility P P PC
4.00 MARITIME/WATER DEPENDENT
4.10 Expansion of existing commercial marinas P P PC
4.20 New marina, commercial P P NP
4.30 Community piers and noncommercial boat docking and storage P P PC
4.40 Public beaches and public water-oriented recreational and educational areas P P PC
4.50 Research Areas P P PC
4.60 Fisheries activities P P P
4.70 Structures on Piers PC PC PC
4.80 Private pier P P P
5.00 RECREATION
5.10 Golf course P P PC
6.00 INDUSTRIAL
6.10 Existing industrial uses P P PC
6.20 New industrial uses PC PC NP
6.30 Non-maritime heavy industry PC NP NP
7.00 TRANSPORTATION/PARKING/COMMUNICATIONS/UTILITIES
7.10 Utility transmission facilities PC PC PC
8.00 PUBLIC/QUASI-PUBLIC
8.10 Sanitary landfill; rubble fill PC PC PC
8.20 Solid or hazardous waste collection or disposal facilities PC PC PC
8.30 Sludge Facilities PC PC PC
9.00 OTHER (reserved)
1
2 B. Maximum permitted density
3
4 1. The maximum permitted density in the Easton Critical Area shall be as
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-11
1 shown in Table B.1.
2
3
4
5
6
7 Table B.1.
8 Maximum Residential Density (Dwelling Units Per Acre)
Land Use Management Designation
IDA LDA RCA
Density permitted by
Underlying Zoning
Density permitted by
Underlying Zoning
1 dwelling unit per
20 acres
9
10
11 2. Calculation of 1-in-20 acre density of development.
12
13 In calculating the 1-in-20 acre density of development that is permitted on
14 a parcel located within the Resource Conservation Area, Easton:
15
16 a. Shall count each dwelling unit;
17
18 b. May permit the area of any private wetlands located on the
19 property to be included under the following conditions:
20
21 1. The density of development on the upland portion of the
22 parcel may not exceed one dwelling unit per eight acres;
23 and
24
25 2. The area of private wetlands shall be estimated on the basis
26 of vegetative information as designated on the State
27 wetlands maps or by private survey approved by Easton,
28 the Critical Area Commission, and the Maryland
29 Department of the Environment.
30
31 28 – 501.7 SUPPLEMENTAL USE STANDARDS
32
33 The following supplemental use standards apply to the permitted uses listed in Table A.1.
34 above and shall apply when the permitted use is allowed in the underlying zoning district.
35
36 A. Accessory dwelling unit
37
38 1. If a permitted use in the underlying zoning district, one additional
39 dwelling unit (accessory dwelling unit) as part of a primary dwelling unit
40 may be permitted in the Resource Conservation Area provided the
41 additional dwelling unit is served by the same sewage disposal system as
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-12
1 the primary dwelling unit and:
2
3 a. is located within the primary dwelling unit or its entire perimeter
4 is within 100 feet of the primary dwelling unit and does not exceed
5 900 square feet in total enclosed areas; or
6
7 b. is located within the primary dwelling unit and does not increase
8 the amount of lot coverage already attributed to the primary
9 dwelling unit.
10
11 2. An additional dwelling unit meeting all of the provisions of this section
12 may not be subdivided or conveyed separately from the primary dwelling
13 unit; and
14
15 3. The provisions of this section may not be construed to authorize the
16 granting of a variance, unless the variance is granted in accordance with
17 the variance provisions contained herein.
18
19 B. Existing institutional uses
20
21 1. Existing institutional facilities, including those that directly support
22 agriculture, forestry, aquaculture or residential development shall be
23 allowed in Resource Conservation Areas.
24
25 2. Expansion of existing institutional facilities and uses in the Resource
26 Conservation Area shall be subject to the non-conforming use provisions
27 of this Ordinance and the Grandfathering provisions in Part 8 and may
28 require growth allocation.
29
30 C. New institutional uses
31
32 1. New institutional facilities and uses, except those specifically listed in
33 Table A.1. shall not be permitted in Resource Conservation Areas.
34
35 2. Certain institutional uses may be permitted in a Resource Conservation
36 Area if allowed in the underlying zoning district and if the use complies
37 with all requirements for such uses as provided in the Easton Zoning
38 Ordinance. These institutional uses are limited to:
39
40 a. A cemetery that is an accessory use to an existing church;
41 provided manmade lot coverage is limited to 15 percent of the site
42 or 20,000 square feet, whichever is less;
43
44 b. A day care facility in a dwelling where the operators live on the
45 premises and there are no more than eight (8) children;
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-13
1
2 c. A group home or assisted living facility with no more than eight
3 (8) residents; and
4
5 d. Other similar uses determined by the Municipality and approved
6 by the Critical Area Commission to be similar to those listed
7 above.
8
9 D. Existing commercial uses
10
11 1. Existing commercial facilities and uses, including those that directly
12 support agriculture, forestry, aquaculture or residential development shall
13 be allowed in Resource Conservation Areas
14
15 2. Expansion of existing commercial facilities and uses in the Resource
16 Conservation Area shall be subject to the non-conforming use provisions
17 of this Ordinance and the Grandfathering provisions in Part 8 and may
18 require growth allocation.
19
20 E. New commercial uses
21
22 1. New commercial uses, except those specifically listed in Table A.1., shall
23 not be permitted in Resource Conservation Areas
24
25 2. Certain commercial uses may be permitted in the Resource Conservation
26 Area if allowed in the underlying zoning district and if the use complies
27 with all requirements for such uses as provided in the Easton Zoning
28 Ordinance. These commercial uses are limited to:
29
30 a. A home occupation as an accessory use on a residential property
31 and as provided for in Easton’s Zoning Ordinance;
32
33 b. A bed and breakfast facility located in an existing residential
34 structure and where meals are prepared only for guests staying at
35 the facility; and
36
37 c. Other uses determined by the Town of Easton and approved by
38 the Critical Area Commission to be similar to those listed above.
39
40 F. Expansion of existing commercial marinas
41
42 1. Expansion of existing commercial marinas may be permitted within
43 Resource Conservation Areas provided:
44
45 a. Water quality impacts are quantified and appropriate Best
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-14
Management P 1 ractices that address impacts are provided;
2
3 b. That it will result in an overall net improvement in water quality
4 at or leaving the site of the marina;
5
6 c. The marina meets the sanitary requirements of the Department of
7 the Environment; and
8
9 d. Expansion is permitted under the nonconforming use provisions
10 of this Ordinance.
11
12 2. Expansion of existing commercial marinas may be permitted in the Buffer
13 in the Intensely Developed Areas and Limited Development Areas
14 provided that the applicant demonstrates:
15 a. The project meets a recognized private right or public need;
16
17 b. Adverse effects on water quality, fish, plant and wildlife habitat
18 are minimized;
19
20 c. Insofar as possible, non-water-dependent structures or operations
21 associated with water-dependent projects or activities are located
22 outside the buffer; and
23
24 d. Expansion is permitted under the nonconforming use provisions
25 of this Ordinance.
26
27 G. New marina, commercial
28
29 1. New commercial marinas shall not be permitted in Resource Conservation
30 Areas.
31
32 2. New commercial marinas may be permitted in Limited Development
33 Areas and Intensely Developed Areas if allowed in the underlying zoning,
34 provided:
35
36 a. New marinas shall establish a means of minimizing the discharge
37 of bottom wash waters into tidal waters.
38
39 b. New marinas meet the sanitary requirements of the Department of
40 the Environment.
41
42 c. New marinas may be permitted in the Buffer in the Intensely
43 Developed Areas and Limited Development Areas provided that it
44 can be shown:
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-15
1. The project meets a r 1 ecognized private right or public need;
2
3 2. Adverse effects on water quality, fish, plant and wildlife
4 habitat are minimized; and
5
6 3. Insofar as possible, non-water-dependent structures or
7 operations associated with water-dependent projects or
8 activities are located outside the Buffer.
9
10 H. Community piers and noncommercial boat docking and storage
11
12 1. New or expanded community marinas and other non-commercial boat13
docking and storage facilities may be permitted in the Buffer subject to the
14 requirements in this Ordinance provided that:
15 a. These facilities may not offer food, fuel, or other goods and
16 services for sale and shall provide adequate and clean sanitary
17 facilities;
18
19 b. The facilities are community-owned and established and operated
20 for the benefit of the residents of a platted and recorded riparian
21 subdivision;
22
23 c. The facilities are associated with a residential development
24 approved by Easton for the Critical Area and consistent with all
25 State requirements and the requirements of this Ordinance
26 applicable to the Critical Area;
27
28 d. Disturbance to the Buffer is the minimum necessary to provide a
29 single point of access to the facilities; and
30
31 e. If community piers, slips, or moorings are provided as part of the
32 new development, private piers in the development are not
33 allowed.
34
35 2. Number of slips or piers permitted
36
37 The number of slips or piers permitted at the facility shall be the lesser of
38 §a. or §b. below:
39
40 a. One slip for each 50 feet of shoreline in the subdivision in the
41 Intensely Developed and Limited Development Areas and one slip
42 for each 300 feet of shoreline in the subdivision in the Resource
43 Conservation Area; or
44
45 b. A density of slips or piers to platted lots or dwellings within the
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-16
subdivision in the Critical 1 Area according to the following
2 schedule:
3
4 Table H.2. b. Number of Slips Permitted
Platted Lots or Dwellings in the Critical Area
Slips
up to 15
1 for each lot
16 – 40
15 or 75% whichever is greater
41 – 100
30 or 50% whichever is greater
101 – 300
50 or 25% whichever is greater
over 300
75 or 15% whichever is greater
5
6
7 I. Public beaches and public water-oriented recreational and educational areas
8
9 1. Public beaches or other public water-oriented recreation or education areas
10 including, but not limited to, publicly owned boat launching and docking
11 facilities and fishing piers may be permitted in the Buffer in Intensely
12 Developed Areas.
13
14 2. These facilities may be permitted within the Buffer in Limited
15 Development Areas and Resource Conservation Areas provided that:
16
17 a. Adequate sanitary facilities exist;
18
19 b. Service facilities are, to the extent possible, located outside the
20 Buffer;
21
22 c. Permeable surfaces are used to the extent practicable, if no
23 degradation of groundwater would result;
24
25 d. Disturbance to natural vegetation is minimized; and
26
27 e. Areas for possible recreation, such as nature study, and hunting
28 and trapping, and for education, may be permitted in the Buffer
29 within Resource Conservation Areas if service facilities for these
30 uses are located outside of the Buffer
31
32 J. Research areas
33
34 1. Water-dependent research facilities or activities operated by State,
35 Federal, or local agencies or educational institutions may be permitted in
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-17
the Buffer, if non-water-1 dependent structures or facilities associated with
2 these projects are, to the extent possible, located outside of the Buffer.
3
4 K. Fisheries activities
5
6 1. Commercial water-dependent fisheries including, but not limited to
7 structures for crab shedding, fish off-loading docks, shellfish culture
8 operations and shore-based facilities necessary for aquaculture operations
9 and fisheries activities may be permitted in the Buffer in Intensely
10 Developed Areas, Limited Development Areas and Resource
11 Conservation Areas.
12
13 L. Structures on piers
14
15 1. Except as provided in §a., §b., and §c. below, construction of a dwelling
16 unit or other non-water-dependent structure on a pier located on State or
17 private tidal wetlands within the Critical Area is prohibited.
18
19 a. A building permit for a project involving the construction of a
20 dwelling unit or other non-water-dependent structure on a pier
21 located on State or private wetlands within the Critical Area may
22 be approved provided a permit was issued by the Department of
23 Natural Resources on or before January 1, 1989.
24
25 b. A building permit for a project involving the construction of a
26 dwelling unit or other non-water-dependent structure on a pier
27 located on State or private wetlands within the Critical Area may
28 be approved if the following conditions exist:
29
30 1. The project is constructed on a pier that existed as of
31 December 1, 1985 that can be verified by a Department of
32 Natural Resources aerial photograph dated 1985,
33 accompanied by a map of the area;
34
35 2. The project does not require an expansion of the pier
36 greater than 25% of the area of piers or dry docks removed
37 on the same property; however, additional expansion may
38 be allowed in the amount of 10% of the water coverage
39 eliminated by removing complete piers from the same or
40 other properties. If the horizontal surface of a pier to be
41 removed is not intact, but pilings identify its previous size,
42 then that area may be used in determining the additional
43 expansion permitted. The project expansion based on
44 water coverage eliminated can be considered only if all
45 nonfunctional piers on the property are removed except for
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-18
the project pier. The total 1 expansion may not exceed 35%
2 of the original size of the piers and dry docks removed; and
3
4 3. The project is located in an Intensely Developed Area.
5
6 c. A building permit for the repair of an existing dwelling unit or
7 other non-water-dependent structure on a pier located on State or
8 private wetlands within the Critical Area may be approved.
9
10 d. If a structure that is not water-dependent is permitted under the
11 exceptions included in this section, an applicant is required to
12 demonstrate that the project will meet the following environmental
13 objectives using the standards established herein:
14
15 1. The construction and operation of the project will not have
16 a long term adverse effect on the water quality of the
17 adjacent body of water;
18
19 2. The quality of stormwater runoff from the project will be
20 improved; and
21
22 3. Sewer lines or other utility lines extended for the pier will
23 not affect the water quality of adjoining waters.
24
25 M. Golf course
26
27 1. A golf course, excluding main buildings and/or structures such as the
28 clubhouse, pro-shop, parking lot, etc., may be permitted in Resource
29 Conservation Areas provided:
30
31 a. Such use is permitted in the underlying zoning; and
32
33 b. Development is in accordance with the official guidance adopted
34 by the Critical Area Commission on August 3, 2005.
35
36 N. Existing industrial uses
37
38 1. Existing industrial facilities and uses, including those that directly support
39 agriculture, forestry, or aquaculture may be permitted in Resource
40 Conservation Areas.
41
42 2. Expansion of existing industrial facilities and uses in the Resource
43 Conservation Areas shall be subject to the non-conforming use provisions
44 of this Ordinance and the Grandfathering provisions in Part 8 and may
45 require growth allocation.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-19
1
2 O. New industrial uses
3
4 1. New industrial uses shall not be permitted in Resource Conservation
5 Areas.
6
7 2. New, expanded or redeveloped industrial facilities may only be permitted
8 in Limited Development Areas and Intensely Developed Areas if
9 permitted uses in the underlying zoning district and provided such
10 facilities meet all requirements for development in the Limited
11 Development Area and Intensely Developed Areas.
12
13 3. New, expanded or redeveloped water-dependent industrial or port-related
14 facilities and the replacement of these facilities may be permitted only in
15 those portions of Intensely Developed Areas that have been designated as
16 Buffer Management Areas.
17
18 P. Non-maritime heavy industry
19
20 1. Non-maritime heavy industry may be permitted if:
21
22 a. The site is located in an Intensely Developed Area; and
23
24 b. The activity or facility has demonstrated to all appropriate local
25 and State permitting agencies that there will be a net improvement
26 in water quality to the adjacent body of water.
27
28 Q. Utility transmission facilities
29
30 1. Utility transmission facilities, except those necessary to serve permitted
31 uses, or where regional or interstate facilities must cross tidal waters, may
32 be permitted in the Critical Area provided:
33
34 a. The facilities are located in Intensely Developed Areas; and
35
36 b. Only after the activity or facility has demonstrated to all
37 appropriate local and State permitting agencies that there will be a
38 net improvement in water quality to the adjacent body of water.
39
40 2. These provisions do not include power plants.
41
42 R. Sanitary landfill; rubble fill
43
44 1. Sanitary landfills or rubble fills may not be permitted in the Critical Area
45 unless no environmentally acceptable alternative exists outside the Critical
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-20
Area, and these development activities 1 or facilities are needed in order to
2 correct an existing water quality or wastewater management problem.
3
4 2. Existing, permitted facilities shall be subject to the standards and
5 requirements of the Department of the Environment.
6
7 S. Solid or hazardous waste collection or disposal facilities.
8
9 1. Solid or hazardous waste collection or disposal facilities, including
10 transfer stations may not be permitted in the Critical Area unless no
11 environmentally acceptable alternative exists outside the Critical Area,
12 and these development activities or facilities are needed in order to correct
13 an existing water quality or wastewater management problem.
14
15 2. Existing, permitted facilities shall be subject to the standards and
16 requirements of the Department of the Environment.
17
18 T. Sludge facilities
19
20 1. Permanent sludge handling, storage and disposal facilities, other than
21 those associated with wastewater treatment facilities may be permitted in
22 the Critical Area provided:
23
24 a. The facility or activity is located in an Intensely Developed Area;
25 and
26
27 b. Only after the activity or facility has demonstrated to all
28 appropriate local and State permitting agencies that there will be a
29 net improvement in water quality to the adjacent body of water.
30
31 2. Agricultural or horticultural use of sludge under appropriate approvals
32 when applied by an approved method at approved application rates may be
33 permitted in the Critical Area, except in the 100 foot-Buffer.
34
35 28 – 501.8 GROWTH ALLOCATION
36
37 A. Growth Allocation Acreage
38
39 1. An area equal to five (5) percent of the RCA acreage located within
40 Easton and/or;
41
42 2. Growth allocation available to Easton as provided for by Talbot County.
43
44 3. As of the date of adoption of this Ordinance, there is no specific acreage
45 of Growth Allocation allotted to the Town of Easton. The County will
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-21
review potential growth allocation requests 1 from the Town on a case by
2 case basis.
3
4 B. Growth Allocation Floating Zone District
5
6 1. Purpose:
7
8 The Growth Allocation Floating Zone is not mapped but is designated for
9 use in areas classified as Resource Conservation Areas and/or Limited
10 Development Areas within the Easton Critical Area Overlay District. The
11 purpose of the floating zone is to permit a change in the land management
12 classification established in the Critical Area Overlay District on specific
13 sites so that they may be developed to the extent permitted by the
14 underlying zoning classification or the land use management
15 classification. Only projects which have been approved by the Town
16 Council for award of the Critical Area Growth Allocation are eligible for
17 the floating zone district.
18
19 2. Designation of floating zones
20
21 a. The Growth Allocation District shall be a floating zone.
22
23 b. The Growth Allocation District provides for changing the land
24 management classification of Resource Conservation Areas and
25 Limited Development Areas in the Critical Area Overlay District.
26
27 C. Standards
28
29 When locating new Intensely Developed or Limited Development Areas the
30 following standards shall apply:
31
32 1. A new Intensely Developed Area shall only be located in a Limited
33 Development Area or adjacent to an existing Intensely Developed Area;
34
35 2. A new Limited Development Area shall only be located adjacent to an
36 existing Limited Development Area or an Intensely Developed Area:
37
38 3. New Intensely Developed Areas shall be at least 20 acres in size unless:
39
40 a. They are contiguous to an existing Intensely Developed Area or
41 located in a Limited Development Area; or
42
43 b. They are a grandfathered commercial or industrial use, which
44 existed as of June 26, 1988. The amount of growth allocation
45 deducted shall be equivalent to the area of the entire parcel or
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-22
parcels s 1 ubject to the growth allocation request; or
2
3 c. They are(or will be) served by public sewer, the growth allocation
4 is consistent with the goals and objectives of the Town’s
5 Comprehensive Plan, and the project has an overall economic
6 benefit to the community.
7
8 4. No more than one-half of Easton’s growth allocation may be located in
9 Resource Conservation Areas except as provided in §9 below;
10
11 5. A new Limited Development Area or Intensely Developed Area shall be
12 located in a manner that minimizes impacts to Habitat Protection Areas as
13 defined herein and in COMAR 27.01.09 and in an area and manner that
14 optimizes benefits to water quality;
15
16 6. A new Intensely Developed Area shall only be located where it minimizes
17 impacts to the defined land uses of the Resource Conservation Area;
18
19 7. A new Intensely Developed Area or a Limited Development Area in a
20 Resource Conservation Area shall be located at least 300 feet beyond the
21 landward edge of tidal wetlands or tidal waters;
22
23 8. New Intensely Developed Areas or Limited Development Areas to be
24 located in Resource Conservation Areas shall conform to all criteria of
25 this Ordinance for such areas, shall be so designated on the Easton Critical
26 Area Maps and shall constitute an amendment to this Ordinance subject to
27 review and recommendation by the Planning Commission, and the
28 approval of the Town Council and the Critical Area Commission, as
29 provided herein.
30
31 9. If Easton is unable to utilize a portion of its growth allocation as set out in
32 §1 and §2 above within or adjacent to existing Intensely Developed or
33 Limited Development Areas, then that portion of the growth allocation
34 which cannot be so located may be located in the Resource Conservation
35 Areas in addition to the expansion allowed in §4 above under program
36 measures specifically approved by the Critical Area Commission.
37
38 D. Additional Factors
39
40 In reviewing map amendments or refinements involving the use of growth
41 allocation, Easton shall consider the following factors:
42
43 1. Consistency with Easton’s adopted Comprehensive Plan and whether the
44 growth allocation would implement the goals and objectives of the
45 adopted plan. “Consistency with” means that a standard or factor will
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-23
further, and not be contrary 1 to, the following items in the comprehensive
2 plan:
3 a. Policies
4
5 b. Timing of the implementation of the plan, of development, and of
6 rezoning
7
8 c. Development patterns
9
10 d. Land uses; and
11
12 e. Densities or intensities.
13
14 2. For a map amendment or refinement involving a new Limited
15 Development Area, whether the development is:
16
17 a. To be served by a public wastewater system or septic system that
18 uses the best available nitrogen removal technology;
19
20 b. A completion of an existing subdivision
21
22 c. An expansion of an existing business; or
23
24 d. To be clustered.
25
26 3. For a map amendment or refinement involving a new Limited
27 Development Area, whether the development is:
28
29 a. To be served by a public wastewater system;
30
31 b. If greater than 20 acres, to be located in a designated Priority
32 Funding Area; and
33
34 c. To have a demonstrable economic benefit.
35
36 4. The use of existing public infrastructure, where practical
37
38 5. Consistency with State and regional environmental protection policies
39 concerning the protection of threatened and endangered species and
40 species in need of conservation that may be located on- or off-site;
41
42 6. Impacts on a Priority Preservation Area;
43
44 7. Environmental impacts associated with wastewater and stormwater
45 management practices and wastewater and stormwater discharges to tidal
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-24
waters, ti 1 dal wetlands, and tributary streams; and
2
3 8. Environmental impacts associated with location in a coastal hazard area or
4 an increased risk of severe flooding attributable to the proposed
5 development.
6
7 28 – 501.9 GRANDFATHERING
8
9 A. Continuation of existing uses
10
11 1. The continuation, but not necessarily the intensification or expansion, of
12 any use in existence on June 26, 1988 may be permitted, unless the use
13 has been abandoned for more than one year or is otherwise restricted by
14 existing Town ordinances.
15
16 2. If any existing use does not conform with the provisions of this
17 Ordinance, its intensification or expansion may be permitted only in
18 accordance with the variance procedures in Part 10.
19
20 B. Residential density on Grandfathered lots
21
22 1. Except as otherwise provided, the following types of land are permitted to
23 be developed with a single-family dwelling, if a dwelling is not already
24 placed there, not withstanding that such development may be inconsistent
25 with the density provisions of this Ordinance.
26
27 a. A legal parcel of land, not being part of a recorded or approved
28 subdivision, that was recorded as of December 1, 1985;
29
30 b. Land that received a building permit subsequent to December 1,
31 1985, but prior to June 26, 1988;
32
33 c. Land that was subdivided into recorded, legally buildable lots,
34 where the subdivision received final approval between June 1,
35 1984 and December 1, 1985; or
36
37 d. Land that was subdivided into recorded, legally buildable lots,
38 where the subdivision received the final approval after December
39 1, 1985 and provided that either development of any such land
40 conforms to the , Intensely Developed Area, Limited
41 Development Area or Resource Conservation Area requirements in
42 this Ordinance or the area of the land has been counted against the
43 growth allocation permitted under this Ordinance.
44
45 C. Consistency
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-25
1
2 Nothing in this Section may be interpreted as altering any requirements of this
3 Ordinance related to water-dependent facilities or Habitat Protection Areas
4
5 28 – 501.10 VARIANCES
6
7 A. Applicability
8
9 Easton has established provisions where, owing to special features of a site or
10 other circumstances, implementation of this Ordinance or a literal enforcement of
11 provisions within this Ordinance would result in unwarranted hardship to an
12 applicant, a Critical Area variance may be obtained.
13
14 1. In considering an application for a variance, Easton shall presume that the
15 specific development activity in the Critical Area, that is subject to the
16 application and for which a variance is required, does not conform with
17 the general purpose and intent of Natural Resources Article, Title 8
18 Subtitle 18, COMAR Title 27, and the requirements of this Ordinance.
19
20 2. Unwarranted hardship means that without a variance, an applicant would
21 be denied reasonable and significant use of the entire parcel or lot for
22 which the variance is requested.
23
24 B. Reference to Article XII
25
26 The provisions for granting such a variance shall conform to the requirements
27 specified in Article XII § 28 – 1303.5 Powers and Duties, relating to powers of
28 the Board of Appeals to review and grant Variances. More specifically, § 28 –
29 1303.5.C.8:
30
31 28 – 501.11 LOT CONSOLIDATION AND RECONFIGURATION
32
33 A. Applicability
34
35 The provisions of this part apply to a consolidation or a reconfiguration of any
36 nonconforming legal grandfathered parcel or lot. These provisions do not apply
37 to the reconfiguration or consolidation of parcels or lots which are conforming or
38 meet all Critical Area requirements. Nonconforming parcels or lots include
39
40 1. Those for which a Critical Area variance is sought or has been issued; and
41
42 2. Those located in the Resource Conservation Area and are less than 20
43 acres in size.
44
45 B. Procedure
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-26
1
2 An applicant seeking a parcel or lot consolidation or reconfiguration shall provide
3 the information required in COMAR 27.01.02.08.E to Easton.
4
5 1. The Town of Easton may not approve a proposed parcel or lot
6 consolidation or reconfiguration without making written findings in
7 accordance with COMAR 27.01.02.08.F.
8
9 2. The Town of Easton shall issue a final written decision or order granting
10 or denying an application for a consolidation or reconfiguration.
11
12 a. After a final written decision or order is issued, Easton shall send
13 a copy of the decision or order and a copy of any approved
14 development plan within 10 business days by U.S. mail to the
15 Critical Area Commission’s business address.
16
17 28 – 501.12 AMENDMENTS
18
19 A. Amendments
20
21 The Easton Town Council may from time to time amend the Critical Area
22 provisions of this Ordinance. Changes may include, but are not limited to
23 amendments, revisions, and modifications to the Critical Area regulations, Critical
24 Area Maps, implementation procedures, and local policies that affect the Easton’s
25 Critical Area. All such amendments, revisions, and modifications shall also be
26 approved by the Critical Area Commission as established in § 8-1809 of the
27 Natural Resources Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland. No such
28 amendment shall be implemented without approval of the Critical Area
29 Commission. Standards and procedures for Critical Area Commission approval
30 of proposed amendments are as set forth in the Critical Area Law § 8-1809(i) and
31 § 8-1809(d), respectively. IN ADDITION TO THE REQUIREMENTS OF
32 ARTICLE XIV, AMENDMENTS TO THE CRITICAL AREA PROVISIONS
33 OF THIS ORDINANCE SHALL ALSO COMPLY WITH THIS SECTION.
34
35 B. Zoning Map Amendments
36
37 Except for Ordinance amendments or Ordinance refinements developed during a
38 six-year comprehensive review, a zoning map amendment may only be granted
39 by the Easton Town Council upon proof of a mistake in the existing zoning. This
40 requirement does not apply to proposed changes to a zoning map that meet the
41 following criteria:
42
43 1. Are wholly consistent with the land classifications as shown on the
44 adopted Critical Area Overlay Map; or
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-27
2. The use of growth allocation 1 in accordance with the growth allocation
2 provisions of this Ordinance is proposed.
3
4 C. Process
5
6 1. When an amendment is requested, the applicant shall submit the
7 amendment to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation.
8 Upon completing Findings of Fact, these documents shall be forwarded to
9 the Easton Town Council. The Easton Town Council shall hold a public
10 hearing at which parties of interest and citizens shall have an opportunity
11 to be heard. At least fourteen (14) days notice of the time and place of
12 such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in
13 Easton.
14
15 2. After the Town Council approves an amendment, they shall forward their
16 decision and applicable resolutions along with the amendment request to
17 the Critical Area Commission for final approval.
18
19 28 – 501.13 ENFORCEMENT
20
21 A. Consistency
22
23 The Critical Area provisions of this Ordinance, in accordance with the Critical
24 Area Act and Criteria supersede any inconsistent law, Chapter or plan of the
25 Town of Easton. In the case of conflicting provisions, the stricter provisions shall
26 apply
27
28 B. Violations
29
30 1. No person shall violate any provision of this Ordinance. Each violation
31 that occurs and each calendar day that a violation continues shall be a
32 separate offense.
33
34 2. Each person who violates a provision of this Ordinance shall be subject to
35 separate administrative civil penalties, abatement and restoration orders,
36 and mitigation for each offense.
37
38 3. Non-compliance with any permit or order issued by Easton related to the
39 Critical Area shall be a violation of this Ordinance and shall be enforced
40 as provided herein.
41
42 C. Reasonable Persons
43
44 The following persons may each be held jointly or severally responsible for a
45 violation: (1) persons who apply for or obtain any permit or approval, (2)
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-28
contractors, (3) subcontractors, (4) property 1 owners, (5) managing agents, or (6)
2 any person who has committed, assisted, or participated in the violation.
3
4 D. Required Enforcement Action
5
6 In the case of violations of this Ordinance, Easton shall take enforcement action
7 including:
8
9 1. Assess administrative civil penalties as necessary to cover the costs
10 associated with performing inspections, supervising or rendering
11 assistance with identifying and citing the violation, issuing abatement and
12 restoration orders, and reviewing mitigation plans and ensuring
13 compliance with these plans;
14
15 2. Issue abatement, restoration, and mitigation orders as necessary to:
16
17 a. Stop unauthorized activity;
18
19 b. Restore and stabilize the site, as appropriate, to its condition prior
20 to the violation or to a condition that provides the same water
21 quality and habitat benefits; and
22
23 3. Require the implementation of mitigation measures, in addition to
24 restoration activities, to offset the environmental damage and degradation
25 or loss of environmental benefit resulting from the violation.
26
27 E. Right to Enter Property
28
29 Except as otherwise authorized and in accordance with the procedures specified
30 herein, the Town of Easton or their designee may obtain access to and enter a
31 property in order to identify or verify a suspected violation, restrain a
32 development activity, or issue a citation if Easton has probable cause to believe
33 that a violation of this Ordinance has occurred, is occurring, or will occur. Easton
34 shall make a reasonable effort to contact a property owner before obtaining access
35 to or entering the property. If entry is denied, Easton may seek an injunction to
36 enter the property to pursue an enforcement action.
37
38 F. Administrative Civil Penalties
39
40 In addition to any other penalty applicable under State or Easton law, every
41 violation of a provision of Natural Resources Article, Title 8, Subtitle 18, and/or
42 the Critical Area provisions of this Ordinance shall be punishable by a civil
43 penalty of up to $10,000 per calendar day.
44
45 1. Before imposing any civil penalty, the person(s) believed to have violated
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-29
this Ordinance shall receive: 1 written notice of the alleged violation(s)
2 including which, if any, are continuing violations, and an opportunity to
3 be heard. The amount of the civil penalty for each violation, including
4 each continuing violation, shall be determined separately. For each
5 continuing violation, the amount of the civil penalty shall be determined
6 per day. In determining the amount of the civil penalty, Easton shall
7 consider:
8
9 a. The gravity of the violation;
10
11 b. The presence or absence of good faith of the violator;
12
13 c. Any willfulness or negligence involved in the violation including
14 a history of prior violations;
15
16 d. The environmental impact of the violation; and
17
18 e. The cost of restoration of the resource affected by the violation
19 and mitigation for damage to that resource, including the cost to
20 Easton for performing, supervising, or rendering assistance to the
21 restoration and mitigation.
22
23 2. Administrative civil penalties for continuing violations shall accrue for
24 each violation, every day each violation continues, with no requirements
25 for additional assessments, notice, or hearings for each separate offense.
26 The total amount payable for continuing violations shall be the amount
27 assessed per day for each violation multiplied by the number of days that
28 each violation has continued.
29
30 3. The person responsible for any continuing violation shall promptly
31 provide Easton with written notice of the date(s) the violation has been or
32 will be brought into compliance and the date(s) for Easton’s inspection to
33 verify compliance. Administrative civil penalties for continuing violations
34 continue to accrue as set forth herein until Easton receives such written
35 notice and verifies compliance by inspection or otherwise.
36
37 4. Assessment and payment of administrative civil penalties shall be in
38 addition to and not in substitution for recovery by Easton of all damages,
39 costs, and other expenses caused by the violation.
40
41 5. Payment of all administrative civil penalties assessed shall be a condition
42 precedent to the issuance of any permit or other approval required by this
43 Ordinance.
44
45 G. Cumulative Remedies
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-30
1
2 The remedies available to Easton under this Ordinance are cumulative and not
3 alternative or exclusive, and the decision to pursue one remedy does not preclude
4 pursuit of others.
5
6 H. Injunctive Relief
7
8 Easton is authorized to institute injunctive or other appropriate actions or
9 proceedings to bring about the discontinuance of any violation of this Ordinance,
10 an administrative order, a permit, a decision, or other imposed condition.
11
12 1. The pendency of an appeal to the Board of Appeals or subsequent judicial
13 review shall not prevent Easton from seeking injunctive relief to enforce
14 an administrative order, permit, decisions, or other imposed condition, or
15 to restrain a violation pending the outcome of the appeal or judicial
16 review.
17
18 I. Variances Pursuant to a Violation
19
20 Easton may accept an application for a variance regarding a parcel or lot that is
21 subject to a current violation of this subtitle or any provisions of an order, permit,
22 plan, or this Ordinance in accordance with the variance provisions of this
23 Ordinance. However, the application shall not be reviewed, nor shall a final
24 decision be made until all abatement, restoration, and mitigation measures have
25 been implemented and inspected by the Town of Easton.
26
27 J. Permits Pursuant to a Violation
28
29 Easton may not issue any permit, approval, variance, or special exception, unless
30 the person seeking the permit has:
31
32 1. Fully paid all administrative, civil, or criminal penalties as set forth in
33 Section F. above;
34
35 2. Prepared a restoration or mitigation plan, approved by Easton, to abate
36 impacts to water quality or natural resources as a result of the violation;
37
38 3. Performed the abatement measures in the approved plan in accordance
39 with the Easton regulations; and
40
41 4. Unless an extension of time is approved by Easton because of adverse
42 planting conditions, within 90 days of the issuance of a permit, approval,
43 variance, or special exception for the affected property, any additional
44 mitigation required as a condition of approval for the permit, approval,
45 variance, or special exception shall be completed.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-31
1
2 K. Appeals
3
4 An appeal to the Board of Appeals may be filed by any person aggrieved by any
5 order, requirement, decision or determination by Easton in connection with the
6 administration and enforcement of this Ordinance.
7
8 1. An appeal is taken by filing a written notice of appeal with the Board of
9 Appeals in accordance with the provisions in the Easton Zoning
10 Ordinance and accompanied by the appropriate filing fee.
11
12 2. An appeal must be filed within thirty (30) days after the date of the
13 decision or order being appealed; and
14
15 3. An appeal stays all actions by Easton seeking enforcement or compliance
16 with the order or decisions being appealed, unless Easton certifies to the
17 Board of Appeals that (because of facts stated in the certification) such
18 stay will cause imminent peril to life or property. In such a case, action by
19 Easton shall not be stayed except by order of the Board of Appeals or a
20 court on application of the party seeking the stay.
21
22 28 – 501.14 THE 100-FOOT BUFFER
23
24 A. Applicability and delineation
25
26 An applicant for a development activity or a change in land use shall apply all of the
27 required standards for a minimum 100-foot Buffer as described in this part. The
28 minimum 100-foot Buffer shall be delineated in the field and shall be shown on all
29 applications as follows:
30
31 1. The minimum 100-foot Buffer is delineated landward from:
32
33 a. The mean high water line of tidal water;
34
35 b. The edge of each bank of a tributary stream; and
36
37 c. The upland boundary of a tidal wetland.
38
39 2. The Buffer shall be expanded beyond the minimum 100-foot Buffer as
40 described in §A.1. above and the minimum 200-foot Buffer as described in
41 §A.3. below, to include the following contiguous land features:
42
43 a. A steep slope at a rate of four feet for every one percent of slope or
44 the entire steep slope to the top of the slope, whichever is greater;
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-32
b. A non-tidal we 1 tland to the upland boundary of the non-tidal wetland;
2
3 c. The 100-foot Buffer that is associated with a Non-tidal Wetland of
4 Special State Concern as stated in COMAR §26.23.06.01;
5
6 d. For an area of hydric soils or highly erodible soils, the lesser of:
7
8 1. The landward edge of the hydric or highly erodible soils; or
9
10 2. Three hundred feet where the expansion area includes the
11 minimum 100-foot Buffer.
12
13 3. Applications for a subdivision or for a development activity on land located
14 within the RCA requiring site plan approval after July 1, 2008 shall include:
15
16 a. An expanded Buffer in accordance with §A.2. above; or
17
18 b. A Buffer of at least 200 feet from a tidal waterway or tidal wetlands;
19 and a Buffer of at least 100-feet from a tributary stream, whichever is
20 greater.
21
22 4. The provisions of §A.3. above do not apply if:
23
24 a. The application for subdivision or site plan approval was submitted
25 before July 1, 2008, and legally recorded (subdivisions) or received
26 approval (site plans), by July 1, 2010;
27
28 b. The application involves the use of growth allocation.
29
30 B. Permitted Activities
31
32 If approved by Easton, disturbance to the Buffer is permitted for the following
33 activities, provided mitigation is performed in accordance with an approved Buffer
34 Management Plan as required per Section F of this Part:
35
36 1. A new development or redevelopment activity associated with a water37
dependent facility or located in an approved Buffer Management Area;
38
39 2. A shore erosion control activity constructed in accordance with COMAR
40 26.24.02, COMAR 27.01.04, and this Ordinance
41
42 3. A development or redevelopment activity approved in accordance with the
43 variance provisions of this Ordinance;
44
45 4. A new development or redevelopment activity on a lot or parcel that was
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-33
1 created before January 1, 2010 where:
2
3 a. The Buffer is expanded for highly erodible soil on a slope less than 15
4 percent or is expanded for a hydric soil and the expanded Buffer
5 occupies at least 75% of the lot or parcel;
6
7 b. The development or redevelopment is located in the expanded
8 portion of the Buffer and not within the 100-foot Buffer; and
9
10 c. Mitigation occurs at a 2:1 ratio based on the lot coverage of the
11 proposed development activity that is in the expanded Buffer.
12
13 5. A new or replacement septic system on a lot created before May 4, 1994,
14 where:
15
16 a. The Talbot County Health Department has determined the Buffer is
17 the only available location for the septic system; and
18
19 b. Mitigation is provided at a 1:1 ratio for area of canopy cleared of any
20 forest or developed woodland.
21
22 C. Buffer Establishment in Vegetation
23
24 An applicant for a development activity, redevelopment activity or a change in land
25 use that occurs outside the Buffer, but is located on a riparian lot or parcel that
26 includes the minimum 100-foot Buffer, shall establish the Buffer in vegetation if the
27 Buffer is not fully forested or fully established in woody or wetland vegetation.
28 Easton shall require a Buffer Management Plan in accordance with the standards of
29 this Part
30
31 1. The provisions of this section apply to:
32
33 a. A new subdivision or a new lot;
34
35 b. A lot or parcel that is converted from one land use to another;
36
37 c. Development or redevelopment on a lot or parcel created before
38 January 1, 2010.
39
40 2. The provisions of this section do not apply to the in-kind replacement of a
41 structure.
42
43 3. If a Buffer is not fully forested or fully established in woody or wetland
44 vegetation, the Buffer shall be established through planting in accordance with
45 COMAR 27.01.09.01-1.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-34
1
2 D. Mitigation for impacts to the Buffer
3
4 1. Authorized development activities may include a variance, subdivision, site
5 plan, shore erosion control permit, building permit, grading permit, septic
6 system approved by the Talbot County Health Department on a lot created
7 before May 4, 1994, and special exception
8
9 2. All authorized development activities shall be mitigated according to
10 COMAR 27.01.09.01-2.
11
12 3. All unauthorized development activities in the Buffer shall be mitigated at a
13 ratio of 4:1 for the limit of disturbance in the Buffer.
14
15 4. Planting for mitigation shall be planted onsite within the Buffer. If mitigation
16 planting cannot be located within the Buffer, then Easton may permit planting
17 in the following order of priority:
18
19 a. On-site and adjacent to the Buffer; and
20
21 b. On-site elsewhere in the Critical Area.
22
23 c. A fee in lieu as referenced in §G below.
24
25 E. Buffer planting standards
26
27 1. An applicant that is required to plant the Buffer for Buffer establishment or
28 Buffer mitigation shall apply the planting standards set forth in COMAR
29 27.01.09.01-2.
30
31 2. A variance to the planting and mitigation standards of this Ordinance is not
32 permitted.
33
34 F. Required submittal of Buffer Management Plans
35
36 An applicant that is required to plant the Buffer to meet establishment or mitigation
37 requirements shall submit a Buffer Management Plan as provided in COMAR
38 27.01.09.01-3 with the application for the specific activity. The provisions of this
39 Part do not apply to maintaining an existing grass lawn or an existing garden in the
40 Buffer
41
42 1. A Buffer Management Plan that includes planting for establishment shall be
43 submitted with all other application materials, clearly specify the area to be
44 planted and state if the applicant is:
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-35
1 a. Fully establishing the Buffer;
2
3 b. Partially establishing an area of the Buffer equal to the net increase in
4 lot coverage, or
5
6 c. Partially establishing an area of the Buffer equal to the total lot
7 coverage.
8
9 2. Any permit for development activity that requires Buffer establishment or
10 Buffer mitigation will not be issued until a Buffer Management Plan is
11 approved by Easton.
12
13 3. An applicant may not obtain final approval of a subdivision application until
14 the Buffer Management Plan has been reviewed and approved by Easton.
15
16 4. Easton may not approve a Buffer Management Plan unless:
17
18 a. The plan clearly indicates that all planting standards under §E of this
19 Ordinance will be met; and
20 b. Appropriate measures are in place for the long-term protection and
21 maintenance of all Buffer areas.
22
23 5. For a Buffer Management Plan that is the result of an authorized disturbance
24 to the Buffer, a permit authorizing final use and occupancy will not be issued
25 until the applicant.
26
27 a. Completes the implementation of a Buffer Management Plan; or
28
29 b. Provides financial assurance to cover the costs for
30
31 1. Materials and installation; and
32 2. If the mitigation or establishment requirement is at least 5,000
33 square feet, long-term survivability requirements as set forth in
34 COMAR 27.01.09.01-2.
35
36 6. Concurrent with recordation of a subdivision plat, an applicant shall record a
37 protective easement for the Buffer.
38
39 7. If an applicant fails to implement a Buffer Management Plan, that failure shall
40 constitute a violation of this Ordinance.
41
42 a. A permit for development activity will not be issued for a property
43 that has the violation.
44
45 8. An applicant shall post a subdivision with permanent signs prior to final
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-36
recordation in ac 1 cordance with COMAR 27.01.09.01-2.
2
3 9. Buffer management plans that includes natural regeneration shall follow the
4 provisions of COMAR 27.01.09.01-4
5
6 G. Fees-In-Lieu of Buffer Mitigation
7
8 A fee- in-lieu of mitigation will be collected if the planting requirements of the Buffer
9 Management Plan cannot be fully met onsite, in accordance with the following
10 standards;
11
12 1. Fee-in-lieu monies shall be collected and held in a special fund, which may
13 not revert to Easton’s general fund;
14
15 2. Fee-in-lieu shall be assessed at $1.50 per square foot of required Buffer
16 mitigation;
17
18 3. A portion of fee-in-lieu money can be used for management and
19 administrative costs; however, this cannot exceed 20% of the fees collected;
20 and
21
22 4. Fee-in-lieu monies shall be used for the following projects:
23
24 a. To establish the Buffer on sites where planting is not a condition of
25 development or redevelopment;
26
27 b. For water quality and habitat enhancement projects as approved by
28 the Critical Area Commission or by agreement between Easton and the
29 Critical Area Commission.
30
31 H. Shore erosion control projects
32
33 Shore erosion control measures are permitted activities within the Buffer in
34 accordance with the following requirements:
35
36 1. An applicant for a shore erosion control project that affects the Buffer in any
37 way, including, but not limited to access, vegetation removal and pruning, or
38 backfilling shall submit a Buffer Management Plan in accordance with the
39 requirements of this section; and
40
41 2. Comply fully with all of the policies and criteria for a shore erosion control
42 project stated in COMAR 27.01.04 and COMAR 26.24.
43
44 28 – 501.15 BUFFER MANAGEMENT AREA (BMA) PROVISIONS
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-37
A. 1 Development and redevelopment standards.
2
3 New development or redevelopment activities, including structures, roads,
4 parking areas and other impervious surfaces, lot coverage or septic systems will
5 not be permitted in the Buffer in a designated BMA unless the applicant can
6 demonstrate that there is no feasible alternative and the Planning Commission
7 finds that efforts have been made to minimize Buffer impacts and the
8 development shall comply with the following standards:
9
10 1. Development and redevelopment activities have been located as far as
11 possible from mean high tide, the landward edge of tidal wetlands, or the
12 edge of tributary streams.
13
14 2. Variances to other local setback requirements have been considered before
15 additional intrusion into the Buffer.
16
17 3. Commercial, industrial, institutional, recreational and multi-family
18 residential development and redevelopment shall meet the following
19 standards:
20
21 a. New development, including accessory structures, shall minimize
22 the extent of intrusion into the Buffer. New development shall not
23 be located closer to the water (or edge of tidal wetlands) than the
24 minimum required setback for the zoning district or 50 feet,
25 whichever is greater. Structures on adjacent properties shall not be
26 used to determine the setback line.
27
28 b. Redevelopment, including accessory structures, shall minimize
29 the extent of intrusion into the Buffer. Redevelopment shall not be
30 located closer to the water (or edge of tidal wetlands) than the local
31 setback for the zoning district or 25 feet, whichever is greater.
32 Structures on adjacent properties shall not be used to determine the
33 setback line. A new structure may be constructed on the footprint
34 of an existing structure.
35
36 4. Single family residential development and redevelopment shall meet the
37 following standards:
38
39 a. New development or redevelopment shall minimize the shoreward
40 extent of intrusion into the Buffer. New development and
41 redevelopment shall not be located closer to the water (or the edge
42 of tidal wetlands) than principal structures on adjacent properties
43 or the local setback for the zoning district, whichever is greater. In
44 no case shall new development be located less than 50 feet, or
45 redevelopment be located less than 25 feet from the water (or the
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-38
1 edge of tidal wetlands).
2
3 b. Existing principal or accessory structures may be replaced in the
4 same footprint.
5
6 c. New accessory structures may be located closer to the water than
7 the setback if the Town of Easton has determined there are no
8 other locations for the structures. The area of new accessory
9 structures shall not exceed 500 square feet within 25 feet of the
10 water and 1,000 square feet total in the Buffer.
11
12 5. Variances to other local setback requirements shall be considered before
13 additional intrusion into the Buffer is permitted.
14
15 6. Development and redevelopment may not impact any Habitat Protection
16 Area (HPA) other than the Buffer, including non-tidal wetlands, other
17 State or federal permits notwithstanding.
18
19 7. Buffer Management Area (BMA) designation shall not be used to
20 facilitate the filling of tidal wetlands that are contiguous to the Buffer or to
21 create additional buildable land for new development or redevelopment.
22
23 8. No natural vegetation may be removed in the Buffer except that required
24 by the proposed construction.
25
26 9. Mitigation for development or redevelopment in the BMA approved under
27 the provisions of this subsection shall be implemented as follows:
28
29 a. Natural forest vegetation of an area twice the extent of the
30 footprint of the development activity within the 100-foot Buffer
31 shall be planted on site in the Buffer or at another location
32 approved by the Planning Commission.
33
34 b. Applicants who cannot fully comply with the planting
35 requirement in §a above, may offset by removing an equivalent
36 area of existing lot coverage in the Buffer.
37
38 c. Applicants who cannot comply with either the planting or offset
39 requirements in §a. or §b. above shall pay $1.50/sq.ft. into a fee-in40
lieu program.
41
42 d. Any fees-in-lieu collected under these provisions shall be placed
43 in an account that will assure their use only for projects within the
44 Critical Area to enhance wildlife habitat, improve water quality, or
45 otherwise promote the goals of Easton’s Critical Area Ordinance.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-39
The funds cannot be used 1 to accomplish a project or measure that
2 would have been required under existing local, State, or federal
3 laws, regulations, statutes, or permits. The status of these funds
4 must be reported to the Critical Area Commission on an annual
5 basis.
6
7 e. Any required mitigation or offset areas shall be protected from
8 future development through an easement, development agreement,
9 plat notes or other instrument and recorded among the land records
10 of the County.
11
12
13 28 – 501.16 OTHER HABITAT PROTECTION AREAS
14
15 A. Identification
16
17 An applicant for a development activity, redevelopment activity or change in land
18 use shall identify all applicable Habitat Protection Areas and follow the standards
19 contained in this Part. Habitat Protection Areas includes:
20
21 1. Threatened or endangered species or species in need of conservation;
22
23 2. Colonial water bird nesting sites;
24
25 3. Historic waterfowl staging and concentration areas in tidal waters,
26 tributary streams or tidal and non-tidal wetlands;
27
28 4. Existing riparian forests;
29
30 5. Forest areas utilized as breeding areas by future interior dwelling birds and
31 other wildlife species;
32
33 6. Other plant and wildlife habitats determined to be of local significance;
34
35 7. Natural Heritage Areas; and
36
37 8. Anadromous fish propagation water
38
39 B. Standards
40
41 1. An applicant proposing a subdivision for a site plan for a site within the
42 Critical Area that is in or near a Habitat Protection Area listed above, shall
43 request review by the Department of Natural Resources Wildlife and
44 Heritage Service for comment and technical advice. Based on the
45 Department’s recommendations, additional research and site analysis may
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-40
be required to identify the location of threatened 1 and endangered species
2 and species in need of conservation on a site.
3
4 2. If the presence of a Habitat Protection Area is confirmed by the
5 Department of Natural Resources, the applicant shall develop a Habitat
6 Protection Plan in coordination with the Department of Natural Resources.
7
8 3. The applicant shall obtain approval of the Habitat Protection Plan from the
9 Planning Commission. The specific protection and conservation measures
10 included in the Plan shall be considered conditions of approval of the
11 project.
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-41
1
2
3
4
5
6 Appendix A SUMMARY OF NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS – CRITICAL AREA
7 COMMISSION
8
9
APPENDIX A
SUMMARY OF NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENT
CRITICAL AREA COMMISSION
(COMAR 14.20)
Type of Application
Require Notification to
Critical Area Commission
(Yes/No)
IDA LDA RCA
1. Disturbances to Habitat Protection Areas Y Y Y
2. Physical disturbance to Buffer Y Y Y
3. Variance from Critical Area Program Y Y Y
4. Development resulting in less than 5,000 sq. ft. of disturbance N N N
5. Development resulting in between 5,000 and 15,000 sq. ft. of
disturbance
N N Y
6. Development resulting in greater than 15,000 sq. ft. of
disturbance
Y Y Y
7. Subdivision of one to four lots N N N
8. Subdivision of five to ten lots N Y Y
9. Subdivision of greater than ten lots Y Y Y
10. Subdivision affecting Growth Allocation N/A Y Y
11. Single family dwelling unit (building permit) N N N
12. Accessory structures (building permit) N N N
13. Rezoning that would occur wholly or partially within the Critical
Area
Y Y Y
14. Special exception or conditional use for industrial, commercial,
institutional non-residential or multi-family
N Y Y
15. Substantial alteration to applications previously submitted to
Critical Are Commission
Y Y Y
10
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
5-42
1
2
3
4
5
6
7 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
8
9 Financial assistance for the updating of this Article provided by the Coastal Zone Management
10 Act of 1972, as amended, administered by the Office of Ocean and Coastal Resource
11 Management, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). A publication of the
12 Maryland Coastal Zone Management Program, Department of Natural Resources pursuant to
13 NOAA Award #14-11-1421 CZM 204.
14
15
16
17 Technical consulting assistance provided by:
18
19 Gradecak & Associates, Inc.
20 Chestertown, Maryland
21 (410) 928-5658
22
23
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE VI
6-1
1 ARTICLE VI
2 PLANNED REDEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT
3
4 SECTION 28 – 601 PLANNED REDEVELOPMENT (PR) OVERLAY DISTRICT
5
6 A. PURPOSE
7
8 The purpose of the Planned Redevelopment Overlay District (PR) is to provide a
9 mechanism for the redevelopment, rehabilitation, and general improvement of
10 certain older areas within the Town of Easton that have fallen into a somewhat
11 neglected or dilapidated state or have simply been used for a purpose that no
12 longer serves the health, safety or general welfare of the neighborhood. PR
13 applications may be submitted only if the project is located within the Planned
14 Redevelopment Overlay District. However, this mechanism is optional and shall
15 not be required of all projects located within this zone. Projects not being
16 developed in accordance with PR District standards shall be developed in
17 accordance with the development standards of the underlying base zoning district.
18
19 The nature, size, scale or intensity of a proposed uses may cause a particular site
20 not to be suitable for a specific PR proposal. Therefore, there is no general
21 presumption that an application for such a use at a particular location is valid,
22 inures to the general benefit of the Town, is compatible with surrounding uses, or
23 is in compliance with the Town’s Comprehensive Plan. Instead, each application
24 will be evaluated according to its particular location and the degree to which the
25 developer is willing or able to propose a development plan which ameliorates
26 possible adverse impacts and furthers the goals and objectives of this Section and
27 the Ordinance generally
28
29 B. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
30
31 Development within the Planned Redevelopment Overlay District shall meet the
32 following requirements:
33
34 1. The area proposed for a planned redevelopment shall be in one (1)
35 ownership, or, if in several ownerships, the proposal shall be filed jointly
36 by all the owners of the property included in the development plan.
37
38 2. The site shall be of a configuration suitable for the development proposed
39
40 3. Public water and sewerage shall be available.
41
42 4. The site shall be located adjacent to adequate transportation facilities
43 capable of serving existing traffic and that expected to be generated by the
44 proposed development.
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE VI
6-2
5. The overall residential density of 1 a Planned Redevelopment project shall
2 not exceed twenty (20) units per gross residential acre. For the purposes
3 of this subsection, the gross residential area shall include all land within
4 the area intended to be used for residences, residential parking space, and
5 reservation for community recreation and education facilities. Any land
6 mapped as floodway by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, and
7 non-residential uses shall be excluded in computing the gross area. The
8 Planning Commission may require a lower density if review of the
9 proposed development indicates that the maximum allowable density is
10 excessive for the surrounding area.
11
12 6. Adequate Common Open Space shall be provided for new infill
13 development projects. Such space shall include land area to be developed
14 as recreational areas or which is designated for the common use of all
15 occupants of the planned redevelopment but shall not include streets, off16
street parking areas or incidental landscaping within off-street parking
17 areas. The Planning Commission must be furnished satisfactory evidence
18 that such open space will be continued and that provision is made for its
19 perpetual maintenance.
20
21 7. For new infill development projects, the setback, lot size, lot coverage,
22 height, and yard requirements shall be established for each individual
23 project by the Planning Commission. In establishing these requirements
24 the Planning Commission shall consider such factors as the proposed
25 intensity of the project and the existing character of the neighborhood.
26
27 8. Adequate parking shall be provided for the proposed use as approved by
28 the Planning Commission.
29
30 9. Sidewalks shall be constructed along any public right-of-way (except for
31 alleys) adjacent to the site along the entire frontage(s) of the property. To
32 the extent practicable, walkways shall be constructed on the site to tie
33 building entrances and/or pedestrian pathway systems into existing or
34 proposed public sidewalk systems. The Planning Commission may waive
35 the requirement for sidewalks on a given lot if they find that pedestrian
36 circulation is adequately addressed without them. In such circumstances
37 the requirement shall not be simply waived, but rather it may be satisfied
38 by either the payment of a fee-in-lieu of constructing the sidewalk (which
39 shall be based on the Town of Easton’s estimate of the cost of
40 constructing a sidewalk on the site in question) or the construction of a
41 comparable length sidewalk on another site (or a combination of the two
42 options) and dedication of an acceptable easement area for sidewalks for
43 potential future construction of sidewalks on the site.
44
45 C. APPLICATION PROCEDURE
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE VI
6-3
1
2 Applications for PR projects shall be reviewed in accordance with the following
3 procedures, depending upon the type of project.
4
5 1. Applications that represent new infill development shall proceed in
6 accordance with the requirements of Section 28 – 301 of this Ordinance.
7 Where the underlying zoning district is residential (any “R” district) the
8 new infill development must be a use otherwise permitted in said
9 underlying district. Where the underlying zoning district is non10
residential, any use may be proposed and the Planning Commission may
11 approve the application based on the site plan review findings and
12 standards of Section 28 – 301. No use indicated as “prohibited” in all
13 zoning districts shall be permitted in the PR Overlay.
14
15 2. Applications for the adaptive reuse of existing buildings shall be reviewed
16 as follows:
17
18 a. Requests to change to a permitted use (in the underlying zoning
19 district) that requires less parking than the previous use shall be
20 approved with no review beyond that required for a building
21 permit (if any).
22
23 b. Requests to change to a permitted use (in the underlying zoning
24 district) that requires more parking than the previous use shall be
25 reviewed in accordance with the Site Plan Review standards as
26 outlined in Section 28 – 301 of this Ordinance.
27
28 c. Requests to change to a use that is not permitted in the underlying
29 zoning district may be reviewed in accordance with the standards
30 for Site Plan Review (Section 28 – 301).
31
32 d. Regardless of subsections a through c above, in any residential
33 (“R”) zoning district, only uses that are permitted in the underlying
34 zoning district may be proposed for the adaptive reuse project.
35
36 3. Applications for renovations, alterations or additions to existing improved
37 lots which violate the prescribed setback of the underlying zoning district,
38 but are no closer to the property line than the existing structure shall be
39 reviewed by the Town Planner. The application shall furnish the Town
40 Planner with a site plan with enough information to permit an adequate
41 review of the request. If approved by the Town Planner, nothing more
42 than a building permit shall be required for such requests. Nothing in this
43 provision, however shall permit construction in violation of the Town’s
44 Building Code without a Variance from said Code.
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE VI
6-4
Applications for renovations, alterations 1 or additions to existing improved
2 lots which both violate the prescribed setbacks of the underlying zoning
3 district and are closer to the property line than the existing structure(s)
4 shall be reviewed by the process prescribed above for new infill
5 development (i.e. the Site Plan Review Standards of this Ordinance as
6 prescribed in Section 28 – 301).
7
8 4. Requests to demolish and redevelop properties shall be reviewed in
9 accordance with the Site Plan Review standards as outlined in Section 28
10 – 301 of this Ordinance.
11
12 5. Requests to operate a Mobile Food Use on a longer-term basis than
13 otherwise permitted (i.e., as a Temporary Use) may be considered and
14 approved by the Planning Commission. Such requests shall only be
15 permitted if the proposed use (i) is owned, operated or controlled by the
16 entity that is entitled to the otherwise lawfully permitted use of the
17 property where the mobile food use is located; and (ii) is operated as an
18 expansion of or complement to a business operating an otherwise lawfully
19 permitted use on said property. Any such request shall be made to the
20 Planning Commission and include a site plan indicating the proposed
21 location of the mobile food use, a picture or sketch which accurately
22 depicts the appearance of the proposed structure, a statement indicating
23 the expected impact of the proposed addition in terms of parking
24 (including the expected additional demand and the existing and proposed
25 supply), neighborhood impacts (e.g. traffic, noise, odor, lighting, etc.), and
26 any other such information which the Town Planner reasonably
27 determines would be necessary for the Planning Commission to reach an
28 informed conclusion as to the merits and impacts of the proposed addition.
29
30 6. Applications for properties that are presently or have most recently been
31 used for any Institutional Use may either (1) continue to be used for said
32 Institutional Use, (2) convert to any other permitted Institutional Use, or
33 (3) be converted to any use permitted in the underlying zoning district.
34
35 7. The Town may require the execution of a Public Works Agreement as a
36 condition of approval of any PR project. If required, said Agreement shall
37 outline the standards and responsibilities associated with the proposed
38 project and shall be prepared in a format acceptable to the Town Attorney.
39
40 D. AMENDMENTS TO APPROVED APPLICATIONS
41
42 Amendments to approved PR applications shall be reviewed under the same
43 standards prescribed above for new projects.
44
45 E. DESIGNATION OF FUTURE PLANNED REDEVELOPMENT OVERLAY
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE VI
6-5
1 DISTRICTS
2
3 In the future, additional lands may be designated as Planned Redevelopment
4 Overlay. The process for so doing is as follows:
5
6 1. An application for Planned Redevelopment Overlay District Zoning shall
7 be filed with the Town Planner and forwarded to the Planning and Zoning
8 Commission for a recommendation before proceeding to the Town
9 Council.
10
11 2. The application for PR Overlay District Zoning shall include a map of the
12 area proposed for the designation and shall be accompanied by a metes
13 and bounds description of the proposed zoning boundaries as well as a
14 complete listing of the names and addresses of all property owners within
15 the proposed PR Overlay District.
16
17 3. The area proposed for PR Overlay District Zoning shall be contiguous and
18 at least five (5) acres in size unless the proposed PR Overlay District is an
19 extension of an existing PR Overlay District.
20
21 4. The application for establishing a new PR Overlay District shall be
22 accompanied by a land use and housing/building survey which analyzes
23 the appropriateness of the existing zoning, the conditions of the housing or
24 commercial or industrial buildings within the proposed PR zone, etc.
25
26 5. The application shall include a petition or similar device indicating the
27 support of the owners of at least fifty-one (51%) percent of the lots within
28 the proposed PR District.
29
30 6. The Planning and Zoning Commission may require whatever additional
31 studies or reports it deems necessary to adequately analyze the application.
32
33 7. The Planning Commission shall make and forward a recommendation to
34 the Town Council who shall schedule and hold a Public Hearing on the
35 application in accordance with the provisions of Section 28 – 1403 of this
36 Ordinance.
37
38 8. The Town Council shall vote as to whether or not to approve the proposed
39 PR Overlay District. Before approving a request, the Town Council must
40 make the following findings.
41
42 a. The structures within the proposed PR District are predominately
43 in need of rehabilitation, deteriorated, or built to zoning (or before
44 any zoning) that no longer is appropriate for the area.
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE VI
6-6
b. The creation of the PR Overlay 1 will allow for the rehabilitation
2 and redevelopment of an area of the Town of Easton that is in need
3 of such action.
4
5 c. The creation of the PR Overlay District will not cause undue
6 traffic nor overburden the Town's community facilities (water,
7 sewer, solid waste, etc.).
8
9 If the Town Council makes an affirmative finding of fact as to each of the criteria
10 listed above, the Council may enact an ordinance granting the proposed PR
11 district creation or expansion. The fact that an application for a PR district
12 creation or expansion complies with the specific requirements listed above shall
13 not require the Town Council to grant the application. The ordinance shall be
14 subject to approval by the Mayor in accordance with the provisions of the Town
15 Charter relating to mayoral vetoes.
16
17 The "change/mistake" rule, as codified in Maryland Annotated Code Article 66B
18 Section 4.05 is not applicable to the creation or expansion of PR districts nor to
19 any project submitted in accordance with the regulations of this subsection.
20
21 F. Site Plan Review and Action
22
23 The review processes described in subsection C above shall represent the initial
24 step in the PR review process. Successful applications shall subsequently follow
25 the appropriate steps for the type of project submitted and the applicant shall
26 prepare and submit for review by the Planning Commission a preliminary and a
27 final site/subdivision plan in accordance with the site plan requirements specified
28 in Subsection 28 – 301.3.B. of this Ordinance and/or the requirements of the
29 Town of Easton Subdivision Regulations.
30
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE VII
7-1
1 ARTICLE VII
2 HISTORIC DISTRICT
3
4 SECTION 28 – 701 HISTORIC DISTRICT
5 A. PURPOSE
6
7 It is the purpose of this subsection to establish regulations and procedures necessary
8 to preserve the historic structures and character of Easton. The regulations create
9 two historic zoning districts and regulate individual historic landmarks which have
10 and will be identified by the Historic District Commission. These historic districts
11 shall be considered as "overlay zones" and shall be considered in conjunction with the
12 use provisions of the zoning district in which a building is located. All standards and
13 regulations are designed to achieve the objectives more specifically described below
14
15 1. The preservation of sites, structures and districts of historical, archeological,
16 or architectural significance together with their appurtenances and
17 environmental settings is a public purpose in this State and in the Town of
18 Easton. The Mayor and Town Council of Easton believe that the public
19 interest and convenience require the preservation and protection of certain
20 places and areas of historic interest, exterior architectural features, examples
21 of the types of architecture, gardens and grounds found in older areas of
22 Easton.
23
24 2. The purpose of this ordinance shall be (1) to enhance the quality of life and
25 to safeguard the historical and cultural heritage of Easton by preserving sites,
26 structures, or districts which reflect elements of cultural, social, economic,
27 political, archeological, or architectural history; (2) to strengthen the local
28 economy; (3) to stabilize and improve property values of such sites,
29 structures, or districts; (4) to foster civic beauty; and (5) to promote the
30 preservation and appreciation of such sites, structures and districts for the
31 education and welfare of the residents of Easton and Talbot County.
32
33 3. The Mayor and Town Council of Easton derive authority for this ordinance by
34 virtue of the terms of the State of Maryland Enabling Act for Municipal
35 Historic District Legislation (1974 Cum. Supl. - Art. 66B - Sec. 8.01-8.15).
36
37 B. HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION
38
39 1. Historic District Commission.
40
41 The Town hereby creates a commission to be called the Easton Historic
42 District Commission.
43
44 2. Membership.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE VII
7-2
The Historic District Commission 1 shall consist of seven members appointed
2 by the Mayor and Town Council. A majority of the members of the
3 Commission shall be residents of the Town of Easton. Each member shall
4 possess a demonstrated special interest, specific knowledge, or professional or
5 academic training in such fields as history, architecture, architectural history,
6 planning, archeology, anthropology, curation, conservation, landscape
7 architecture, historic preservation, urban design, or related disciplines.
8 Nonresident appointees to the Commission must possess professional or
9 academic qualifications as further defined in paragraph 3 of this subsection.
10 At least two (2) members of the Commission shall possess professional or
11 academic training in one or more of the above-listed fields in accordance with
12 the minimum professional requirements of the United States Department of
13 the Interior for certifying local governments under 36 C.F.R. Part 61.
14
15 3. Commission Membership Qualification Criteria.
16
17 The requirement for Commission membership under the category of
18 demonstrated special interest may be satisfied either by formal training in one
19 or more of the fields listed in paragraph 2 of this subsection or active
20 membership in a preservation-related organization. The requirement for
21 membership under the category of specific knowledge may be satisfied by
22 formal post-secondary education, employment or practical experience in one
23 or more of the above-listed fields. The requirement for Commission
24 membership under the category of professional or academic training may be
25 satisfied by, at a minimum, two years’ experience as a professional or a
26 Bachelor’s degree in one or more of the above-listed fields.
27
28 4. Terms.
29
30 Commission members shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years, except
31 that the terms of the initial appointments shall be staggered so that three (3)
32 members shall serve terms of three (3) years, two (2) members shall serve
33 terms of two (2) years, and two (2) members shall serve terms of one (1) year
34 so that not more than three (3) appointment shall expire in a given year.
35 Commission members may be re-appointed.
36
37 5. Commission Officers.
38
39 The Commission shall elect, from its membership, a Chairperson and Vice
40 Chairperson. The Chairperson and Vice Chairperson shall serve for one (1)
41 year terms and shall be eligible for reelection.
42
43 6. Vacancy.
44
45 Any vacancy in the membership of the Commission caused by the expiration
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE VII
7-3
of a term, resignation, death, incapacity 1 to discharge duties, removal for cause,
2 or any other reason, shall be filled for a new term, or for the remainder of the
3 term for which there is a vacancy, as the case may be, in the same manner as
4 provided herein for the appointment of the initial members of the
5 Commission. Any vacancy on the Commission shall be filled by the
6 appointing authority within sixty (60) days. In the case of expiration of term,
7 a member may continue to serve until the member’s successor is appointed.
8 Unexcused absence at three (3) consecutive meetings shall constitute
9 resignation by the member and shall create a vacancy.
10
11 7. Removal for Cause.
12
13 A member may be removed from the Commission for cause, upon written
14 charges, and after a public hearing, by the Mayor with the consent and
15 approval of the Town Council.
16
17 8. Compensation.
18
19 Commission members shall serve without compensation, but may be
20 reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties,
21 provided said expenses are permitted by the budget and approved in advance
22 by the Town Planner.
23
24 9. Meetings.
25
26 The Commission shall hold such regular meetings and hearings as necessary
27 to discharge its duties.
28
29 10. Staff.
30
31 Consistent with the Town’s policies and procedures, employees may be
32 assigned to the Commission, and such services and facilities shall be made
33 available as the Town deems necessary or appropriate for the proper
34 performance of its duties.
35 C. POWERS AND DUTIES
36
37 The Historic District Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
38
39 a. To direct studies, reports and surveys to identify historical, archeological, or
40 architecturally significant sites, structures, and districts that exemplify the
41 cultural, social, economic, political, or architectural history of the Town, state,
42 or nation.
43
44 b. Consistent with the Town’s charter, ordinances, resolutions, local public law,
45 policies and procedures regarding the acceptance and use of gifts by public
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE VII
7-4
officials, to accept and us 1 e gifts for the exercise of its functions.
2
3 c. To prescribe appropriate rules and regulations for transaction of its business.
4
5 d. To adopt rehabilitation and new construction design guidelines and criteria for
6 construction, alteration, reconstruction, moving, and demolition of designated
7 landmarks, sites, structures, and districts which are consistent with the
8 Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties.
9 Guidelines may include design characteristics intended to meet the needs of
10 particular types of sites, structures, and districts, and may identify categories
11 of changes that, because they are minimal in nature, do not affect historic,
12 archeological, or architectural significance, do not require review by the
13 Commission.
14
15 e. Consistent with the Town’s charter, ordinances, resolutions, local public law,
16 policies and procedures governing the acquisition of easements, to accept or
17 otherwise acquire historic preservation easements on designated landmarks,
18 structures, or sites and, when deemed appropriate by the Commission, sites or
19 structures located in, or adjacent to, a designated district. The easements
20 acquired by the Commission may grant to the commission, the residents of the
21 historic district, and the general public the right to ensure than any site,
22 structure, or surrounding property on which the easement is applied is
23 protected, in perpetuity, from changes that would affect the historic,
24 archeological, architectural significance of the site, structure, or surrounding
25 property, and
26
27 f. To undertake any other action or activity necessary or appropriate to the
28 implementation of its powers and duties or the implementation of the purpose
29 of this article.
30 D. DESIGNATION
31
32 1. Easton Historic Zones
33
34 a. The Easton Historic Zones consist of two districts. The first district
35 covers the area of the Third Haven Meeting House and is identified as
36 the “Meeting House District”. The second district consists of that land
37 which constitutes basically the original part of Easton as shown on the
38 Historic Zoning map and identified as “Old Easton District”. In
39 addition, the commission has compiled a list of public and private
40 structures which it deems to be of historic and architectural
41 significance and are considered Local Landmarks. These individual
42 structures may be located in any portion of the Town and shall be
43 considered to be subject to the provisions of this section. The list of
44 structures designated to be of historical or architectural significance
45 and the map entitled “Town of Easton Historic Districts Boundaries
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE VII
7-5
Map” 1 shall be kept on file in the office of the Easton Town Planner.
2
3 In addition there are scattered individual properties and structures
4 deemed to be of historical or architectural significance which are
5 subject to the provisions of the Historic District overlay zone. A list of
6 Local Landmarks located outside of the two (2) Historic Districts
7 includes:
8
9 1. Richardson Cemetery Map-104, Parcel-605
10 2. Mt. Pleasant – 30 Mt. Pleasant Ave.
11 3. St. Aubins – 105 Willis Ave.
12 4. Langsdale Houses - 216/218 Bay St.
13 5. Carroll’s Addition – 702 South St.
14 6. Oak Hill House – 317 N. Washington St.
15 7. Londonderry Manor House – Map 34, Parcel 121
16
17 2. Designation Procedures. The Historic District Commission may, after making
18 full and proper study, recommend any area within the limits of the Town for
19 designation as a landmark, site, structure, or district of historic, archeological,
20 or architectural significance. The Commission may also recommend
21 boundaries for such landmarks, sites, structures or districts. The
22 recommendations shall be submitted to the Mayor and Town Council for
23 approval or disapproval. Additionally, any parcel, upon consideration of
24 annexation, shall be subject to a historical significance assessment completed
25 by a qualified professional. If structures or other appurtenances of historical
26 significance are found, the Historic District Commission will review such
27 findings and make a recommendation to the Town Council either in support or
28 in opposition of declaring the site or structure a Local Landmark. Any site or
29 structure already included on the National Register of Historic Places, the
30 Maryland Historic Trust Historic Sites Survey or designated a landmark by
31 Talbot County shall automatically be presented to the Town Council for
32 consideration of becoming a Local Landmark.
33
34 E. APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS AND
35 COMMISSION REVIEW
36
37 1. Application for Certificate of Appropriateness.
38
39 Before the construction, alteration, reconstruction, moving, or demolition is
40 undertaken of a designated landmark, site, or structure, or site or structure
41 within designated district, if an exterior change is involved which would affect
42 the historic, archeological, or architectural significance of a designated
43 landmark, site, or structure, or structure within a designated district, any
44 portion of which is visible or intended to be visible from a public way, the
45 person, individual, firm, or corporation proposing to make the construction or
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE VII
7-6
change shall file an application 1 for a Certificate of Appropriateness with the
2 Commission for permission to construct, alter, reconstruct, move, or demolish
3 the landmark, site, or structure. Every application shall be referred to and
4 considered by the Commission and accepted or rejected by the Commission.
5 An application which is identical to a rejected application may not be
6 resubmitted within a period of one year after the rejection. No Certificate of
7 Appropriateness shall be granted until the Commission has acted thereon as
8 hereinafter provided. A Certificate of Appropriateness shall lapse upon the
9 expiration of the corresponding Building Permit. For applications that require
10 a building permit but for which none is issued, this Certificate of
11 Appropriateness shall lapse six (6) months after its issuance. In the event a
12 Building Permit is not required, the Certificate of Appropriateness shall lapse
13 six (6) months from its issuance if substantial work is not underway. For
14 good cause shown, this period may be extended by the Commission.
15
16 2. Application Review
17
18 a. In reviewing applications, the Commission shall give consideration to
19 the historic, archeological, or architectural significance of the
20 landmark, site, or structure and its relationship to the historic,
21 archeological, or architectural significance of the surrounding area; the
22 relationship of the exterior architectural features of a landmark or
23 structure to the remainder of the landmark or structure and to the
24 surrounding area; the general compatibility of proposed exterior
25 design, scale, proportion, arrangement, texture, and materials to the
26 landmark, site, or structure and to the surrounding area; and any other
27 factors including aesthetic factors which the Commission deems to be
28 pertinent.
29
30 b. The Commission shall consider only exterior features of a landmark or
31 structure and shall not consider any interior arrangements.
32
33 c. The Commission shall not disapprove an application except with
34 respect to the several factors specified in paragraph (1) above.
35
36 d. The Commission shall be strict in its judgment of plans for sites or
37 structures determined by research to be of historic, archeological, or
38 architectural significance. The Commission shall be lenient in its
39 judgment of plans for sites or structures of little historic, archeological,
40 or architectural significance, or of plans involving new construction,
41 unless in the Commission’s judgment such plans would seriously
42 impair the historic, archeological, or architectural significance of
43 surrounding sites or structures. The Commission is not required to
44 limit construction, reconstruction, or alteration to the architectural
45 style of any one (1) period.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE VII
7-7
1
2 i. If an application is submitted for construction, reconstruction,
3 or alteration affecting a site or the exterior of a structure or for
4 the moving or demolition of a structure, the preservation of
5 which the Commission considers to be of unusual importance
6 to the Town of Easton or of unusual importance to the State or
7 the nation, the Commission shall attempt to formulate an
8 economically feasible plan with the owner(s) of the site or
9 structure for the preservation of the site or structure. Unless
10 the Commission is satisfied that the proposed construction,
11 alteration, or reconstruction will not materially impair the
12 historic, archeological, or architectural significance of the site
13 or structure, the Commission shall reject the application, filing
14 a copy of its rejection with the Zoning Inspector.
15
16 ii. If an application is submitted for construction, reconstruction,
17 or alteration, or for the moving or demolition of a site or
18 structure at that the Commission considers to be of unusual
19 importance and no economically feasible plan can be
20 formulated, the Commission shall have ninety (90) days, from
21 the time it concludes that no economically feasible plan can be
22 formulated, to negotiate with the owner and other parties in an
23 effort to find a means of preserving the site or structure.
24
25 In the case of a site or structure considered to be valuable
26 for its historic, archeological, or architectural significance,
27 the Commission may approve the proposed construction,
28 reconstruction, alteration, moving, or demolition despite
29 the provisions of Section 28 – 701 E(2)(d) of this Article if:
30
31 a) The site or structure is a deterrent to a major
32 improvement program which will be of substantial
33 benefit to the Town;
34
35 b) Retention of the site or structure would cause undue
36 financial hardship to the owner; or
37
38 c) Retention of the site or structure would not be in the
39 best interest of a majority of persons in the Town.
40
41 3. Commission Decision.
42
43 The Commission shall file with the Zoning Inspector a Certificate of
44 Appropriateness certifying its approval, modification, or rejection of each
45 application and plans submitted to it for review. Work shall not be
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE VII
7-8
commenced on any project until such a 1 certificate of approval has been filed,
2 and the Zoning Inspector shall not issue a building permit or historic area
3 work permit for such change or construction unless it has received such a
4 Certificate of Appropriateness. The failure of the Commission to act upon a
5 completed application within forty-five (45) days from the date the completed
6 application was filed shall be deemed to constitute automatic approval of the
7 proposed changes unless an extension of this forty-five (45) day period is
8 agreed upon mutually by the applicant and the Commission or the application
9 has been withdrawn.
10
11 4. Routine Maintenance.
12
13 Nothing in this Article shall be taken or construed to prevent maintenance that
14 does not alter the exterior fabric or features of a designated landmark, site, or
15 structure, customary farming operations, or landscaping which will have no
16 material effect on the historic, archeological, or architectural significance of a
17 designated landmark, site, structure, or district.
18 F. DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT
19
20 1. In the event of demolition by neglect, the Commission may request the
21 Zoning Inspector to notify, in writing, the property owner of record, any
22 person having a right, title, or interest therein, and the occupant or other
23 person responsible for the maintenance of the property, of the deterioration.
24 The notice shall specify the minimum items of repair or maintenance
25 necessary to correct the deterioration or prevent further deterioration.
26
27 2. Prior to the issuance of a written notice, the Commission may request the
28 Zoning Inspector to establish a record of demolition by neglect. Such a record
29 may include dated materials such as photographs and written reports of the
30 condition of the property so as to record or measure the deterioration.
31
32 3. The notice shall provide that corrective action shall commence within thirty
33 (30) days of the receipt of said notice and be completed within a reasonable
34 time thereafter. The notice shall state that the owner of record of the property,
35 or any person of record with any right, title, or interest therein, may, within
36 ten (10) days after the receipt of the notice, request a hearing on the necessity
37 of the items and conditions contained in the notice. In the event a public
38 hearing is requested, it shall be held by the Commission upon thirty (30) days
39 written notice being mailed to all persons of record with any right, title, or
40 interest in the property and to all citizens and organizations which the
41 Commission determines may have an interest in the proceedings.
42
43 4. If, after the public hearing, the Commission determines that the corrective
44 actions remain necessary, the Commission may request that the Zoning
45 Inspector take corrective action to comply with the Final Notice within thirty
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE VII
7-9
1 (30) days of receipt of the Final Notice
2
3 5. Upon failure, neglect, or refusal of the property owner or other responsible
4 person, duly notified, to take the corrective action specified in the Final Notice
5 within the time required, the Commission may request that the Zoning
6 Inspector institute any of the remedies and penalties provided by law for such
7 violations.
8 G. ORDER TO RESTORE
9
10 In the event that any type of intervention on a property or structure in the Historic
11 District has been conducted without a Certificate of Appropriateness or in violation of
12 a Certificate of Appropriateness, or, in cases of Demolition by Neglect, the Town
13 may issue the owner an Order to Restore. This order will require the property owner
14 to restore the property to the condition that existed prior to the intervention using
15 material-in-kind and design-in-kind, subject to all applicable building and life safety
16 codes. The Historic District Commission shall review the intended mitigation of any
17 such intervention for appropriateness, and establish a reasonable time limit for the
18 mitigation.
19
20 H. ROLE OF MARYLAND HISTORICAL TRUST
21
22 The Commission may designate the Maryland Historical Trust to make an analysis of
23 and report recommending the preservation of sites, structures, or districts of historic,
24 archeological, architectural, or cultural significance within the Town. The report may
25 include proposed boundaries of sites, structures, or districts, as well as
26 recommendations for the identification and designation of particular sites, structures,
27 or districts to be preserved.
28
29 I. APPEALS
30
31 In the event than any party is aggrieved by a decision of the Commission, the party
32 has the right of appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals. Appeal requests must be filed
33 within thirty (30) days from the date of the Commission decision. Further appeal may
34 be taken to the Circuit Court for Talbot County.
35 J. VIOLATIONS
36
37 Any willful violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed a Municipal
38 infraction as provided in Section 1-8 (b) of the Town Code. Each and every day that
39 the violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
40
41 K. SEVERABILITY
42
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE VII
7-10
If any provision of this article or application thereof to 1 any person or circumstances is
2 held invalid for any reason, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or any
3 other application of this article which can be given effect without the invalid
4 provision or application, and to this end, all the provisions of this article are hereby
5 declared to be severable.
6
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE VIII
8-1
1 ARTICLE VIII
2 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
3
4 SECTION 28 – 801 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT ("PUD")
5
6 A. PURPOSE AND INTENT
7
8 The purpose of the PUD District is to provide for carefully planned residential, mixed use
9 and certain commercial developments at appropriate locations within the Town of Easton.
10 It is the intent of this Section to allow all aspects of a PUD District to be subject to public
11 review and control by the Town with specific provisions to be made on a case-by-case
12 basis for adequate open space, architectural appearance, the height, bulk and location of
13 buildings, required public facilities, and a variety of housing types, densities, and/or
14 compatible commercial or industrial uses as a part of a detailed development plan.
15
16 Not all locations in the Town are suitable for PUD development and the nature, size,
17 scale or intensity of proposed uses may cause a particular site not to be suitable for a
18 specific PUD proposal. Therefore, there is no general presumption that an application for
19 such a use at a particular location is valid, inures to the general benefit of the Town or is
20 in compliance with the Town’s Comprehensive Plan. Instead, each application will be
21 evaluated according to its particular location and the degree to which the developer is
22 willing or able to propose a development plan which furthers the goals and objectives of
23 this Section and the Ordinance generally.
24
25 B. LOCATION
26
27 The PUD is a floating zone. That means that while provisions and regulations are made
28 to govern development within any PUD District, no such District will be pre-mapped on
29 the Zoning Map. A PUD District may be established in any parent zoning district
30 provided the requirements outlined in this subsection are met.
31
32 C. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
33
34 The following types of uses are permitted in a PUD District:
35
36 1. Residential uses of all types.
37
38 2. Commercial and industrial uses limited as follows:
39
40 a. Where the PUD District is established in the A-1 or any "R" District,
41 commercial uses shall be oriented to benefit the residents of the
42 neighborhood. Industrial uses are not permitted in PUD Districts
43 established within any "R" parent district. The following commercial uses
44 are prohibited in any residential district: Major Retail, Shopping Center -
45 Campus Style and Shopping Center – Strip.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE VIII
8-2
1
2 b. Where the PUD District is established in any "C" District, all permitted
3 and special exception commercial and residential uses may be permitted.
4 Major Retail and Shopping Centers shall meet the supplemental standards
5 set out in Section 28 – 1007. The Town Council may, in granting a PUD
6 application, permit specific industrial uses which shall be limited to those
7 permitted within the I-1 District.
8
9 c. Where the PUD District is established in any "I" District, all commercial
10 or industrial uses may be permitted.
11
12 3. Any use listed in the Table of Uses as "Institutional" or
13 "Recreational/Entertainment".
14
15 D. USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION
16
17 Uses which are permitted in the underlying zoning district by special exception shall be
18 permitted in a PUD District provided that such uses are specifically authorized by the
19 ordinance establishing the PUD District or, in the case of a pre-existing PUD District,
20 such uses are approved by the Board of Appeals pursuant to the provisions of Section 28
21 – 1303 of this Ordinance.
22
23 E. USES PERMITED WITH A TEMPORARY USE PERMIT
24
25 Temporary uses are permitted in a PUD District only if they are permitted within the
26 parent district within which the PUD is established
27
28 F. ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
29
30 Uses and structures customarily accessory and incidental to any principal permitted use
31 shall be permitted
32
33 G. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
34
35 Applications for Planned Unit Developments shall meet the following requirements:
36
37 1. The area proposed for a planned unit development shall be in one (1) ownership,
38 or, if in several ownerships, the proposal shall be filed jointly by all the owners of
39 the property included in the development plan.
40
41 2. The site shall be of a configuration suitable for the development proposed.
42
43 3. Public water and sewerage shall be available, although it may be made available
44 in conjunction with the development of the PUD. An ordinance granting a PUD
45 application for a site within the Chesapeake Bay Critical Area may provide that
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE VIII
8-3
residential uses need not be connected 1 to public water and sewer systems if
2 connection would not be economically feasible given the density of the proposed
3 development.
4
5 4. The site shall be located adjacent to adequate transportation facilities capable of
6 serving existing traffic and that expected to be generated by the proposed
7 development. Private roads may be approved if such roads will adequately serve
8 the development. Such roads shall be internal to the development.
9
10 5. The owners or developers must indicate that they plan to begin construction of the
11 development within one (1) year after final approval. If there is no action on the
12 part of the applicant at any point in the process for a period of one (1) year, the
13 zoning of the site shall revert to its previous classification unless a time extension
14 is requested by the developer and granted by the Planning Commission.
15
16 6. The site proposed to be zoned as a PUD shall have an area of at least five (5)
17 acres. Smaller sites may be permitted when it is found that the proposed PUD is
18 compatible with existing development in the area and does not disrupt the orderly
19 expansion of the transportation system of the Town.
20
21 7. The overall residential density of a PUD District shall generally not exceed
22 sixteen (16) residential units per gross residential acre. If the PUD is proposed
23 within the CR base zoning district or as part of the redevelopment of an existing
24 strip shopping center, the maximum permitted density shall not exceed 30 units
25 per gross residential acre. For the purposes of this subsection, the gross
26 residential area shall include all land within the area intended to be used for
27 residences, residential parking space, and reservation for community recreation
28 and education facilities. Any land mapped as floodway by the Federal
29 Emergency Management Agency and non-residential uses shall be excluded in
30 computing the gross area. A lower density may be imposed if review of the
31 proposed development indicates that the maximum allowable density is excessive
32 for the surrounding area.
33
34 8. Common Open Space shall comprise not less than thirty (30%) percent of the
35 total gross area. Such space shall include land area to be developed as
36 recreational areas or which is designated for the common use of all occupants of
37 the planned unit development but shall not include streets, off-street parking areas
38 or incidental landscaped areas within off-street parking areas. The developer shall
39 furnish satisfactory evidence that such open space will be continued and that
40 provision is made for its perpetual maintenance.
41
42 9. The setback, lot size, lot coverage, height, minimum frontage, and yard
43 requirements shall be established for each individual project by the Town Council
44 in the ordinance granting the application. The Planning Commission shall make
45 recommendations to the Town Council with regard to these requirements.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE VIII
8-4
1
2 10. Off-street parking shall be provided for each individual use in the planned unit
3 development in accordance with the requirements of Section 28 – 1001. Mixed4
use PUD’s that integrate coordinated pedestrian and bicycle circulation systems
5 throughout the development, shall be permitted to reduce the required off-street
6 parking by 20% of the required standard without the need for a parking variance,
7 waiver, or deferral.
8
9 11. Sidewalks shall be constructed along any public right-of-way (except for alleys)
10 adjacent to the site along the entire frontage(s) of the property. To the extent
11 practicable, walkways shall be constructed on the site to tie building entrances
12 and/or pedestrian pathway systems into existing or proposed public sidewalk
13 systems. The Planning Commission may waive the requirement for sidewalks on
14 a given lot if they find that pedestrian circulation is adequately addressed without
15 them. In such circumstances the requirement shall not be simply waived, but
16 rather it may be satisfied by either the payment of a fee-in-lieu of constructing the
17 sidewalk (which shall be based on the Town of Easton’s estimate of the cost of
18 constructing a sidewalk on the site in question) or the construction of a
19 comparable length sidewalk on another site (or a combination of the two options)
20 and dedication of an acceptable easement area for sidewalks for potential future
21 construction of sidewalks on the site.
22
23 12. No more than 50% of the off-street parking area for the entire property of a major
24 retail or shopping center use, shall be located between the front façade of the
25 principal building(s) and the primary abutting street.
26
27 One or more of the standards outlined above may be modified by the Town Council upon
28 the applicant's showing that the standard would place an undue burden upon the applicant
29 and that any adverse effect created by such modification will be ameliorated by another
30 means in the proposed project.
31
32 H. APPLICATION PROCEDURES
33
34 The following procedures shall be followed with respect to all applications for PUD
35 District Zoning:
36
37 1. The application for PUD District zoning shall be accompanied by a sketch plan
38 prepared in accordance with the requirements as specified herein.
39
40 The sketch plan shall be to scale and contain sufficient information to establish
41 the identity of proposed uses in general terms (i.e. residential, retail, office, etc. –
42 the identity of specific tenants is not required), grades and approximate
43 dimensions, and locations of proposed structures, streets, parking areas,
44 walkways, easements and property lines. It shall include the following
45 information:
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE VIII
8-5
1
2 a. Proposed development layout.
3
4 b. Proposed reservations for parks, parkways, playgrounds, school sites and
5 other open spaces.
6
7 c. Proposed location of commercial and industrial uses within the PUD
8 areas, including all associated off-street parking.
9
10 d. Types of dwelling and portions of the area proposed therefore.
11
12 e. Proposed location of dwelling and parking areas.
13
14 f. A tabulation of the total number of acres in the proposed project and the
15 percentage thereof designated for each of the proposed dwelling types,
16 neighborhood retail businesses, other nonresidential uses, off-street
17 parking, streets, parks, schools, and other reservations, including a
18 tabulation of the gross square footage of all buildings by use.
19
20 g. A tabulation of overall residential density per gross residential acre.
21
22 h. Preliminary plans and elevations of the several dwelling types.
23
24 i. Conceptual plan of proposed vehicular, pedestrian and bicycle circulation
25 systems
26
27 2. Planning Commission Review and Action.
28
29 At this step in the review process, the Planning Commission’s review of the
30 proposed PUD shall be limited to a comparison to the Town’s Comprehensive
31 Plan. The Commission shall review the material submitted and following the
32 presentation from the applicant, shall forward a recommendation to the Mayor
33 and Town Council as to whether or not the proposed PUD complies with the
34 Comprehensive Plan. The Planning Commission’s transmittal to the Town
35 Council may include recommended changes to the PUD Sketch Plan or
36 recommended conditions of approval that the Commission deems necessary to
37 better insure compliance with the Comprehensive Plan.
38
39 3. Mayor and Town Council Action.
40
41 a. Upon receiving the written report of the Planning Commission, the Town
42 Council shall conduct a public hearing upon the application for a PUD
43 Map amendment. The Council shall consider, but not be bound by, the
44 recommendations and comments of the Planning Commission. The Town
45 Council shall make written findings of fact with regard to the following
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE VIII
8-6
1 matters:
2
3 1.Whether the proposed PUD development conforms to all
4 applicable standards set out in this Ordinance for such uses,
5 structures and projects;
6
7 2. Whether the proposed PUD development conforms to the Town's
8 Comprehensive Plan, including those provisions of the
9 Comprehensive Plan relating to the design and location of
10 commercial projects of a nature similar to those proposed in the
11 application;
12
13 3. Whether the proposed PUD development, in conjunction with
14 existing and reasonably anticipated development in the
15 neighborhood surrounding the site for the proposed PUD, will not
16 interfere with the adequate and orderly provision of public services
17 to the area;
18
19 4. Whether the proposed PUD development, in conjunction with
20 existing and reasonably anticipated development in the
21 neighborhood surrounding the site for the proposed PUD
22 development, will not cause unacceptable traffic congestion or
23 hazards either in or near the site for the proposed PUD
24 development or elsewhere in the Town or Talbot County;
25
26 5. Whether the proposed PUD development is planned in such a
27 manner as to protect features of historical, cultural, or ecological
28 importance;
29
30 6. Whether the proposed PUD development is compatible with
31 existing development in the surrounding neighborhood and with
32 development reasonably anticipated to occur in the neighborhood
33 in terms of size, scale, design, and appearance or, if the proposed
34 PUD development is not so compatible, the proposed PUD design
35 contains adequate screening, landscaping and similar features to
36 protect the surrounding neighborhood; and
37
38 7. Whether the proposed PUD development unreasonably adversely
39 affects the value of property in the neighborhood surrounding the
40 site
41
42 In making findings of fact as to the issues set forth above, there
43 shall be no general presumption that an application for a PUD use
44 at a particular location is valid, is compatible with surrounding
45 uses, inures to the general benefit of the Town or is in compliance
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE VIII
8-7
with the Town’s Comprehensive 1 Plan. Instead, each application
2 will be evaluated according to its specific development plan in its
3 particular location.
4
5 b. If the Town Council makes an affirmative finding of fact as to each of the
6 criteria listed above, the Council may enact an ordinance granting the
7 proposed PUD application. The fact that an application for a PUD Zoning
8 Map Amendment complies with the specific requirements listed above
9 shall not require the Town Council to grant the application. The ordinance
10 shall be subject to approval by the Mayor in accordance with the
11 provisions of the Town Charter relating to mayoral vetoes. In determining
12 whether or not to enact an ordinance, the Council may consider, in
13 addition to the factors outlined above, other factors it deems appropriate
14 including but not limited to the degree to which the proposed PUD
15 development:
16
17 1. helps accomplish the coordinated, adjusted, and harmonious
18 development of the Town and its environs in accordance with
19 present and future needs;
20
21 2. promotes health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity,
22 and general welfare; including among other things, adequate
23 provisions for traffic, the promotion of public safety, adequate
24 provision for light and air, conservation of natural resources, the
25 prevention of environmental pollution, the promotion of the
26 healthful and convenient distribution of population;
27
28 3. exemplifies good civic design and arrangement and the
29 stewardship of the Chesapeake Bay and the land as a universal
30 ethic;
31
32 4. encourages the conservation of resources, including a reduction in
33 resource consumption;
34
35 5. is located in at a location suitable for it given existing and
36 reasonably foreseeable development; and
37
38 6. encourages appropriate and sustainable economic growth.
39
40 The "change/mistake" rule, as codified in Maryland Annotated Code Article 66B Section
41 4.05 is not applicable to PUD Zoning Map Amendment applications.
42
43 The Town Council shall have the authority to impose conditions upon the grant of a PUD
44 Zoning Map Amendment application and may require the recordation of covenants and
45 restrictions, in a form approved by the Town Attorney, to assure compliance with said
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE VIII
8-8
1 conditions or with any of the provisions of the Ordinance.
2
3 Approved PUD applications shall require the execution of a Public Works Agreement
4 outlining the standards and responsibilities associated with the public works for the
5 proposed project. Such agreement shall be prepared in a format acceptable to the Town
6 Attorney.
7
8 If the Town Council votes to deny the PUD application, no application for a PUD Zoning
9 Map Amendment will be accepted for filing by the Town for a period of one year after
10 the date of the Council’s decision or the date of finality of any judicial review of the
11 Council’s decision, whichever is later.
12
13 I. AMENDMENTS TO APPROVED PUD APPLICATIONS
14
15 A property owner of a site subject to a PUD District may request an amendment to the
16 terms and conditions of the District. Any request for an amendment shall be in writing
17 and shall include the information specified in §28 – 801.G. If the Town Planner
18 determines that the proposed amendment (1) does not involve a material change to the
19 design approved by the Town Council and (2) otherwise complies with the terms of this
20 Ordinance, the amendment request shall be approved by the Town Planner. Any other
21 amendment shall be subject to review by the Planning Commission and Town Council
22 according to the procedures set forth in this §28 – 801.
23
24 Material changes shall include the following:
25 • proposed increases in residential density,
26 • proposed increase of non-residential floor area,
27 • changes of use that are determined to be more intense,
28 • elimination or substitution of an approved project amenity,
29 • any proposed change which alters a condition of the PUD approval,
30 • other changes of a similar scope or magnitude.
31
32 Non-material changes may include the following:
33 • Proposed substitution of species provided for landscaping (provided the new
34 species serves the same function the original species was intended to serve).
35 • Relocation of residential units provided there are no environmental, traffic, etc.,
36 impacts as a result of such action.
37 • Relocation of site infrastructure (e.g. utilities, stormwater management) provided
38 said relocation creates no adverse impact.
39 • Proposed change in architectural style or type from that which was indicated on
40 approved PUD plans (unless the PUD approval specifies a condition(s)
41 concerning such architectural style or feature, in which case such a revision would
42 constitute a material change).
43 • Other changes of a similar scope or magnitude.
44
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE VIII
8-9
If the Town Planner determines that a proposed 1 amendment is a non-material change,
2 he/she shall retain the right to have said amendment reviewed and approved/denied by
3 the Planning Commission.
4
5 All previously approved PMR (planned major retail) projects shall become PUDs and
6 amendments to such projects shall follow the process outlined above.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IX
9-1
1 ARTICLE IX
2 PLANNED HEALTHCARE DISTRICT
3
4 SECTION 28 – 901 PLANNED HEALTHCARE DISTRICT (“HC”)
5
6 A. PURPOSE
7
8 The purpose of the HC District is to provide for the planned and orderly development
9 of major medical-related uses. The HC District requires Planning Commission
10 approval of a detailed site plan to ensure compatibility with surrounding
11 neighborhoods.
12
13 The nature, size, scale or intensity of a proposed uses may cause a particular site not
14 to be suitable for a specific HC proposal. Therefore, there is no general presumption
15 that an application for such a use at a particular location is valid, inures to the general
16 benefit of the Town, is compatible with surrounding uses or is in compliance with the
17 Town’s Comprehensive Plan. Instead, each application will be evaluated according
18 to its particular location and the degree to which the developer is willing or able to
19 propose a development plan which ameliorates any adverse impacts and furthers the
20 goals and objectives of this Section and the Ordinance generally.
21
22 B. LOCATION
23
24 The HC District is a floating zone and may be established anywhere within the Town
25 limits provided the requirements of this subsection are satisfied
26
27 C. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
28
29 Residential Uses
30
31 1. Domiciliary Care
32
33 Commercial Uses
34
35 1. Health Care Facilities related to Hospital Operations
36
37 2. Medical office Park
38
39 Institutional Uses
40
41 1. Hospitals
42
43 2. Nursing Homes
44
45 3. Public Utilities
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IX
9-2
1
2 4. Retirement Communities
3
4 Recreational/Entertainment Uses
5
6 1. None
7
8 Industrial Uses
9
10 1. None
11
12 Miscellaneous
13
14 1. None
15
16 In addition, uses which are permitted in the underlying zoning district shall be
17 permitted in the HC District.
18
19 D. USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION
20
21 Uses which are permitted in the underlying zoning district by special exception shall
22 be permitted in a HC District provided that such uses are specifically authorized by
23 the ordinance establishing the HC District or, in the case of a pre-existing HC
24 District, such uses are approved by the Board of Appeals pursuant to the provisions of
25 Section 28 – 1303 of this Ordinance.
26
27 E. USES PERMITTED WITH A TEMPORARY USE PERMIT
28
29 None
30
31 F. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
32
33 In order to provide certain goods and services, the following uses and structures are
34 permitted only as an accessory use. These uses must clearly be incidental to one of
35 the permitted uses listed above and may in no circumstances be permitted in the
36 absence of such use(s).
37
38 Residential Uses
39
40 1. Single Family Dwellings, Detached
41
42 2. Multifamily Dwellings
43
44 3. Duplexes
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IX
9-3
1
2 Commercial Uses
3
4 1. Banks, (but not Brokers, and Other Financial Institution)
5
6 2. Convenience stores (subject to supplemental use standards; see section 28
7 – 1007)
8
9 3. Drug stores
10
11 4. Florist shops
12
13 5. Gift shops
14
15 6. Laundromats
16
17 7. Medical services including physicians offices, opticians, chiropractors,
18 clinics, medical laboratories, etc.
19
20 8. Newspaper/magazine shops
21
22 9. Restaurant, sit-down
23
24 10. Personal services such as shoe repairs, beauty parlors, etc.
25
26 Institutional Uses
27
28 1. Civic, service clubs and fraternal organizations
29
30 2. Community centers or civic centers
31
32 3. Fire, rescue or Police stations
33
34 4. Houses of Worship
35
36 5. Libraries
37
38 6. Studios for the teaching of art, music, dance, crafts, etc.
39
40 Recreational/Entertainment Uses
41
42 1. Parks and recreation areas
43
44 2. Theater, movie house, cinema – indoor
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IX
9-4
1 Industrial Uses
2
3 1. None
4
5 Miscellaneous Uses
6
7 1. Recycling collection stations
8
9 2. Off-street parking lot or structure
10
11 3. Off-street loading facility
12
13 4. Other accessory uses and structures clearly incidental and customary to
14 and associated with the permitted uses
15
16 G. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
17
18 The following minimum development standards shall be observed in the HC District:
19
20 1. The area proposed to be zoned as HC shall have an area of at least one (1)
21 acre.
22
23 2. The overall residential density for permitted accessory uses shall not exceed
24 eight (8) units per gross residential acre. Residential density for permitted
25 principal uses shall be approved by the Town Council based on
26 site/neighborhood compatibility.
27
28 3. Required parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 28 – 1001 of
29 this Ordinance.
30
31 4. For any HC development, Common Open Space shall comprise not less than
32 twenty (20%) percent of the total gross area. Such space shall include land
33 area to be developed as recreational areas or which is designated for the
34 common use of all occupants of the HC development but shall not include
35 streets, off-street parking areas, incidental landscaped areas within off-street
36 parking areas or utility easements. The Planning Commission must be
37 furnished satisfactory evidence that such open space will be continued and
38 that provision is made for its perpetual maintenance.
39
40 5. All lots hereafter established shall have a frontage on a public street or way of
41 at least one hundred (100) feet with a depth of at least one hundred (100) feet.
42
43 6. Minimum setbacks for all uses shall be as follows:
44
45 a. Front - fifty (50) feet from the property line.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IX
9-5
1
2 b. Side - fifteen (15) feet on each side of the property line (except for
3 fences).
4
5 c. Rear - twenty (20) feet from the property line (except for fences).
6
7 7. No principal permitted structure shall exceed fifty (50) feet in height, and no
8 accessory structure shall exceed forty (40) feet in height.
9
10 8. Lot coverage by all buildings and structures shall not exceed thirty-five (35%)
11 percent of the lot area.
12
13 9. Outdoor storage is prohibited.
14
15 10. All areas not devoted to buildings or parking areas shall be landscaped and
16 maintained in accordance with the provisions of Section 28 – 1014 of this
17 Ordinance.
18
19 11. The applicant shall comply with all applicable rules and regulations of the
20 State Department of Health and Mental Hygiene.
21
22 12. Primary structures shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from any
23 adjacent residentially zoned lot.
24
25 13. All parking areas shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any adjacent
26 residentially zoned lot.
27
28 14. The applicant shall make provisions to ensure safety in the area surrounding
29 the facility which may include additional traffic control devices (i.e. signal
30 lights, signs, pavement painting, etc.).
31
32 15. Sidewalks shall be constructed along any public right-of-way (except for
33 alleys) adjacent to the site along the entire frontage(s) of the property. To the
34 extent practicable, walkways shall be constructed on the site to tie building
35 entrances and/or pedestrian pathway systems into existing or proposed public
36 sidewalk systems. The Planning Commission may waive the requirement for
37 sidewalks on a given lot if they find that pedestrian circulation is adequately
38 addressed without them. In such circumstances the requirement shall not be
39 simply waived, but rather it may be satisfied by either the payment of a fee-in40
lieu of constructing the sidewalk (which shall be based on the Town of
41 Easton’s estimate of the cost of constructing a sidewalk on the site in
42 question) or the construction of a comparable length sidewalk on another site
43 (or a combination of the two options) and dedication of an acceptable
44 easement area for sidewalks for potential future construction of sidewalks on
45 the site.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IX
9-6
1
2 The standards outlined above may be modified by the Town Council upon the
3 applicant's showing that the standard would place an undue burden upon the
4 application and that compensation is provided by another means in the
5 application.
6
7 H. APPLICATION PROCEDURES
8
9 The following procedures shall be followed with respect to all applications for HC
10 District Zoning:
11
12 1. The application for HC District zoning shall be accompanied by a sketch plan
13 prepared in accordance with the provisions of Section 28 – 301 of this
14 Ordinance. The preliminary development plan shall be to scale and contain
15 sufficient information to establish the identity of proposed uses, grades and
16 approximate dimensions, and locations of proposed structures, streets, parking
17 areas, walkways, easements and property lines. It shall include the following
18 information:
19
20 a. Proposed development layout.
21
22 b. Proposed reservations for parks, parkways, and other open spaces.
23
24 c. Proposed location of all permitted and accessory uses within the HC
25 development areas, including all associated off-street parking.
26
27 d. Types of dwelling and portions of the area proposed therefore.
28
29 e. Proposed location of dwelling and parking areas.
30
31 f. A tabulation of the total number of acres in the proposed project and
32 the percentage thereof designated for each of the proposed dwelling
33 types, neighborhood retail businesses, other nonresidential uses, off34
street parking, streets, parks, schools, and other reservations.
35
36 g. A tabulation of overall density per gross acre (for projects with any
37 residential component).
38
39 h. Preliminary plans and elevations of the several dwelling types.
40
41 i. A metes and bounds description of the area subject to the HC
42 application.
43
44 2. The Planning Commission shall review the application and make a written
45 recommendation to the Town Council. If the Planning Commission concludes
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IX
9-7
that the proposed uses and their size, 1 scale and location are not consistent with
2 the Comprehensive Plan, the Commission shall make a negative
3 recommendation to the Town Council citing the specific reasons why the
4 application is inconsistent with the Plan.
5
6 If the Commission concludes that the proposal conforms to the
7 Comprehensive Plan or is subject to reasonable modifications which will
8 bring it into conformity with the Plan, the Commission may make
9 recommendations to the applicant regarding changes to the proposal
10 which, in the judgment of the Commission, shall cause the proposal to
11 better conform to the requirements of the Comprehensive Plan and the
12 design standards, goals and objectives of this Ordinance. The applicant
13 may resubmit the sketch plan in consideration of the Planning
14 Commission's comments.
15
16 If after three sketch plan submissions, the application has not received a
17 favorable recommendation from the Planning Commission, the
18 Commission shall make a negative recommendation to the Town Council
19 setting forth its reasons as to why the application should not be granted.
20
21 3. Mayor and Town Council Action
22
23 a. Upon receiving the written report of the Planning Commission, the
24 Town Council shall conduct a public hearing upon the application for
25 a HC Map amendment. The Council shall consider, but not be bound
26 by, the recommendations and comments of the Planning Commission.
27 The Town Council shall make written findings of fact with regard to
28 the following matters:
29
30 1. Whether the proposed HC development conforms to all
31 applicable standards set out in this Ordinance for such uses,
32 structures and projects;
33
34 2. Whether the proposed HC development conforms to the
35 Town's Comprehensive Plan, including those provisions of the
36 Comprehensive Plan relating to the design and location of
37 commercial projects of a nature similar to those proposed in the
38 application;
39
40 3. Whether the proposed HC development, in conjunction with
41 existing and reasonably anticipated development in the
42 neighborhood surrounding the site for the proposed HC, will
43 not interfere with the adequate and orderly provision of public
44 services to the area;
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IX
9-8
4. Whether 1 the proposed HC development, in conjunction with
2 existing and reasonably anticipated development in the
3 neighborhood surrounding the site for the proposed HC
4 development, will not cause unacceptable traffic congestion or
5 hazards either in or near the site for the proposed HC
6 development or elsewhere in the Town or Talbot County;
7
8 5. Whether the proposed HC development is planned in such a
9 manner as to protect features of historical, cultural, or
10 ecological importance;
11
12 6. Whether the proposed HC development is compatible with
13 existing development in the surrounding neighborhood and
14 with development reasonably anticipated to occur in the
15 neighborhood in terms of size, scale, design, and appearance
16 or, if the proposed HC development is not so compatible, the
17 proposed HC design contains adequate screening, landscaping
18 and similar features to protect the surrounding neighborhood;
19 and
20
21 7. Whether the proposed HC development unreasonably
22 adversely affects the value of property in the neighborhood
23 surrounding the site.
24
25 In making findings of fact as to the issues set forth above,
26 there shall be no general presumption that an application
27 for a HC use at a particular location is valid, inures to the
28 general benefit of the Town, is compatible with
29 surrounding uses, or is in compliance with the Town’s
30 Comprehensive Plan. Instead, each application will be
31 evaluated according to its specific development plan in its
32 particular location.
33
34 b. If the Town Council makes an affirmative finding of fact as to each of
35 the criteria listed above, the Council may enact an ordinance granting
36 the proposed HC application. The fact that an application for a HC
37 Zoning Map Amendment complies with the specific requirements
38 listed above shall not require the Town Council to grant the
39 application. The ordinance shall be subject to approval by the Mayor
40 in accordance with the provisions of the Town Charter relating to
41 mayoral vetoes. In determining whether or not to enact an ordinance,
42 the Council may consider, in addition to the factors outlined above,
43 other factors it deems appropriate including but not limited to the
44 degree to which the proposed HC development;
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IX
9-9
1. helps 1 accomplish the coordinated, adjusted, and harmonious
2 development of the Town and its environs in accordance with
3 present and future needs;
4
5 2. promotes health, safety, morals, order, convenience,
6 prosperity, and general welfare; including among other things,
7 adequate provisions for traffic, the promotion of public safety,
8 adequate provision for light and air, conservation of natural
9 resources, the prevention of environmental pollution, the
10 promotion of the healthful and convenient distribution of
11 population;
12
13 3. exemplifies good civic design and arrangement and the
14 stewardship of the Chesapeake Bay and the land as a universal
15 ethic;
16
17 4. encourages the conservation of resources, including a
18 reduction in resource consumption;
19
20 5. is located in at a location suitable for it given existing and
21 reasonably foreseeable development; and
22
23 6. encourages appropriate and sustainable economic growth.
24
25 The "change/mistake" rule, as codified in Maryland Annotated
26 Code Article 66B Section 4.05 is not applicable to HC Zoning Map
27 Amendment applications.
28
29 The Town Council shall have the authority to impose conditions
30 upon the grant of a HC Zoning Map Amendment application and
31 may require the recordation of covenants and restrictions, in a form
32 approved by the Town Attorney, to assure compliance with said
33 conditions or with any of the provisions of the Ordinance.
34
35 Approved HC Zoning Map Amendment applications shall require
36 the execution of a Public Works Agreement outlining the standards
37 and responsibilities associated with the public works for the
38 proposed project. Such agreement shall be prepared in a format
39 acceptable to the Town Attorney.
40
41 Town Council approval of HC projects shall expire after two (2)
42 years if the applicant does not obtain the necessary site plan and/or
43 subdivision approval, or if said approval itself expires. A property
44 owner of a site subject to an approved HC District project may
45 surrender such approval upon twenty (20) days written notice to
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE IX
9-10
the Town Planner. In such cases 1 the zoning of said property shall
2 revert to the Zoning it held prior to the HC Zoning Approval.
3
4 4. Site Plan Review and Action. Upon Mayor and Town Council approval of a
5 HC District Zoning Map amendment, the applicant shall prepare and submit a
6 development/preliminary and a final site/subdivision plan in accordance with
7 the site plan requirements specified in Subsection 28 – 301.3.B. of this
8 Ordinance and/or the requirements of the Town of Easton Subdivision
9 Regulations. The design of the preliminary and final site plan and/or
10 subdivision shall be consistent with the ordinance granting the HC
11 application.
12
13 I. AMMENDMENTS TO APPROVED HC APPLICATIONS
14
15 A property owner of a site subject to a HC District may request an amendment to the
16 terms and conditions of the District. Any request for an amendment shall be in
17 writing and shall include the information specified in §28 – 901.G. If the Town
18 Planner determines that the proposed amendment (1) does not involve a material
19 change to the design approved by the Town Council and (2) otherwise complies with
20 the terms of this Ordinance, the amendment request shall be approved by the Town
21 Planner. Any other amendment shall be subject to review by the Planning
22 Commission and Town Council according to the procedures set forth in this §28 –
23 901.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-1
1 ARTICLE X
2 SUPPLEMENTAL ZONE REGULATIONS
3
4 SECTION 28 – 1001 OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
5 28 – 1001.1 PURPOSE
6
7 To facilitate the movement of people and goods on the local street system, to lessen
8 congestion in the streets, to assure that streets are clear of obstructions and as a means of
9 protecting the lives and safety of motorists and pedestrians, the following off-street parking
10 standards are established. Standards hereinafter established govern the provision,
11 arrangement and access for parking lots or areas and individual parking spaces.
12 28 – 1001.2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
13
14 A. All land hereinafter used or occupied and all structures hereinafter designed or
15 enlarged, shall provide sufficient off-street parking spaces in accordance with this
16 Section.
17
18 B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to established parking districts and no
19 off-street parking space greater than which exists at the effective date of this
20 ordinance need be provided for existing uses or structures. However, if at any time
21 in the future the use of the property changes to one which requires greater off-street
22 parking space, the extra space shall be provided.
23
24 C. When a building or property is used for more than one use, the parking requirement
25 for each such use shall be separately applied on the basis of that area established
26 for each use.
27
28 D. All off-street parking spaces, other than for a single family or duplex dwelling,
29 which requires vehicles to back into a public road, street or highway are prohibited.
30
31 E. No parking area shall be used for the sale, repair, dismantling or servicing of any
32 vehicle or equipment or for the storage of materials or supplies.
33
34 F. All off-street parking facilities shall be constructed of dust-free materials, have a
35 surface resistant to erosion, drained so as to prevent damage to abutting properties
36 or public streets, and maintained properly by the owner.
37
38 G. Each automobile parking space shall be clearly marked appropriately to the
39 dimensions required for each space exclusive of the access drive.
40
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-2
H. There shall be provided entrances and exits 1 and driveway adequate to connect
2 parking areas with a public right-of-way.
3
4 I. Minimum dimensions for off-street parking and maneuvering space or driveways
5 shall correspond to Table 10.1.
6
7 J. No parking spaces except those proposed for single family or duplex residences
8 shall have direct access to a public way.
9
10 K. A driveway ten (10) feet wide and thirty-five (35) feet long shall be deemed
11 sufficient parking space, for single family or each unit in a duplex.
12
13 L. No part of any parking or maneuvering space shall be closer than ten (10) feet to
14 any street line, sidewalk or property line for commercial or industrial uses, or three
15 (3) feet for residential uses.
16
17 M. No off-street parking areas may be used for displays, exhibits or sales, except in
18 conjunction with any approved Temporary uses.
19 Table 10.1
Angle Minimum Stall Width
(W)
Minimum Stall Length
(L)
Minimum Aisle Width
(Maneuvering Space) (A)
90° 9 feet 18 feet ** 24 feet
60° 9 feet 18 feet ** 18 feet one-way
22 feet two-way
45° 9 feet 18 feet ** 16 feet one-way
22 feet two-way
30° 9 feet 18 feet ** 14 feet one-way
22 feet two-way
Parallel 8 feet 22 feet 16 feet one-way
22 feet two-way
20
21 ** - Vehicle Overhang: Up to two(2) feet of vehicle overhang into any planter area is allowed
22 provided the planter is a minimum of six feet wide, in this situation the minimum required depth
23 of the parking stall may be reduced by up to two 2 feet When utilizing this option, curbing shall be
24 utilized at the edge of the paved area, rather than wheel stops.
25
26 28 – 1001.3 PARKING REQUIREMENTS
27
28 A. Except under the provisions of subsections B and C below, all uses of land and
29 structures shall adhere to the following parking requirements:
30
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-3
1. Assembly hall, arena, or auditorium – 1 1 space per 3 seats of its rated capacity.
2
3 2. Auto sales or showroom – 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area. In
4 no case shall any of the dealers' inventory be parked in this minimum required
5 parking area.
6
7 3. Animal hospital – 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area.
8
9 4. Appliance stores – 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area.
10
11 5. Assisted Living Facilities shall satisfy the parking standard for Nursing Homes.
12
13 6. Automotive repair garage – 4 spaces per service bay or work area.
14
15 7. Bank – 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area plus 5 stacking spaces
16 per each drive-in stall.
17
18 8. Bars – 1 space per 50 square feet of gross floor area.
19
20 9. Boarding house – 1 space per sleeping room.
21
22 10. Bowling alley – 4 parking spaces for each lane.
23
24 11. Churches and other houses of worship – 1 space per 3 seats of the main seating
25 area, plus 1 space per 200 square feet of gross Sunday School area.
26
27 12. Civic Club – 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area.
28
29 13. Clubs, entertainment, night clubs – 1 space per 50 square feet of gross floor
30 area.
31
32 14. Clubs, private – 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area.
33
34 15. Domiciliary Care Facilities shall satisfy the parking standard for Nursing
35 Homes.
36
37 16. Equipment sales – 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area.
38
39 17. Furniture stores – 1 space per 500 square feet of gross floor area.
40
41 18. Funeral Homes – 1 space for each 3 seats of its rated capacity, but not less than
42 30 spaces.
43
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-4
19. Gasoline or service station – 4 spaces pe 1 r service bay or work area.
2
3 20. Golf Course – 4 spaces per hole plus 3 spaces per driving range, putting green,
4 or pitching/chipping green plus parking for any restaurant or bar as required
5 herein.
6
7 21. Healthcare Staff Housing and Healthcare Student Dormitories – 1 space per
8 resident, plus 1 space per employee on the largest shift, plus 1 space per guests
9 per eight (8) residents.
10
11 22. Hotels – 1.25 spaces per guest room plus required parking for accessory uses
12 contained on the premises as required herein.
13
14 23. Hospital – 1 space per 600 square feet of gross floor area.
15
16 24. Laboratory – 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area.
17
18 25. Laundromat – 1 parking space for each washing or dry-cleaning machine.
19
20 26. Library – 1 space per each 250 square feet of gross floor area.
21
22 27. Machinery sales or repairs – 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area.
23
24 28. Manufacturing facility – 1 space per 800 square feet of gross floor area.
25
26 29. Medical, Health or dental offices and clinics – 1 space per 250 square feet of
27 gross floor area.
28
29 30. Medical Laboratory – 1 space per 600 square feet of gross floor area.
30
31 31. Moving and storage – 1 space per 2,000 square feet of gross floor area plus
32 required spaces for any office area and 1 space for each vehicle used in the
33 business.
34
35 32. Motel – 1.25 spaces per guest room plus required parking for accessory uses
36 contained on the premises.
37
38 33. Motor vehicle sales – 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area.
39
40 34. Museums – 1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area.
41
42 35. Nursing Homes, Convalescent Home or Home for Aged – 1 space per every 2
43 beds plus 1 space for any facility vehicles, plus parking for any offices,
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-5
community 1 centers, etc., as required herein.
2
3 36. Office uses – 1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area.
4
5 37. Overnight Care Facilities shall satisfy the parking standard for Nursing Homes.
6
7 38. Patient Hostel – 1 space per guest room plus 1 space per employee of the largest
8 shift.
9
10 39. Residential Uses:
11
12 a. Dwelling, single-family – 2 spaces for each dwelling unit.
13
14 b. Dwelling, two-family or duplex – 2 spaces for each dwelling unit.
15
16 c. Dwelling, multi-family – efficiency or one bedroom, 1 space for each
17 dwelling unit; Two bedrooms or more - 2 spaces per dwelling unit.
18
19 d. Dwelling, townhouse – 2 spaces for each dwelling unit.
20
21 40. Retail sales – 1 space per each 250 square feet of gross floor area.
22
23 41. Retirement Community – 1 space per every 2.5 bedrooms plus 1 space for any
24 facility vehicles, plus parking for any offices, community centers, etc., as
25 required herein.
26
27 42. Restaurant:
28
29 a. Carry-out – 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space
30 per delivery vehicle.
31
32 b. Fast Food – 1 space per 50 square feet of gross floor area, plus 5 stacking
33 spaces per drive-thru window.
34
35 c. Sit Down – 1 space per 50 square feet of gross floor area.
36
37 43. Schools:
38
39 a. Elementary, Junior or Middle – 2 spaces per classroom plus any
40 requirements for auditoriums or gymnasiums, but not less than 1
41 parking space per teacher and staff.
42
43 b. Senior High, College – 2.5 spaces per classroom plus any requirements
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-6
for auditoriums, gymnasiums 1 or stadiums, but not less than 1 per teacher
2 and staff.
3
4 44. Shopping center – 1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area.
5
6 45. Special Medical Treatment Facility – 1 space per 400 square feet of gross floor
7 area.
8
9 46. Storage and warehouse – 1 space per 2,000 square feet of gross floor area plus
10 required spaces for any office area and 1 space for each vehicle used in the
11 business.
12
13 47. Taverns – 1 space per 50 square feet of gross floor area.
14
15 48. Terminal:
16
17 a. Freight – 1 space per 2,000 square feet of gross floor area plus required
18 spaces for any office area and 1 space for each vehicle used in the
19 business.
20
21 b. Passenger – 1 space per 100 square feet of gross floor area plus 3 lanes
22 for buses.
23
24 49. Theaters – 1 space per 3 seats of its rated capacity.
25
26 50. Tourist Information Center - 1 space per 100 square feet of gross floor area.
27
28 51. Wholesale – 1 space per 2,000 square feet of gross floor area plus required
29 spaces for any office area and 1 space for each vehicle used in the business.
30
31 B. For any use not specifically listed in subsection A above, the parking requirement will
32 be determined by the Town Planner.
33
34 C. The Town recognizes that, due to the peculiarities of any given development, the
35 inflexible application of the parking standards may result in a development either
36 with inadequate parking space or parking space far in excess of its needs. The former
37 situation may lead to traffic congestion or parking violations in adjacent streets as
38 well as unauthorized parking in nearby private lots. The latter situation wastes money
39 as well as space that could more desirably be used for valuable development or
40 environmentally useful open space. Therefore, the Town (through the Planning
41 Commission) may permit deviations from the presumptive requirements of
42 subsections A or B above and may require more or allow less parking as may be
43 deemed appropriate during the process of site plan review. In determining whether or
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-7
not it i 1 s appropriate to allow such deviations, the applicant shall have the burden of
2 supplying evidence that such a change is warranted. This evidence shall include the
3 applicant’s experience with the same use in other jurisdictions, alternate standards
4 (and an assessment of their adequacy) for the same use in other communities, or a
5 suggested standard by a Nationally recognized authority in parking (e.g. The Institute
6 of Transportation Engineers, the American Planning Association, etc.).
7
8 D. In situations where the total parking area should not be needed in the immediate
9 future, but may be in the longer-term, the Planning Commission may require that all
10 of the area be provided and reserved for parking, but may suspend or waive the
11 requirement that it actually be paved, until such time as the Town Planner determines
12 that it is necessary.
13
14 E. Whenever the Town Council shall have established municipally owned and
15 maintained off-street parking areas, and where certain uses may be required to pay an
16 additional tax for the support of publicly owned facilities provided by said tax; the
17 parking requirements of this Ordinance applying to those uses located within said
18 district shall not be required; provided, however, that said users pay either the full
19 special tax or a proportionate share thereof.
20
21 F. Parking lots shall always be generously planted with shade trees. Lots of 25 spaces or
22 more shall provide at least one tree per five (5) parking spaces. Stock should be no
23 less than 1.5" caliper (at breast height) and each tree should be provided with at least
24 forty (40) square feet of unpaved area around its trunk.
25
26 G. Parking areas for more than five (5) vehicles shall be effectively screened on each
27 side which adjoins or is faced by any "R" District, by an ornamental wall, fence, or
28 compact evergreen hedge. Such screen shall be not less than four (4) feet or more
29 than six (6) feet in height and shall be maintained in good condition without any
30 advertising thereon.
31
32 H. The location of parking spaces shall be approved by the Planning Commission during
33 the appropriate review process.
34
35 I. The visual impact of parking spaces shall be minimized through siting and
36 landscaping. In general, parking lots for commercial or industrial uses should, to the
37 extent feasible, be located in rear or side yards. Landscaping of parking lots should
38 be generous to provide shade for parked vehicles and a buffer between the lot and
39 adjacent uses.
40
41 J. The standards outlined in this subsection (28 – 1001.3) shall not apply to uses or
42 projects within the CR Zoning District. Properties within the CR Zoning District are
43 exempt from the off-street parking requirements.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-8
1
2 K. In such situations that warrant approval of excess spaces, property owners are
3 required to use pervious surfacing materials for all spaces over the ordinarily
4 permitted threshold unless they can demonstrate that the use of such paving surfaces
5 creates undue hardship and that the adverse impacts of additional impervious surfaces
6 can be mitigated.
7
8 L. The Town (through the Planning Commission) may permit deviations from the
9 minimum dimensions specified in Table 10.1 to allow reductions for Minimum Stall
10 Depth, Minimum Stall Length and Minimum Aisle Width if deemed appropriate during
11 the process of site plan review. In determining whether or not it is appropriate to
12 allow such deviations, the applicant shall have the burden of supplying evidence that
13 such a change is warranted. This evidence shall include the applicant’s experience
14 with the same use in other jurisdictions, alternate standards (and an assessment of
15 their adequacy) for the same use in other communities, or a suggested standard by a
16 Nationally recognized authority in parking (e.g. The Institute of Transportation
17 Engineers, the American Planning Association, etc.).
18
19 M. Parking spaces designed to abut other parking spaces in the front shall be separated
20 by a landscaping area. Such landscaping areas shall be a minimum of six (6) feet
21 wide and shall be planted with landscaping material. Such landscaping areas should
22 be designed to receive runoff from adjoining parking areas and utilize minimal
23 impediments to the sheet flow of water (such as precast wheel stops as opposed to
24 continuous standing curb). The application of bio-retention in these areas is strongly
25 encouraged.
26
27 28 – 1001.4 JOINT USE – OFF-SITE FACILITIES
28
29 A. All parking spaces required herein shall be located on the same lot with the building or
30 use served, except that where an increase in the number of spaces is required by a
31 change or enlargement of use or where such spaces are provided collectively or used
32 jointly by two (2) or more buildings or establishments, the required spaces may be
33 located and maintained on a lot within five hundred (500) feet of the building served.
34
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-9
B. Up to twenty-five (25%) percent of the 1 parking spaces required for (a) theaters, public
2 auditoriums, bowling alleys, dance halls, and night clubs, and up to one hundred
3 (100%) percent of the parking spaces required for a church auditorium may be provided
4 and used jointly by (b) banks, offices, retail stores, service establishments, and similar
5 uses not normally open, used, or operated during the same hours as those uses listed,
6 and up to fifty (50%) percent of parking spaces required for schools may be provided
7 and used jointly by a church auditorium; provided, however, that written agreement
8 thereto is properly executed and recorded as specified below.
9
10 C. In any case, where the required parking spaces are not located on the same lot with the
11 building or use served, or where such spaces are collectively or jointly provided and
12 used, such parking space shall be established by a recorded covenant or agreement as
13 parking space to be used in conjunction with the principal use and shall be reserved as
14 such through an encumbrance to be valid for the total period the use or uses for which
15 the parking is needed are in existence. A certificate or recording shall be furnished to
16 the Zoning Inspector.
17
18 28 – 1001.5 HANDICAP PARKING
19
20 Parking for physically handicapped persons shall be provided in accordance with the
21 standards prescribed by the Maryland Handicapped Accessibility Code.
22
23 SECTION 28 – 1002 OFF-STREET LOADING
24 28 – 1002.1 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
25
26 The following standards shall apply for off-street loading spaces:
27
28 A. In any zone in connection with every building or part thereof having a gross floor
29 area of four thousand (4,000) square feet or more, which is to be occupied by
30 manufacturing, storage, warehouse, goods display or sales, mortuary, or other uses
31 similarly requiring the receipt and distribution by vehicles of material or
32 merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the same lot with such
33 building or use at least one (1) off-street loading space plus one (1) additional such
34 loading space for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet of gross floor area or major
35 fraction thereof.
36
37 B. Each loading space shall be not less than ten (10) feet in width and forty-five (45)
38 feet in length, and shall have a minimum overhead clearance of fourteen (14) feet.
39
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-10
C. Such space may occupy all or any part of any 1 required yard or court, except a front
2 yard.
3
4 D. No such space shall be located closer than fifty (50) feet to any lot located in any
5 "R" District, unless wholly within a completely enclosed building or unless
6 enclosed on three sides by a wall of uniformly painted board fence or natural
7 plantings. The height of all screening shall be determined by the zoning inspector
8 but in no event, shall the screening be less than six (6) feet in height.
9
10 E. Loading spaces shall be so located and designed that the vehicles intended to use
11 them can maneuver safely and conveniently to and from a public right-of-way, and
12 complete the loading or unloading operations without obstructing or interfering
13 with any public right-of-way or any parking space or parking lot aisle.
14
15 F. No area allocated to loading and unloading facilities may be used to satisfy the area
16 requirements for off-street parking, nor shall any portion of any off-street parking
17 area be used to satisfy the area requirements for loading and unloading facilities.
18
19 SECTION 28 – 1003 STRUCTURES PERMITTED ABOVE HEIGHT LIMIT
20
21 The building height limitations of this Ordinance shall not apply to roof structures, whether
22 partially or totally enclosed or open, for housing stairways, elevators, heating, cooling and
23 ventilation equipment and fans, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment required to
24 operate and maintain the buildings; fire, or parapet, screening or sound attenuation walls
25 or panels, towers, steeples, grain tanks, silos, smoke stacks or vents, masts and antennas,
26 tanks, monuments, or other structures that project into the air. The provisions of this section
27 shall not apply to any structure or use within any airport clear zone.
28
29 SECTION 28 – 1004 FRONT YARD ADJUSTMENTS
30
31 The front yard required for a dwelling in any zone which permits residences may be
32 reduced in the case of a dwelling to be located between two (2) existing dwellings which
33 lack the required front yard and which are less than one hundred (100) feet apart. In such
34 a case the front yard depth shall be not less than that of the deeper adjoining lot.
35
36 SECTION 28 – 1005 CORNER LOT RESTRICTIONS
37
38 On corner lots, all sides of the lot which face a street must comply with the applicable front
39 setback.
40
41 SECTION 28 – 1006 OTHER EXCEPTIONS TO SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
42
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-11
The following features may project i 1 nto required setbacks as hereinafter set forth.
2
3 A. Beyond any required front setback, rear setback, or required side setback adjoining a
4 street side lot line, the following exceptions shall be permitted:
5
6 1. Cornices, canopies, eaves or other architectural features may project a distance
7 not exceeding three (3) feet.
8
9 2. Fire escapes may project a distance not exceeding five (5) feet.
10
11 3. An uncovered stair and necessary landings may project a distance not to exceed
12 six (6) feet; provided however that such stair and landing shall not extend above
13 the entrance floor of the building except for a railing not to exceed three (3) feet
14 in height.
15
16 4. Bay windows, balconies, and chimneys may project a distance not to exceed
17 three (3) feet; provided that such features do not occupy, in the aggregate, more
18 than one third (1/3) of the length of the wall on which they are located.
19
20 B. Subject to the conditions specified above, the above-named features may project
21 beyond any required side setback adjoining an interior side lot line a distance not to
22 exceed one-fifth (1/5) of the required width of such side setback, but not to exceed three
23 (3) feet in any case.
24
25 C. Where otherwise permitted, filling station pumps and pump islands may occupy the
26 front yards, provided, however, that pumps and pump islands shall not be less than
27 thirty (30) feet from front property line. The top of any canopy shall not be less than
28 fifteen (15) feet from the front property line.
29
30 D. Fences, Walls, and Hedges may be located in the established yards as follows:
31
32 1. Fences, walls, and hedges, not exceeding at any point four (4) feet in height
33 above the elevation of the surface of the ground, may be located in any front
34 yard or court, but not beyond the front property line. For fences erected in an
35 Industrial Zoning District (BC, I, I-1, or I-2), the maximum height shall be six
36 (6) feet.
37
38 2. Fences, walls, and hedges not exceeding at any point eight (8) feet in height
39 above the elevation of the surface of the ground, may be located in any rear
40 yard or side yard area.
41
42 3. For through lots, fences, walls, and hedges, not exceeding at any point eight (8)
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-12
feet in height above the elevation of the surface 1 of the ground, may be located
2 in the non-access front yard, but not beyond the front property line.
3
4 4. In the I-1, I-2, I, or BC Zoning Districts, barbed wire may be affixed to the top
5 of an otherwise legal fence without respect to the height limitations applicable
6 thereto.
7
8 5. A non-solid feature (e.g. lattice) not exceeding an additional two (2) feet in
9 height may be added to the top of any otherwise legal fence.
10
11 E. Handicapped ramps as required by the State Handicapped Code requirements.
12
13 F. Decks may project beyond the required rear setback no more than ten (10) feet.
14
15 G. Screened porches which violate the prescribed setbacks because it is legally
16 grandfathered or which received a Variance from the Board of Zoning Appeals, may
17 be converted to enclosed living space.
18
19 SECTION 28 – 1007 SUPPLMENTAL USE STANDARDS
20
21 Certain uses may be permitted in the various zoning districts subject to specific
22 development and/or performance standards as specified by this Ordinance and as
23 determined by the Planner, the Town Engineer, the Board of Zoning Appeals, the Planning
24 Commission, and/or the Town Council. In instances where a standard references Planning
25 Commission approval, but where Planning Commission review is not otherwise required,
26 said approval authority shall be deemed to be vested in the Town Planner. Supplemental
27 standards apply to traditional or planned developments. However, in planned
28 developments, the Town Council may approve alternate methods of complying with any
29 of these supplemental standards during the appropriate review process. These standards
30 include:
31 28 – 1007.1 RESIDENTIAL USES
32
33 A. Specific residential uses listed below shall be subject to the following:
34
35 1. Agriculture
36
37 a. All accessory structures, and pens for the raising of poultry or
38 livestock (except pastures) shall be located at least two hundred
39 (200) feet from any lot line.
40
41 2. Bed and Breakfast
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-13
1
2 a. No structure shall be used as a Bed and Breakfast establishment
3 unless it is either located within an Historic District, or is one of the
4 residential structures identified by the Easton Historic District
5 Commission as being of architectural or historical significance in
6 the Town of Easton.
7
8 b. Any structure used as a Bed and Breakfast operation must meet all
9 applicable fire, safety and health codes and regulations.
10
11 c. Each Bed and Breakfast establishment must provide two (2) parking
12 spaces plus one (1) additional space for each room which may be
13 provided. The parking spaces are to be located on the property in
14 such a manner as to minimize any adverse impact upon the
15 appearance of the property and to minimize the destruction of shrubs
16 and trees readily visible from a public way. In granting a Special
17 Exception for a Bed and Breakfast establishment, the Board of
18 Appeals shall specify appropriate buffers to separate parking areas
19 from adjoining residential properties.
20
21 d. The structure in which the Bed and Breakfast operation takes place
22 shall be the principal residence of the owner of the property, or an
23 outbuilding located on the same property provided said outbuilding
24 satisfies all Building, Fire, and Safety Codes and Regulations for use
25 in this manner.
26
27 e. Meals for guests shall be limited to breakfast provided in an area of
28 the dwelling generally utilized by the resident family for the
29 consumption of food.
30
31 f. No person shall be a guest in a bed and breakfast operation for more
32 than 15 consecutive nights.
33
34 3. Day Care Facility, Family
35
36 a. Applicant shall meet the requirements of the Office of Child Care
37 Licensing and Regulation in the Department of Human Resources
38 of the State of Maryland, or its successor agency for Family Day
39 Care.
40
41 b. A Family Day Care Home shall not have more day care children
42 than the number which appears on the certificate of registration
43 issued by the Office of Child Day Care Licensing and Regulation to
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-14
such Family Day Care 1 Home and Family Day Care Provider.
2
3 c. At any one time, a Family Day Care Home shall have no more than
4 eight (8) children, including no more than two (2) children under the
5 age of two (2) years.
6
7 d. Children visiting the Family Day Care Home for whom payment is
8 not received shall count towards the eight (8) Children permitted
9 under paragraph C above only if all of the following conditions are
10 met:
11
12 1. The child is less than six (6) years old;
13
14 2. The child visits the Family Day Care Home unaccompanied
15 by an adult on a regular basis; and
16
17 3. The child cannot be sent home immediately.
18
19 e. The Planning Commission may prescribe specific conditions
20 determined necessary to minimize effects of use on neighboring
21 properties given identification of concerns specific to a particular
22 site.
23
24 f. The applicant shall have one hundred (100) square feet of usable
25 outdoor recreation area for each child that may use this space at any
26 time. Such usable outdoor recreation area shall be identified on the
27 site plan and shall be sufficiently buffered from adjacent residential
28 areas. Usable outdoor recreation areas shall be limited to the side
29 and rear yard of the property.
30
31 g. The family day care provider shall comply with Article 88A of the
32 Annotated Code of Maryland and the State Department of Human
33 Resources regarding group day care centers.
34
35 h. All such uses shall be located so as to permit the safe pickup and
36 delivery of all persons on this site.
37
38 i. This use shall be treated as an outright permitted use unless either of
39 the following circumstances occurs:
40
41 1. A Public Hearing is requested within seven (7) days of the
42 posting of the property and the placement of an
43 advertisement concerning the application in a newspaper of
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-15
1 general circulation in the Town of Easton; or
2
3 2. The Town planner recommends denial of the application.
4
5 In the event that either 1 or 2 above occurs, the application shall be treated
6 as a Special Exception and shall proceed in accordance with the standards
7 applying thereto as specified in Article XIII, Section 28 – 1303.5.B.
8
9 4. Granny Flat
10
11 a. Applicant shall have or obtain a Town of Easton Rental Housing
12 License for the rental unit.
13
14 b. One additional off-street parking space shall be provided for the
15 granny flat.
16
17 c. No more than one granny flat may be created on any one lot under
18 the terms of these provisions.
19
20 d. The principal residence associated with the application for a granny
21 flat must be occupied by the owner of the property.
22
23 5. Homeless Shelter
24
25 a. Homeless shelters shall be supervised by individuals with
26 appropriate training covering such topics as First Aid, Emergency
27 procedures, etc.
28
29 b. The proposed homeless shelter must comply with all applicable
30 building, fire and safety and health codes and regulations.
31
32 c. Residents of the homeless shelter may be referred to the facility by
33 the Talbot County Department of Social Services or local law
34 enforcement officials, or other local service agencies.
35
36 6. Home Occupations
37
38 a. The applicant shall demonstrate that the occupation will be
39 conducted within the dwelling or accessory building and is clearly
40 secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes. There
41 shall be no external evidence of business activity including
42 inordinate vehicular traffic, outside storage, noise, dust, fumes, or
43 other nuisances emitting from the premises. No more than one
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-16
ordinary vehicle 1 per permitted home occupation, which contain a
2 sign or logo, may be maintained on the premises, provided said
3 vehicle is used in the daily operation of the business. Not permitted,
4 however, are vehicles other than those customarily found in a
5 residential neighborhood (i.e. cars, pick-ups, mini-vans, Sport
6 Utility Vehicles).
7
8 b. All employees shall be residents except that one full-time non9
resident employee may be on the premises if approved by the Board
10 of Zoning Appeals.
11
12 c. No outside storage of equipment, materials or items to be repaired
13 shall be permitted.
14
15 d. No article or commodity shall be offered for sale or publicly
16 displayed on the premises except those incidental to services
17 offered.
18
19 e. No off-street parking shall be required other than that necessary for
20 the permitted residential use.
21
22 f. The applicant shall provide an impact statement indicating the
23 nature of the business to be conducted in the office, the maximum
24 number of persons expected on the premises at any one time, and
25 the expected traffic generation caused by the use.
26
27 g. Residential appearance shall be maintained and the proposed
28 development shall be in keeping with the character of the
29 neighborhood.
30
31 h. Illumination of the site will be at a minimum to achieve safety
32 requirements and shall be shielded from neighboring properties.
33
34 i. No more than twenty-five (25%) percent of the floor area of the
35 dwelling including an attached garage may be utilized for the home
36 occupation and not more than five (5%) percent may be used for
37 storage of stock in trade.
38
39 j. The applicant shall be entitled to one (1) non-illuminated sign
40 identifying the home occupation. Such sign shall be attached to the
41 building and shall be no greater in size than two (2) square feet.
42
43 7. Kennel
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-17
a. Kennels shall meet the side 1 setback requirement and shall be setback
2 a minimum of eight feet from the rear property line. They shall not
3 be located in any front yard.
4
5 b. Situations involving nuisance animals are regulated by the Easton
6 Town Code and are enforced by the Talbot County Humane Society.
7
8 8. Short-Term Housing
9
10 a. Short-term housing shall comply with the requirements for Rental
11 Housing units as specified in Chapter 14 of the Town Code.
12
13 9. Manufactured Home Parks or Subdivisions
14
15 a. All manufactured home parks or subdivisions must be developed in
16 accordance with the Town of Easton Subdivision Regulations and
17 shall require Planning Commission review and approval.
18
19 b. At least ten (10%) percent of the gross development area shall be
20 reserved as common open space.
21
22 c. The minimum total area required for a manufactured home park or
23 subdivision shall be ten (10) acres.
24
25 d. The minimum site area for each manufactured home within the park
26 or subdivision shall be 5,000 square feet and each individual home
27 site shall be defined by landscape plantings and/or low-level
28 decorative fencing.
29
30 e. There shall be a minimum setback from any structure to any adjacent
31 public street or road of fifty (50) feet.
32
33 f. All interior access drives shall be privately owned and maintained
34 by the owner/operator of the subdivision or park. Access drives
35 shall be at least twenty (20) feet wide, shall be paved, and shall be
36 approved by the Town Engineer.
37
38 g. All structures within the subdivision or park shall be set back at least
39 twenty-five (25) feet from the side lines of any internal access
40 drives.
41
42 h. No manufactured home within the subdivision or park shall be
43 directly provided access onto a public street or road.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-18
1
2 i. A manufactured home subdivision or park shall be enclosed on all
3 sides with a permanently maintained natural or artificial
4 barrier/buffer in accordance with the provisions of Section 28 –
5 1014 of this Ordinance.
6
7 j. All access roads, parking areas and walkways within the subdivision
8 or park shall be illuminated at night. Illumination in the subdivision
9 or park shall not cast any glare beyond the perimeter of the
10 subdivision or park.
11
12 k. Every manufactured home within the park or subdivision shall be
13 certified as meeting the current National Manufactured Housing
14 Construction and Safety Standards
15
16 l. Every manufactured home shall have a gross floor area of at least
17 600 square feet.
18
19 m. No manufactured home may be used exclusively for storage
20 purposes.
21
22 n. Every manufactured home shall have a canopied or covered
23 entranceway/porch at least sixty-four square feet in size. This
24 standard may be waived or modified by the Planning Commission
25 if it finds that the standardized design of the unit already
26 incorporates a covered porch or entryway.
27
28 o. One (1) utility building is permitted for each manufactured home.
29 Such building shall be located on the individual manufactured home
30 site, and shall not exceed exterior dimensions of twelve (12) feet by
31 twelve (12) feet and shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height.
32
33 p. Every manufactured home, together with all enclosed extensions or
34 structural additions shall be installed upon an approved anchor tie35
down system and shall be securely anchored thereto so as to prevent
36 the home from shifting or overturning. The undercarriage of every
37 manufactured home shall be suitably hidden by some form of
38 opaque skirting.
39
40 q. A manufactured home subdivision shall comply with all
41 requirements of the Easton Subdivision Regulations.
42
43 10. Multi-Family Dwellings
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-19
1
2 a. Multi-family dwelling shall be constructed in accordance with an
3 approved Site Plan prepared under the provisions of Section 28 –
4 301 of this Ordinance.
5
6 b. At least twenty-five (25%) percent of the gross development area
7 shall be reserved as common open space.
8
9 c. The setback requirements for multi-family dwellings shall be
10 determined by the development standards for the zoning district in
11 which the project is located except as hereby modified:
12
13 1. When more than one (1) multi-family building is
14 constructed, the buildings shall collectively adhere to the
15 front setback requirements of the district in which they are
16 located, plus five (5) feet per story over two (2) stories, or
17 portion thereof.
18
19 2. When more than one (1) multi-family building is built, no
20 building shall be closer than twenty-five (25) feet from any
21 other multi-family building.
22
23 3. No multi-family structure shall be constructed at a distance
24 of less than twenty (20) feet from any adjoining property
25 lines; except for multi-family structures constructed in the
26 CR district, wherein the development standards for that
27 district shall apply.
28
29 d. When more than one multi-family building is constructed, external
30 walkways shall be paved and lighted.
31
32 e. In the event that swimming facilities are designed as a part of the
33 project, these facilities shall be enclosed by a fence not less than six
34 (6) feet high.
35
36 f. All areas not utilized for building or off-street parking shall be
37 landscaped and maintained in accordance with Section 28 – 1014 of
38 this Ordinance.
39
40 g. All buildings within the multi-family project shall be of compatible
41 architectural design.
42
43 h. The minimum dimension, width or depth, of all living units shall be
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-20
1 eighteen (18) feet.
2
3 i. In the R-7A, R-10A, and R-10M districts, no more than three (3)
4 units may be constructed with the same front setback and no more
5 than six (6) units may be constructed in one building at first floor
6 level. In the CR district, no more than nine (9) units may be
7 constructed in one building at first floor level and no more than three
8 (3) units may be constructed with the same front setback.
9
10 j. The facades of units shall be varied by changed front yards of not
11 less than five feet. Architecture shall be compatible among the units
12 within the development and harmonious with the existing
13 architecture of the Town of Easton.
14
15 k. Public water and sewerage systems must be available to serve the
16 project.
17
18 l. The maximum permitted density shall be as follows:
19
20 1. In R-7A and CR Districts - 8 dwelling units per acre.
21
22 2. In R-10A and R-10M Districts - 5 dwelling units per acre.
23
24 m. Side yard setback requirements for multi-family units
25 (condominiums, townhouses, and apartments) adjacent to a single
26 family detached residence or vacant residential lot shall be fifty (50).
27 Parking setback is also fifty (50) feet.
28
29 n. Rear yard setback requirements for multi-family units
30 (condominiums, townhouses, and apartments) adjacent to a single
31 family residence or vacant residential lot shall be seventy-five (75)
32 feet. The setback for parking areas is also seventy-five (75) feet.
33
34 11. Two-Family or Duplex Units
35
36 a. Minimum lot area standards of the applicable zoning district shall
37 be increased by fifty (50%) percent for two-family or duplex
38 dwellings.
39
40 12. Garage or Yard Sales
41
42 a. In any district which permits yard or garage sales, each lot shall be
43 allowed to conduct no more than three (3) yard or garage sales
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-21
events in any one (1) calendar year. 1 A yard or garage sales event
2 shall have a maximum duration of one (1) day. Each consecutive
3 day that a yard or garage sale extends shall constitute a separate
4 event.
5
6 b. Signs shall be permitted under the provisions governing Temporary
7 signs.
8
9 13. Single-Family Detached Dwelling Units
10
11 a. Similarity Restricted
12
13 No building permit shall be issued for any new single-family
14 dwelling unit, which is similar in appearance to any dwelling unit
15 near the proposed building, as further defined below.
16
17 b. Exemptions
18
19 The following dwelling units or projects shall be exempt from the
20 provisions of this Section:
21
22 1. Dwellings for which a building permit was approved before the
23 effective date of these Regulations, including dwellings that are
24 being remodeled, reconstructed, or replaced after damage by
25 fire, flood, or other casualty.
26
27 2. Subdivisions already in progress, and developing under the
28 provisions of Section 28 – 106 (applicability).
29
30 3. Multi-family projects, including apartments.
31
32 4. Planned Unit Development or Planned Redevelopment Projects
33 in which similarity of architectural form and style among
34 dwelling units is clearly indicated in the Plans for such projects
35 and such similarity is determined by the approving body to be
36 integral to the success of a unified plan.
37
38 c. Calculations of Differences in Appearance
39
40 1. Differences in bulk and massing shall be reviewed for two
41 lots on either side of the proposed unit on the same side of
42 the street.
43
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-22
2. Where lots are interrupted 1 by an intervening street, parkland
2 or similar feature of at least 50 feet in width, no review shall
3 be necessary.
4
5 3. The proposed unit shall be considered different from any
6 vacant lot for which no building permit has been issued
7 without requiring further documentation.
8
9 d. Differentiation
10
11 The proposed unit shall differ from each other house in at least two
12 of the five criteria listed below, unless the units differ with respect
13 to the number of full stories (#2) then only #2 is required.
14
15 1. The unit is a different housing type.
16
17 a. Single-family detached;
18
19 b. Zero lot line (where allowed);
20
21 c. Single-family attached; or
22
23 d. Single-family detached rotated 90 degrees (i.e. the
24 narrower façade fronts the street as opposed to the wider
25 façade).
26
27 2. The unit differs in the number of full stories.
28
29 3. The unit is served by a different type of garage.
30
31 a. Front-load garage;
32
33 b. Side-load garage;
34
35 c. Rear-load garage;
36
37 d. Detached garage;
38
39 e. Carport; or
40
41 f. No Garage.
42
43 4. The unit has a different roof type
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-23
1
2 a. Gable
3
4 b. Hip;
5
6 c. Gambrel
7
8 d. Mansard;
9
10 e. Roof types a through d rotated 90 degrees; or
11
12 f. Flat.
13
14
15 Figure 10.1 Sample Roof Types
16
17 5. The unit has variation in the articulation of the front façade.
18
19 a. Garage setback from the front façade of at least four (4)
20 feet;
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-24
1
2 b. Covered, open walled porch of at least six (6) feet in
3 depth extending at least 33 percent of the width of the
4 front façade; or
5
6 c. Other articulation of the front façade at least four (4) feet
7 in depth, extending at least 33 percent of the width of the
8 front façade.
9
10 6. Although not required, differentiation in color between adjacent
11 homes is strongly encouraged.
12
13 e. Permit Review
14
15 1. Acceptable documentation may include photographs of
16 the other structures in question (no building elevations
17 are required).
18
19 2. A subdivision or phase thereof may be reviewed as a
20 whole for conformity with this requirement, provided
21 that adequate documentation to ensure conformity is
22 submitted with the plat. Such documentation is not
23 required to be recorded as part of the plat.
24
25 14. Swimming Pool
26
27 a. Swimming pools may be located outside the building envelope;
28 however, they may not be constructed in any front yard.
29
30 b. Swimming pools and any supporting braces or decks must be
31 setback a minimum of eight feet from any property line or may
32 adhere to the minimum setback of the district, whichever is lesser.
33
34 c. Swimming pools, together with garages or sheds, (if present), may
35 occupy no more than 50% of the rear yard area.
36
37
38 15. Waterfront development
39
40 a. Except where otherwise specifically stated in this Ordinance, the
41 following conditions shall control the use and development of land
42 abutting upon a man-made or natural waterway:
43
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-25
1. Only land situated and 1 lying above the mean high waterline
2 should be considered when determining the area of a lot or
3 the permitted density of uses or structures upon said lot:
4
5 2. The required front setback and yard for a principal structure
6 shall be measured from the mean high waterline except
7 where said principal structure is a pier, wharf, landing or
8 boathouse.
9
10 28 – 1007.2 COMMERCIAL USES
11
12 A. Specific Commercial uses listed below shall be subject to the following:
13
14 1. Adult-Oriented Business
15
16 a. Viewing booths and Live Viewing Booths are prohibited in all
17 zoning districts.
18
19 b. In addition to any buffer, buffer yard, setback, or other design
20 criteria generally applicable to permitted uses in the Select
21 Industrial (I-1) Zoning District, an Adult-Oriented Business
22 must meet the following setback criteria:
23
24 i. The closest portion of a building or structure in which an
25 Adult Oriented Business is located shall not be within
26 1,000 feet of the boundary of any parcel of land that is
27 zoned residentially or Regional Healthcare (RH).
28
29 ii. The closest portion of a building or structure in which an
30 Adult Oriented Business is located shall not be within
31 500 feet from the boundary of any parcel of land
32 containing a school, house of worship, park or recreation
33 facility, day care center – small group, day care center –
34 group, or day care facility – family.
35
36 iii. For the purposes of this Section, measurement shall be
37 made in a straight line, without regard to intervening
38 structures or objects.
39
40 iv. A lawfully operating Adult Oriented Business shall not
41 be rendered a non-conforming use by the location,
42 subsequent to the grant or renewal of an Adult Oriented
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-26
Business license 1 pursuant to Easton Town Code § 30-14,
2 of a residential zoning district, school, house of worship,
3 park or recreation facility, day care center – small group,
4 day care center – group, or day care facility – family
5 within buffer distances provided for above.
6
7 c. An Adult Oriented Business shall provide or cause to be
8 provided for all exterior areas, including but not limited to,
9 parking lots or areas, loading docks, and sidewalks sufficient
10 lighting to illuminate the exterior areas of the business to an
11 illumination level of not less than two foot-candles and shall be
12 equipped with video surveillance cameras that monitor the
13 exterior portions of the premises from a management station
14 located within the business.
15
16 d. An Adult Oriented Business may not erect a fence, wall, or
17 other barrier that prevents any portion of the parking lot(s) for
18 the establishment from being visible from a public right of way.
19
20 e. An Adult Oriented Business must post appropriate signage
21 prohibiting parking at the premises for persons other than
22 patrons of the business and prohibiting the use of the exterior of
23 the premises for other than ingress, egress, parking and solid
24 waste deposit/processing for bona fide employees and patrons of
25 the business.
26
27 f. In the case of Adult Oriented Businesses other than an adult
28 book or video store, and to the extent not regulated under Article
29 2B of the Annotated Code of Maryland (or successor provisions
30 thereof), shall be constructed and maintained in such manner
31 that the conduct, promotion, delivery, provision, or performance
32 of adult entertainment or material is not visible in any way or
33 manner, or to any degree, from outside the building.
34
35 g. No Adult Oriented Business may be conducted on the same
36 parcel as, in the same building as, or in conjunction with any
37 hotel, motel, bed and breakfast inn, boarding house, or in any
38 structure or portion thereof not generally open to the public and
39 freely accessible to patrons at all time.
40
41 h. An Adult Oriented Business shall not have displayed on or
42 about the exterior of any building in, or premises on, which an
43 Adult Oriented Business is located, any sign, advertisement, or
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-27
depiction visible to 1 the general public, wherever located,
2 containing any adult oriented entertainment or material.
3
4 2. Animal Hospital/Veterinary Clinics or Services
5
6 a. Disposal of waste shall be through approved, safe means and
7 shall be separate from regular trash disposal.
8
9 3. Automobile Sales or Showrooms
10
11 a. All sales and installation facilities operations shall be conducted
12 within a wholly enclosed building. Outdoor display of motor
13 vehicles for sale shall be permitted if areas for this purpose are
14 integrated into the overall site design and are compatible with
15 the adjacent and neighboring properties. Applicant shall submit
16 a plan indicating outdoor storage areas and screening of such
17 areas. The Planning Commission may require additional
18 landscape treatment to address this requirement. Neighboring
19 properties shall be protected from site illumination, noise, and
20 odor.
21
22 b. Display for sale or rental purposes of motor vehicles, trailers,
23 boats, camping trailers, or other vehicles may be permitted
24 provided that the lot on which the vehicles are parked is
25 adequately screened from all neighboring residentially zoned
26 land or land proposed for residential purposes by the
27 Comprehensive Plan. In addition to buffering and landscaping
28 requirements, a sightly, solid wall or fence at least three (3) feet
29 in height shall be located along all property lines adjoining
30 residentially zoned land, such wall shall contain no advertising
31 and shall be maintained in good condition.
32
33 c. The area of the lot devoted to buildings and vehicle display or
34 storage shall include no more than seventy-five (75%) percent
35 of the total lot area, exclusive of flood plains, steep slopes, or
36 other environmentally sensitive areas.
37
38 d. The number and type of vehicles permitted on the lot shall be
39 determined on a case-by-case basis taking into account factors
40 such as the gross weight of the vehicle, vehicle size, nature of
41 the vehicle (commercial, industrial, passenger, or other) impacts
42 on adjoining properties and traffic implications of the facility.
43
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-28
e. The applicant 1 shall design buildings to complement and
2 contribute to desirable community character in terms of shape
3 and style, roof lines, color, and materials.
4
5 f. The applicant shall site new buildings to ensure that adjacent
6 properties have visual privacy and sunlight as well as protection
7 from new developments, site illumination, noise, and odor.
8
9 g. The applicant shall design and site buildings to screen from
10 public view unsightly site elements such as shipping and loading
11 areas, car storage areas, dumpsters, etc.
12
13 h. The applicant shall protect pedestrian areas from vehicular
14 intrusion with landscaping and curbs that are integrated into the
15 overall streetscape.
16
17 i. The applicant shall identify a safe, identifiable driving lane
18 within the parking lot.
19
20 j. The applicant shall use landscaping islands, curbs, and signs to
21 clearly distinguish the parking from loading and delivery and
22 driving lanes.
23
24 k. The applicant shall provide adequate space on site for service
25 and delivery vehicles.
26
27 l. The applicant shall provide turning areas in order to avoid dead28
end parking situations.
29
30 4. Automotive Repair Garage and Gasoline/Service Station
31
32 a. Bulk storage of flammable liquids shall be underground and
33 shall be subject to setback requirements.
34
35 b. The entrance or exit at such establishment shall be at least fifty
36 (50) feet from any lot zoned residential.
37
38 c. There shall be no open storage or accumulation of junk or scrap.
39
40 d. No structure or building shall be erected within thirty (30) feet
41 of any dwelling.
42
43 e. The applicant shall design and site buildings to screen from
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-29
public view unsightly 1 site elements such as shipping and loading
2 areas, car storage areas, dumpsters, etc.
3
4 f. No vehicular entrance or exit to such a facility shall be located
5 within one-hundred (100) feet of any intersection.
6
7 g. Any facility which repairs or services automobiles shall provide
8 an area for the long-term storage of vehicles. The area to be
9 provided shall be at least 800 square feet for each service area or
10 bay in the facility. Such an area shall be for the storage of
11 vehicles only and therefore shall not be subject to any of the
12 dimensional requirements for parking areas.
13
14 h. The maximum fence height in front yards may be exceeded for
15 this use if necessary to better screen or secure vehicles placed in
16 the long-term storage area associated with the use. In such
17 instances, the maximum permitted height shall be six (6) feet.
18
19 5. Bistro
20
21 a. Light food service shall be made available during all times
22 when wine and/or beer is served for consumption on premises.
23
24 6. Brew Pub
25
26 a. Any brew pub which is permitted to have off-premise alcohol
27 sales shall meet the minimum spacing requirements of liquor
28 stores (Section 28 – 1007.2. A. (14)).
29
30 7. Catering
31
32 a. No consumption of food or beverages shall be permitted on the
33 site of the catering business when said business is located within
34 an I-1 zoning district.
35
36 8. Christmas Tree Sales
37
38 a. Sales of Christmas Trees shall be permitted only between the
39 dates of November 15 and December 26.
40
41 b. Storage or display of the trees shall not obstruct any
42 handicapped parking spaces, traffic signs, or site lines at
43 entrances or exits.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-30
1
2 c. This use is only permitted on a temporary basis and shall be
3 totally removed and the site returned to exact previous
4 appearance by December 31.
5
6 9. Commercial Kennel
7
8 a. Any buildings or runs associated with the kennel shall be
9 setback a minimum of 200 feet from any property line and shall
10 be screened from view from adjacent parcels.
11
12 10. Convenience Stores
13
14 a. The applicant shall design and site buildings to screen from
15 public view unsightly site elements such as shipping and loading
16 areas, dumpsters, etc.
17
18 b. The applicant shall provide adequate space on site for service
19 and delivery vehicles.
20
21 c. No entrance or exit to such a facility shall be located within one22
hundred (100) feet of any intersection.
23
24 d. Any convenience or grocery store which proposes to sell
25 alcoholic beverages shall also be subject to the supplemental
26 standards prescribed for liquor stores.
27
28 11. Craft Beverage Manufacturing
29
30 a. Any Craft Beverage Manufacturing use which is permitted to
31 have off-premises alcohol sales shall meet the minimum spacing
32 requirements of liquor stores, except that the minimum
33 separation requirements from parks, shall not apply to
34 Thompson Park.
35
36 b. Restaurants or tasting rooms are permitted in conjunction with
37 craft production beverage establishments. In the A-1, I-1, or BC
38 Zoning Districts, restaurants or tasting rooms shall be limited to
39 a maximum size of 50% of the total gross floor area of the
40 principal building used fr processing, or 2,500 square feet,
41 whichever is less.
42
43 c. Off- street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-31
standards of section 1 28 – 1001 of this Ordinance. The parking
2 requirement shall be calculated by assigning the applicable
3 standard to the corresponding area of operation. Temporary
4 areas for overflow parking for special events shall be indicated
5 on the site plan.
6
7 d. Live entertainment shall be permitted. When applying for a
8 craft beverage production establishment, the applicant shall
9 specify the type of entertainment and days of the week and hours
10 of the day in which entertainment is to be performed. Outdoor
11 entertainment shall be non-amplified or located a minimum of
12 500 feet away from any property line.
13
14 e. Promotional or special events, such as, but not limited to,
15 wine/beer/etc. festivals, publicly advertised functions,
16 conferences, workshops, fundraising or charitable functions,
17 weddings, receptions, social events, or cultural exhibits and
18 similar events, where the number of persons in attendance at any
19 given time exceeds 200 persons, shall be permitted but restricted
20 to no more than eight such events per calendar year. Smaller,
21 less attended, functions, such as, but not limited to, tastings,
22 private parties, facility tours, meetings or picnics, are permitted
23 without limitation on the number of events.
24
25 f. Craft beverage manufacturers are defined as producing no more
26 than 20,000 barrels of beer of 36,000 gallons of distilled spirits,
27 wine, cider or mead per year. Establishments which exceed these
28 limits shall be considered a “Bottling or distribution station for
29 beverages” and regulated as prescribed in this Ordinance for that
30 use.
31
32 12. Farmer’s Market
33
34 a. All Farmers’ Markets and their vendors shall comply with all
35 federal, state and local laws relating to the operation, use and
36 enjoyment of the market premises.
37
38 b. All Farmers’ Markets and their vendors shall obtain all required
39 operating and health permits and these permits (or copies) shall
40 be in the possession of the Farmers’ Market operator or the
41 vendor, as applicable, on the site of the Farmers’ Market during
42 all hours of operation.
43
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-32
c. All Farmers’ Markets shall 1 have a representative of the operator
2 authorized to direct the operations of all vendors participating in
3 the market on the site of the market during all hours of operation.
4
5 d. All Farmers’ Markets shall establish and maintain rules of
6 operation governing the eligibility of vendors, products that may
7 be sold, conduct of vendors, set up of the market, etc.
8
9 13. Hotels/Motels
10
11 a. Accessory uses may include gift shop, beauty shop, barber
12 shop, restaurant, cocktail lounge/night club, auditorium/meeting
13 facilities and similar retail stores and commercial
14 establishments.
15
16 b. Circulation and parking shall be adequate to fulfill requirements
17 of all proposed uses - principal and accessory. A traffic analysis
18 shall be provided by the applicant demonstrating adequacy of
19 the system to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission.
20
21 c. The applicant shall design the building roof to screen
22 mechanical equipment from public view and to contribute to an
23 attractive streetscape.
24
25 d. The applicant shall develop the public streetscape between the
26 street-front of the building and the street curb as a safe and
27 convenient pedestrian area with attractive amenities such as
28 paving, lighting, seating, shelter, and landscaping.
29
30 e. The applicant shall locate amenities such as lighting, seating,
31 shelter, and landscaping into attractive groupings that provide
32 for safe and unobstructed pedestrian movement.
33
34 f. The applicant shall design fences and retaining walls that are
35 consistent in materials and quality to that of the building and the
36 adjacent properties.
37
38 g. The applicant shall design and locate signs so that their
39 illumination is directed away from adjacent properties, and such
40 that their design is integrated into the site and the streetscape.
41
42 h. Vehicular access to the subject property shall not be by means
43 of any street internal to a residential subdivision.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-33
1
2 14. Indoor Recreation Facility
3
4 a. The minimum required lot size for this use shall be five (5)
5 acres.
6
7 15. Day Care Centers, Group or Large Group;
8
9 a. Applicant shall meet the requirements of the Office of Child
10 Care Licensing and Regulation in the Department of Human
11 Resources of the State of Maryland, or its successor agency for
12 Group Day Care.
13
14 b. A Group Day Care Center or Large Group Day Care Center
15 shall not have more day care children than the number which
16 appears on the certificate of registration issued by the Office of
17 Child Day Care Licensing and Regulation to such Center and
18 Provider.
19
20 c. The Planning Commission may prescribe specific conditions
21 determined necessary to minimize effects of use on neighboring
22 properties given identification of concerns specific to a
23 particular site.
24
25 d. The applicant shall have one hundred (100) square feet of
26 usable outdoor recreation area for each child that may use this
27 space at any time. Such usable outdoor recreation area shall be
28 identified on the site plan and shall be sufficiently buffered from
29 adjacent residential areas. Usable outdoor recreation areas shall
30 be limited to the side and rear yard of the property.
31
32 e. The day care center and provider shall comply with Article 88A
33 of the Annotated Code of Maryland and the State Department of
34 Human Resources regarding group day care centers.
35
36 f. All such uses shall be located so as to permit the safe pickup
37 and delivery of all persons on this site.
38
39 16. Liquor Stores
40
41 a. No liquor store shall be permitted within 1,000 feet (measured
42 from the closest portion of the affected properties) of any of the
43 following uses: Schools, Colleges & Universities, Houses of
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-34
Worship, Family Day Care, Day 1 Care Group, Day Care Small
2 Group, and Park.
3
4 17. Major Retail
5
6 a. Applicability
7
8 The following supplemental standards for major retail uses do
9 not apply to any non-retail commercial uses, or the following
10 retail uses:
11
12 Use # 2.1 B –
13
14 6. Auto Sales or Showroom
15 31. Construction Equipment Sales or Rental
16 32. Construction Supply and Services
17 46. Farm Equipment, Trailer or Marine Products Sales &
18 Service
19 48. Farmers Market
20 55. Greenhouses, Nurseries, etc.
21
22 b. Facades and Exterior Walls
23
24 i. All facades greater than 100 feet in length, measured
25 horizontally, shall incorporate wall plane projections or
26 recesses having a depth of at least 3% of the length of the
27 façade. No uninterrupted length of any façade shall
28 exceed 100 horizontal feet.
29
30 ii. All facades shall have arcades, display windows, entry
31 areas, awnings, or other such features along no less than
32 60% of their horizontal length.
33
34 c. Detail Feature
35
36 i. Building facades must include a repeating pattern that
37 shall include no less than three of the elements listed
38 below. At least one of these elements shall repeat
39 horizontally. All elements shall repeat at intervals of no
40 more than 30 feet, either horizontally or vertically:
41
42 • Color Change
43 • Texture Change
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-35
1 • Material Module Change
2 • Expression of architectural or structural bay
3 through a change in plane no less than 12 inches
4 in width, such as an offset, reveal or projecting
5 rib.
6
7 d. Roofs
8
9 Roofs shall have at least two of the following features:
10
11 i. Parapets completely concealing flat roofs and all rooftop
12 equipment from public view. The average height of such
13 parapets shall not exceed 15% of the height of the
14 supporting wall and such parapet shall not at any point
15 exceed one-third of the height of the supporting wall.
16 Such parapets shall feature three-dimensional cornice
17 treatments.
18
19 ii. Overhanging eaves, extending no less than three feet past
20 the supporting walls.
21
22 iii. Sloping roofs that do not exceed the average height of
23 the supporting walls, with an average slope greater than
24 or equal to one foot of vertical rise for every three feet of
25 horizontal run and less than or equal to one foot of
26 vertical rise for every one foot of horizontal run.
27
28 iv. Multiple roof slope planes.
29
30 e. Materials and Colors
31
32 i. Predominant exterior building materials shall be high
33 quality materials. These include, without limitation:
34
35 • Brick
36 • Wood
37 • Tinted, textured, concrete masonry units
38 • Other native materials
39
40 ii. The predominate façade colors shall be low reflectance,
41 subtle, neutral, or earth tone colors. The use of high
42 intensity or fluorescent colors is discouraged.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-36
1
2 iii. Building trim and accent areas may feature brighter
3 colors, including primary colors, but neon tubing shall
4 not be an acceptable feature for building trim or accent
5 areas.
6
7 iv. Predominant exterior building materials shall not include
8 the following:
9
10 • Smooth-faced block
11 • Tilt-up concrete panels
12 • Pre-fabricated steel panels
13 • Vinyl siding
14 • Aluminum siding
15
16 f. Entryways
17
18 i. Each principal building on a site shall have clearly
19 defined, highly visible customer entrances featuring at
20 least three of the following:
21 • Canopies or porticos
22 • Overhangs
23 • Recesses/projections
24 • Arcades
25 • Raised corniced parapets over the door
26 • Peaked roof forms
27 • Arches
28 • Outdoor patios
29 • Display windows
30 • Architectural details such as tile work and
31 moldings which are integrated into the building
32 structure and design
33 • Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate
34 landscaped areas and/or places for sitting
35
36 g. Entrances
37
38 i. All sides of a principal building that directly face an
39 abutting public street shall feature at least one customer
40 entrance. Where a principal building directly faces more
41 than two abutting public streets, this requirement shall
42 apply only to two sides of the building, including the side
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-37
of the building 1 facing the primary street, and another side
2 of the building facing a second street.
3
4 h. Outdoor Storage, Trash Collection and Loading Areas
5
6 i. Areas for outdoor storage, truck parking, trash collection
7 or compaction, loading, or other such uses shall not be
8 visible from abutting streets.
9
10 ii. No areas for outdoor storage, trash collection or
11 compaction, loading, or other such uses shall be located
12 within 25 feet of any public street, public sidewalk, or
13 internal pedestrian way.
14
15 iii. Loading docks, truck parking, outdoor storage, utility
16 meters, HVAC equipment, trash collection, trash
17 compaction, and other service functions shall be
18 incorporated into the overall design of the building and
19 the landscaping so that the visual and acoustic impacts
20 of these functions are fully contained and out of view
21 from adjacent properties and public streets, and no
22 attention is attracted to the functions by the use of
23 screening materials that are different from or inferior to
24 the principal materials of the building and landscape.
25
26 iv. Non-enclosed areas for the storage and sale of seasonal
27 inventory shall be permanently defined and screened
28 with walls and/or fences. Materials, colors, and design
29 of screening walls and/or fences and the cover shall
30 conform to those used as predominant materials and
31 colors on the building. If such areas are to be covered,
32 then the covering shall conform to those used as
33 predominant materials and colors on the building.
34
35 i. Pedestrian Flows and Bicycle Traffic
36
37 i. Sidewalks at least eight feet in width shall be provided
38 along all sides of the lot that abut a public street.
39
40 ii. Continuous internal pedestrian walkways, no less than
41 eight feet in width, shall be provided from the public
42 sidewalk or right-of-way to the principal customer
43 entrance of all principal buildings on the site. At a
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-38
minimum, 1 walkways shall connect focal points of
2 pedestrian activity such as, but not limited to, transit
3 stops, street crossings, building and store entry points,
4 and shall feature adjoining landscaped areas that include
5 trees, shrubs, benches, flower beds, ground covers, or
6 other such materials for no less than 50% of its length.
7
8 iii. Sidewalks, no less than eight feet in width, shall be
9 provided along the full length of the building along any
10 façade featuring a customer entrance, and along any
11 façade abutting public parking areas. Such sidewalks
12 shall be located at least six feet from the façade of the
13 building to provide planting beds for foundation
14 landscaping, except where features such as arcades or
15 entryways are part of the façade.
16
17 iv. Internal pedestrian walkways provided in conformance
18 with part (ii) above shall provide weather protection
19 features such as awnings or arcades within 30 feet of all
20 customer entrances.
21
22 v. All internal pedestrian walkways shall be distinguished
23 from driving surfaces through the use of durable, low
24 maintenance surface materials such as pavers, bricks, or
25 scored concrete to enhance pedestrian safety and
26 comfort, as well as the attractiveness of the walkways.
27
28 vi. Bicycle traffic shall be accommodated by providing
29 adequate bicycle circulation routes (which may or may
30 not be combined with the required pedestrian walkways
31 and sidewalks) as well as bicycle storage facilities (i.e.
32 racks or lockers).
33
34 j. Central Features and Community Spaces
35
36 i. Each establishment subject to these standards shall
37 contribute to the establishment or enhancement of
38 community and public spaces by providing at least two
39 of the following:
40 • Patio/seating area
41 • Pedestrian plaza w/ benches
42 • Transportation center
43 • Window shopping walkway
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-39
1 • Outdoor playground area
2 • Kiosk area
3 • Water feature
4 • Clock tower
5 • Other such deliberately shaped area and/or a
6 focal feature or amenity that, in the judgement of
7 the Planning Commission, adequately enhances
8 such community and public spaces.
9
10 Any such areas shall have direct access to the public sidewalk
11 network and such features shall not be constructed of materials that
12 are inferior to the principal materials of the building and landscape.
13
14
15 k. Abatement of Nuisance to Neighboring Properties
16
17 i. Neighboring properties shall be protected from site
18 illumination, noise, odor, or any other impact which
19 could potentially be a nuisance to those properties.
20
21 l. Maximum Size
22
23 i. No structure shall exceed 65,000 square feet in gross
24 floor area. This provision shall not apply for retail stores
25 within or adjacent to shopping centers which were
26 approved prior (Aug. 25, 2004, including projects which
27 involve the expansion of individual stores within an
28 existing shopping center; or the redevelopment of an
29 existing shopping center; or the expansion of an existing
30 center onto an abutting site or an adjacent site; or the
31 construction of a new retail store on a site adjacent to an
32 existing shopping center
33
34 m. Bus Shelter
35
36 A bus shelter (or shelters) shall be provided to afford bus
37 riders the opportunity to wait for their bus in a structure that
38 protects them from inclement weather. The location of such
39 shelter(s) shall be shown on the site plan at the sketch plan
40 level.
41
42 18. Mini-Warehouses
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-40
1
2 a. Door openings for any rental unit shall face the interior of the
3 site unless impracticable. This shall be mandatory where the
4 abutting property is residentially zoned.
5
6 b. Accommodations for resident managers is permitted as an
7 accessory component of this use.
8
9 c. The roof shape and materials shall be compatible with the
10 design and materials of neighboring buildings.
11
12 d. Mini-warehouses shall be limited to storage only. Auctions,
13 sales, and servicing of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, lawn
14 mowers, appliances, etc…, shall be prohibited.
15
16 e. Internal driveway aisles shall be a minimum width of thirty (30)
17 feet. A driveway aisle where access to storage units is only on
18 one side of the aisle may be reduced to twenty (20) feet. All
19 internal drives and parking areas shall be surfaced with asphalt,
20 concrete, or other hard surfaced, dustless material and so
21 constructed as to provide adequate drainage both on-site and off22
site.
23
24 f. All outdoor lighting shall be shielded to direct light and glare
25 only onto the mini-warehouse facility and may be of sufficient
26 intensity to discourage vandalism and theft. Said lighting and
27 glare shall be deflected, shaded, and focused away from all
28 adjoining property.
29
30 g. No outdoor storage shall be permitted.
31
32 h. No portion of a mini-warehouse facility shall be located within
33 three hundred feet of the right-of-way of any “major road” as
34 indicated by Section 28 – 1009.
35
36 i. All multi-story buildings shall have windows or architectural
37 treatments that appear as windows.
38
39 j. The structures should be located perpendicular to the road.
40
41 k. Use of corrugated metal on the front facades is unacceptable.
42 Use of textured block, brick, wood, or stucco is preferred though
43 flat metal may be acceptable. Colors should be muted and
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-41
complimentary 1 with other colors used on adjacent buildings.
2
3 19. Multiple Uses
4
5 a. Each use must be permitted within the zone either by right or
6 via Special Exception.
7
8 b. Changes of use do not require additional Special Exceptions
9 provided that the new uses are also permitted within the zone.
10 Any new uses that are only permitted via Special Exception shall
11 be treated as an amendment to the Special Exception and require
12 Planning Commission review and Board of Zoning Appeals
13 approval.
14
15 20. Office (For Offices located within Residential Zones)
16
17 a. Site Plans for all office uses located within residential zones
18 shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission,
19 regardless of the size of the building. Site Plan review and
20 approval shall be a condition of special exception approval.
21
22 b. Parking lots, utility facilities or service elements and signs shall
23 be located and/or landscaped so as to have minimal impact on
24 surrounding residences.
25
26 c. Building height, mass, and architecture shall be of a kind and
27 quality that is consistent with the character of a residential
28 neighborhood.
29
30 d. Site lighting shall not cause a nuisance for neighboring
31 properties and shall be of an intensity and design that is
32 consistent with the character of a residential neighborhood.
33
34 21. Office Parks
35
36 a. Office Parks shall be located on a site that is at least one (1) acre
37 in size.
38
39 b. The lot on which the Office Park is located must have a
40 minimum frontage of one-hundred (100) feet on a public street.
41
42 c. The lot on which the Office Park is located must have a depth
43 of at least one-hundred (100) feet.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-42
1
2 d. The project shall have a unified arrangement of buildings,
3 service areas, parking, and landscaped areas.
4
5 e. Materials, massing, and facade design for the project shall be
6 harmonious with the character of the neighborhood.
7
8 f. The internal circulation system shall be designed to minimize
9 through traffic and traffic conflicts within the project.
10
11 g. Safe pedestrian movement shall be required.
12
13 h. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Section 28 –
14 1014 of this Ordinance.
15
16 22. Outdoor Recreation Area
17
18 a. Outdoor Recreation Areas shall have a minimum lot size of five
19 (5) acres.
20
21 23. Residential Use in a Commercial Building
22
23 a. Residential uses are not permitted on the ground floor.
24
25 b. In the CG district, residential uses shall be limited in size to no
26 more than fifty (50%) percent of the gross floor area of the
27 principal building.
28
29 c. In the CR district, residential uses shall be permitted on any
30 non-ground floor level. There shall be no density limitation as
31 long as the project retains ground-floor commercial activity. If
32 the ground floor commercial activity is abandoned, it may only
33 be replaced with residential uses if the density standards of the
34 CR district can be met for the building as a whole. If as a result
35 of any such revision the density is such that a PUD is necessary
36 (i.e. between 9 and 30 du/ac), the application process for PUD
37 projects must be followed.
38
39 24. Retail Thrift or Outlet Store Operated by a Non-Profit Organization
40
41 a. The business shall be operated by a legitimate non-profit
42 organization, with legal IRS certification as such.
43
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-43
b. There shall be no 1 open storage nor shall any products be
2 displayed in open areas. Any outside storage areas shall be
3 adequately screened and landscaped in accordance with the
4 provisions of Section 28 – 1014 of this Ordinance.
5
6 c. Adequate loading/unloading areas shall be provided and, if
7 applicable, screened appropriately, in accordance with Section
8 28 –1014 of this Ordinance.
9
10 25. Shopping Centers – Campus Style
11
12 a. Shopping centers shall meet all of the supplemental standards
13 prescribed herein for Major retail uses in addition to the
14 standards prescribed below.
15
16 b. Where shopping centers contain individual buildings of less
17 than 25,000 square feet of gross floor area, with multiple
18 businesses with separate, exterior customer entrances:
19
20
21 i. The street level façade of such stores shall be transparent
22 between the height of three feet and eight feet above the
23 walkway grade for no less than 60% of the horizontal
24 length of the building façade.
25
26 ii. Windows shall be recessed and should include visually
27 prominent sills, shutters, or other such forms of framing.
28
29 c. The applicant or developer of a shopping center shall submit a
30 General Signage Plan as part of the sketch PUD plan. Signage
31 for shopping centers shall be consistent throughout the center
32 and shall be designed as part of the architectural design of the
33 building(s). Directional and information signs shall be
34 adequately provided and design coordinated.
35
36 d. A traffic study shall be provided by the developer. Traffic
37 associated with the shopping center shall not diminish the
38 quality or efficiency of the transportation system of the
39 surrounding area. Vehicular access shall be by means of a major
40 or minor collector.
41
42 e. Any use that is permitted within the zone in which the shopping
43 center is proposed shall be permitted to locate within said
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-44
shopping center without 1 the need for further action by the
2 Planning Commission or the Board of Zoning Appeals. Special
3 Exception uses proposed with the initial submission shall require
4 Planning Commission review and approval in order to locate
5 within an approved shopping center. Special Exception uses
6 proposed after the shopping center is approved and which
7 represent merely a substitution of one Special Exception use for
8 another, shall require approval by the Easton Board of Zoning
9 Appeals (as a Special Exception). Special Exception uses which
10 replace outright permitted uses or which represent an expansion
11 of the shopping center shall require an amendment to the PUD.
12 Prohibited uses shall not be permitted to locate within the
13 shopping center.
14
15 26. Shopping Centers – Strip
16
17 a. The intent of these provisions is to encourage the expansion of
18 the traditional Central-Business District and the conversion of
19 existing strip shopping centers to a more urban, neo-traditional
20 style of development.
21
22 b. Strip shopping centers are only permitted in the CR zoning
23 district or via the PUD process as a redevelopment of an existing
24 shopping center.
25
26 c. The nearest point of any principal structure shall be setback no
27 more than 15 feet from the property line.
28
29 d. The aesthetic impact of off-street parking shall be minimized by
30 locating such parking in accordance with the following priority
31 schedule:
32
33 i. Either behind the building or in an interior courtyard;
34
35 ii. In side yards;
36
37 iii. In the least prominent front yard on multiple frontage
38 lots only.
39
40 e. Bus Shelters
41
42 A bus shelter (or shelters) shall be provided to afford bus riders the
43 opportunity to wait for their bus in a structure that protects them from
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-45
inclement weather. The location 1 of such shelter(s) shall be shown on
2 the site plan at the sketch plan level.
3
4 27. Winery
5
6 a. A winery shall comply with all regulations of the Maryland
7 Annotated Code, Article 2B, and the Talbot County Alcoholic
8 Beverages Regulations, including but not limited to any
9 licensing provisions.
10
11 b. Wholesale and retail sales of wine, grape, or fruit products
12 produced on the premises are allowed. Retail sales of
13 merchandise or items other than wine is allowed within a tasting
14 room or a gift shop, and must be directly related to the winery
15 and limited to items like souvenirs, clothes bearing the winery
16 logo, or other wine-related items.
17
18 c. Areas designated for wine tasting (tasting rooms) are permitted
19 but shall not exceed 50% of the total gross floor area of the
20 principal building used for processing wine or 2,500 square feet,
21 whichever is less.
22
23 d. Snack foods or prepackaged foods like sandwiches, soups, or
24 salads that are consumed on the premises are allowed. A
25 commercial restaurant may also be permitted in association with
26 the winery in the CG or CL Zoning Districts.
27
28 e. Promotional or special events, such as, but not limited to, wine
29 festivals, publicly advertised functions, conferences, workshops,
30 fund-raising or charitable functions, weddings, receptions,
31 social events or cultural exhibits where the number of persons in
32 attendance at any given time exceeds 200 persons shall be
33 permitted but restricted to no more than eight such events per
34 calendar year. Smaller less attended functions, such as, but not
35 limited to, wine tastings, private parties, winery tours, meetings
36 or picnics are permitted without limitation on the number of
37 events.
38
39 f. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
40 standards of Section 28 – 1001 of this Ordinance. The parking
41 requirement shall be calculated by assigning the applicable
42 standard to the corresponding area of the operation (i.e. apply
43 the restaurant standard to the area used as a restaurant, apply the
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-46
retail standard 1 to any gift shop, apply the manufacturing
2 standard to the portion used for processing, etc…). Temporary
3 Area(s) for overflow parking for special events shall be
4 indicated on the site plan.
5
6 g. Live Entertainment shall be permitted at a winery. When
7 applying for a winery, the applicant shall specify the type of
8 entertainment and days of the week and hours of the day in
9 which entertainment is to be performed. Outdoor entertainment
10 shall be non-amplified or located a minimum of 500 feet from
11 any property line.
12
13 28. Fitness Centers/ Sports Training Facilities/ Health Spa/ Figure Salons
14
15 a. In the I-1 and BC districts, fitness centers/sports training
16 facilities/health spa/figure salon must consist of contiguous
17 interior space, under single ownership or management, of at
18 least 10,000 square feet.
19
20 28 – 1007.3 INDUSTRIAL USES
21
22 A. Specific industrial uses shall be subject to the following supplemental
23 standards:
24
25 1. Agriculture, controlled-environment
26
27 a. In addition to common agricultural activities, agriculture,
28 controlled- environment may also include elements of
29 manufacturing, processing, packaging, storage, distribution, etc.
30
31 b. Retail sales of agricultural products grown and/or processed on32
site shall be permitted provided they are of a scale that is clearly
33 secondary and incidental to the primary agricultural-based use
34 of the property.
35
36 c. Applicant shall demonstrate and maintain compliance with any
37 State and/or Federal Standards or Rules regulating the particular
38 good or product being grown or processed on-site.
39
40 2. Industrial Parks
41
42 a. Industrial Parks shall be located on a site that is at least one (1)
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-47
1 acre in size.
2
3 b. The lot on which the Industrial Park is located must have a
4 minimum frontage of one-hundred (100) feet on a public street.
5
6 c. The lot on which the Industrial Park is located must have a depth
7 of at least one-hundred (100) feet.
8
9 d. The project shall have a unified arrangement of buildings,
10 service areas, parking, and landscaped areas.
11
12 e. Materials, massing, and facade design for the project shall be
13 harmonious with the character of the neighborhood.
14
15 f. The internal circulation system shall be designed to minimize
16 through traffic and traffic conflicts within the project.
17
18 g. The vehicular plan shall provide for safe pedestrian movement.
19
20 h. The applicant shall design and site buildings to screen from
21 public view unsightly site elements such as shipping and loading
22 areas, equipment storage areas, dumpsters, etc.
23
24 i. All operations (except for permitted outdoor storage) shall be
25 located in a wholly enclosed building.
26
27 j. The release, disposal, or storage of waste materials shall not be
28 visible from off-site. All trash and refuse shall be stored in self29
enclosed storage areas.
30
31 k. There shall be no outside storage of the finished product. Bulk
32 storage of the finished product in a wholly enclosed building
33 shall be considered an accessory use.
34
35 l. An impact statement shall be submitted with the site plan which
36 explains:
37
38 1. The proposed architectural design (graphic or narrative)
39 of all buildings and structures.
40
41 2. The proposed hours of operation.
42
43 3. The provisions to be made for control of noxious and
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-48
1 offensive odors.
2
3 4. The air pollution, water quality, and noise control
4 measures to be taken.
5
6 5. The type and amount of traffic expected to be generated.
7
8 m. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Section
9 28 – 1014 of this Ordinance.
10
11 3. Industry, Heavy
12
13 a. Applications for a heavy industrial use shall be accompanied by
14 a statement or report describing the nature of the proposed use,
15 any toxic, hazardous, explosive or otherwise potentially
16 dangerous substances associated with the use, expected truck
17 traffic, and any other information necessary to provide a fair and
18 accurate assessment of the impacts of the proposed use on the
19 subject property and the surrounding area.
20
21 b. Heavy industrial uses may contain potentially hazardous
22 substances, but shall not pose any threat to the quality of the air,
23 water, or land of the subject property or the surrounding area.
24
25 c. Heavy industrial uses shall be setback a minimum of 200 feet
26 from any property line.
27
28 4. Industry, Heavy with no potentially hazardous or commonly recognized
29 offensive conditions
30
31 a. Applications for this use shall be accompanied by a statement
32 or report describing the nature of the proposed use, it’s expected
33 impact on its surrounding area, expected truck traffic, and any
34 other information necessary to provide a fair and accurate
35 assessment of the impacts of the proposed use on the subject
36 property and the surrounding area.
37
38 b. Heavy industrial uses shall be setback a minimum of 200 feet
39 from any property line.
40
41 5. Industry, Light
42
43 a. Applications for this use shall be accompanied by a statement
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-49
or report describing 1 the nature of the proposed use, it’s expected
2 impact on its surrounding area, expected truck traffic, and any
3 other information necessary to provide a fair and accurate
4 assessment of the impacts of the proposed use on the subject
5 property and the surrounding area.
6
7 28 – 1007.4 MISCELLANEOUS USES
8
9 A. Specific Miscellaneous Uses Shall be Subject to the Following Supplemental
10 Standards:
11
12 1. Carnivals/Circuses/Public Events
13
14 a. Those Carnivals/Circuses/Public Events of a scale such that
15 unusual congestion on the streets or traffic patterns can be
16 expected shall require a Public Assembly Permit approved by
17 the Easton Town Council. Such uses which receive Town
18 Council approval of a Public Assembly Permit shall not require
19 Temporary Use approval by the Town Planner or Planning
20 Commission.
21
22 2. Crematorium
23
24 a. Applicant shall obtain and comply with all requisite
25 State/Federal permits or rules and regulations
26
27 3. Garage, Private or Shed
28
29 a. Detached garages or sheds may be located outside the building
30 envelope. They must meet side setback requirements except for
31 sheds that do not exceed ten feet in height which may be located
32 in side yards within three feet of the property line. They may
33 not be constructed in any front yard, except in the case of
34 through lots in which case they may be constructed in the non35
access front yard.
36
37 b. Any garage, shed, or parking stall shall be setback a minimum
38 of 15 feet from the centerline of any alley, if there is not an alley
39 in the rear of the property the required setback is zero feet.
40
41 c. Garages or sheds, together with a swimming pool (if one is
42 present), may occupy no more than 50% of the rear yard area.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-50
1
2 4. Mobile Food Uses
3
4 a. These regulations shall apply only to mobile food uses located
5 on private property. Mobile food uses operated on public
6 property (e.g. streets or sidewalks) are regulated elsewhere in the
7 Town Code.
8
9 b. Mobile food uses shall comply with all applicable health codes
10 and operators shall provide proof of health department approval
11 upon application for a Temporary Use.
12
13 c. Mobile food uses shall operate in association with another
14 approved Temporary Use (e.g. a Special Event, Carnival, etc…).
15 An exception to this standard shall be mobile food uses that are
16 primarily intended to serve work crews at active construction
17 sites.
18
19 d. Mobile food uses shall not remain at any one location for more
20 than two days more than the duration of the Special Event (or
21 other permitted Temporary Use) with which it is associated. The
22 two additional days are provided to allow for set-up and take23
down of the mobile food unit, not for additional days of
24 operation.
25
26 5. Sale of Merchandise in Parking Lots From Automobiles, Temporary
27 Structures, etc.
28
29 a. Temporary sales of merchandise from automobiles, temporary
30 structures, etc., shall be allowed subject to a Temporary Use
31 permit.
32
33 b. Such sales shall be conducted from an off-street parking area or
34 a storage/display area.
35
36 c. No vehicle or structure used for such sales shall be located
37 within any required parking spaces and shall not block any drive
38 aisles.
39
40 d. Such sales may not occur on more than 10 days in a calendar
41 year and no more than two days in succession.
42
43 6. Special Office Uses
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-51
1
2 a. No structure shall be used as a Special Office Use unless it has
3 been approved for such use as a Special Exception by the Board
4 of Zoning Appeals. In addition to the procedures for considering
5 an application for a special exception as set forth in Section 28
6 – 1303.5.B of this Ordinance, the Board of Appeals shall make
7 those considerations required by this subsection.
8
9 b. No structure shall be used as a Special Office Use unless it is an
10 existing structure located within an Historic District or is one of
11 the structures identified by the Easton Historic District
12 Commission as being of architectural or historic significance in
13 the Town of Easton.
14
15 c. Any structure used as a Special Office Use must meet all
16 applicable fire, safety and health codes and regulations.
17
18 d. Each Special Office Use must provide one (1) off-street parking
19 space for each employee in addition to one (1) off-street
20 customer space per office. Spaces are to be located on the
21 property in such a manner as to minimize any adverse impact
22 upon the appearance of the property and to minimize the
23 destruction of shrubs and trees readily visible from a public way.
24 In granting a Special Exception for a Special Office Use, the
25 Board of Appeals shall specify appropriate buffers to separate
26 parking areas from adjoining residential properties.
27
28 e. Any application for Special Office Use must include a site plan
29 prepared in accordance with the standards set forth in Section 28
30 – 301 of this Ordinance. Any application for a Special Office
31 Use shall be reviewed by both the Planning Commission and the
32 Easton Historic District Commission. In reviewing such
33 applications, the Easton Historic District Commission will act in
34 an advisory capacity rather than in its administrative capacity as
35 defined elsewhere in this Section. The Easton Historic District
36 Commission can conduct its investigation of the application and
37 shall submit its written findings and recommendations to the
38 Board of Appeals before the scheduled hearing on the special
39 exception application. The Easton Historic District Commission
40 shall also serve a copy of its findings and recommendations to
41 the Applicant. The Board of Appeals shall consider the findings
42 and recommendations made by the Easton Historic District
43 Commission, but it shall not be bound by such findings and
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-52
recommendations. 1 The grant of powers to the Easton Historic
2 District Commission to review the applications for special
3 exception for a Special Office Use stated herein shall in no way
4 limit the powers conferred upon the Easton Historic District
5 Commission to approve of changes to, and otherwise regulate
6 property within, the Historic District as set forth herein.
7
8 7. Small Wind Energy Turbine
9
10 a. Height shall be limited to 150 feet measured to the tip of the
11 turbine when it reaches its highest elevation.
12
13 b. The base of the wind turbine shall not be closer to surrounding
14 property lines than the height of the wind turbine unless a MD
15 Registered Professional Engineer certifies the fall zone of the
16 wind turbine and appurtenances will be within the setback area
17 proposed. In addition, no wind turbine shall be located closer to
18 an inhabited structure on adjacent property than 1.5 times the
19 height if the wind turbine. Relief from this section may be
20 granted if the applicant can secure a permanent easement from
21 the adjoining property owner(s) providing for a fall zone.
22
23 c. Small wind energy systems must comply with applicable FAA
24 regulations, including any necessary approvals for installations
25 close to airports. Evidence of compliance or non-applicability
26 shall be submitted with the application.
27
28 d. No small wind energy system shall be installed until evidence
29 has been given that the appropriate utility company has been
30 informed of the customer’s intent to install an interconnected
31 customer-owned generator. Off-grid systems shall be exempt
32 from this requirement.
33
34 e. Small wind energy towers shall maintain a galvanized finish or
35 be painted to conform with the tower color to the surrounding
36 environment to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
37
38 f. Any wind energy system that is not functional shall be repaired
39 by the owner or removed within three months of ceasing to
40 operate or notice from the Town.
41
42 8. Solar Panels, Roof Mounted
43
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-53
a. The solar panel collection 1 cells must be located on a roof and
2 shall be screened insofar as possible.
3
4 b. The solar panels shall be used for on-site energy consumption
5 only.
6
7 c. The solar panels shall be used in accordance with the approved
8 electric company tariff in which they are served.
9
10 9. Solar Panels, Array
11
12 a. Shall be screened from adjoining residentially zoned districts
13 and public rights-of-way. Screening shall be determined by the
14 Board of Zoning Appeals.
15
16 10. Towers
17
18 a. It must be demonstrated that the location of a tower is required
19 for a specific antenna or antennas. No tower shall be constructed
20 for speculative reasons.
21
22 b. It must be demonstrated that an attempt has been made to locate
23 the antenna on an existing tower or another suitable structure.
24
25 c. Towers shall be located a minimum distance from any existing
26 residential structure or lot platted for the purpose of constructing
27 a single residential structure equal to the height of the tower plus
28 ten (10) feet.
29
30 d. It must be demonstrated that any tower is in compliance with all
31 federal regulations (FAA, FCC) prior to the Board of Appeals
32 approval of a tower.
33
34 e. Towers shall not exceed 200 feet in height and shall be self35
supporting.
36
37 f. Tower should be designed to accommodate additional antennas.
38
39 g. Buffer screens as per the provisions of Section 28 – 1014,
40 Landscaping and Buffering, shall be provided surrounding any
41 tower structure and any accessory equipment building.
42
43 h. To the extent possible while maintaining the requisite
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-54
functionality of the tower, 1 towers shall be positioned on a site so
2 as to minimize the visual impacts of the tower from all public
3 streets. To accomplish this a tower should generally be buffered
4 by buildings, landscaping and/or other site features.
5
6 i. Nothing in these regulations is intended to supersede applicable
7 Federal or State law. In the event that the regulations set forth
8 in Section 28 – 1007.4 (A) 8. conflict with such laws, the
9 applicable State and/or Federal laws shall apply.
10
11 11. Donation Bins
12
13 a. No person or other legal entity shall place or maintain any
14 Donation Bin on the premises open to the public except when
15 issued by the Building Inspection Division in accordance with
16 this section.
17
18 b. All Donation Bins shall be appropriately located so as not to
19 interfere with site triangles, on-site circulation, required
20 setbacks, landscaping, parking and any other requirements that
21 have been imposed as part of the site plan approval for the
22 property, and shall be placed on a concrete surface.
23
24 c. The Donation Bin shall be of a type that is enclosed by use of a
25 receiving door and locked so that the contents of the bin may not
26 be accessed by anyone other than those responsible for the
27 retrieval of the contents.
28
29 d. The Donation Bin shall not cover a ground surface area in
30 excess of thirty-one square feet, nor be more than six feet in
31 height.
32
33 e. Donation Bins must be maintained and kept in good repair. The
34 Donation Bins area shall be maintained in a safe, orderly
35 condition. Donation bins shall have no rust, peeling paint or
36 graffiti. The areas around the Donation Bin must be kept clean
37 and free of garbage and debris on the premises where the
38 Donation Bin is located. Each Donation Bin shall be regularly
39 emptied of its contents so that it does not overflow.
40
41 f. There shall be no more than two Donation Bins per property.
42
43 g. A permit for a Donation Bin shall be required. The permit shall
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-55
be issued by the Building 1 Inspection Division, but can only be
2 granted in compliance with the followed:
3
4 i. The Donation Bin is for use by a duly registered
5 organization in good standing in the State of Maryland.
6 The applicant shall submit a statement or declaration of
7 whether the organization is “for profit” or “not for
8 profit”. If the organization is “not for profit” , it must
9 submit proof of the organization’s 501(c)(3) designation;
10
11 ii. Each duly registered nonprofit organization shall be
12 permitted to have a maximum of eight (8) Donation Bins
13 within the Town of Easton;
14
15 iii. The type, size and location of the Donation Bin comply
16 with this subsection;
17
18 iv. The applicant submits a letter of authority/permission
19 from the property owners upon which the Donation Bin
20 is proposed to be located;
21
22 v. The name, address and telephone number of the
23 nonprofit organization is displayed on each Donation
24 Bin.
25
26 vi. The names of recipients of any donations or funds raised
27 from the sale of the donations are displayed on each
28 Donation Bin. If the organization is “for profit” the
29 donation bin shall be labeled “For Profit” and “Not Tax
30 Deductible”; and
31
32 vii. All information required to be displayed on the Donation
33 Bin shall be in lettering not smaller than three (3) inches
34 tall and must be in contrasting color with the
35 background.
36
37 12. Storage of boats, travel trailers, motorcycles, jet-skis or other similar
38 recreationally used vehicles
39
40 a. No more than one boat, one trailer and two motorcycles may be
41 kept in open storage on a lot.
42
43 b. For lots with improved alleys, the storage or overnight parking
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-56
of such vehicles is restricted to the 1 rear yard only. For lots
2 without improved rear alleys, such vehicles must be kept either
3 in the rear yard or in the side yard behind the front plane of that
4 portion of the house nearest to the side yard. Stored vehicles
5 shall not encroach into side setback areas.
6
7 c. On corner lots storage is permitted in either side yard behind the
8 plane of the house closest to that yard.
9
10 d. The provisions of Section 28 – 1203, Non-Conforming Use of
11 Land (Not Within Structures), shall not be applicable to any
12 outside storage of a boat, trailer, motorcycle, jet-ski or other
13 similar vehicle or vessel.
14
15 13. PODS
16 a. May not remain on-site for more than 30 days.
17
18 b. Shall meet applicable setbacks.
19
20 c. The 30-day time limit may be extended for an additional 30 day
21 period by the Town Planner, upon request of the applicant, for
22 good cause. PODS utilized as part of a longer term temporary
23 use or construction project may be considered and approved by
24 the Planning Commission in the course of the necessary
25 approvals for said project.
26
27 SECTION 28 – 1008 VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS
28
29 28 – 1008.1 PURPOSE
30
31 As an aid to the safe movement of vehicles at and near street intersections and in order to
32 promote adequate protection of pedestrians, the following provisions shall apply to all
33 corner lots. On all such lots, there shall be limitations on the height of fences, walls,
34 gateways, ornamental structures, hedges, shrubbery and other fixtures, construction and
35 plantings.
36
37 28 – 1008.2 STANDARDS
38
39 Such barriers to clear unobstructed visions at intersecting streets shall be limited to a height
40 of not over three feet above the established elevation of the nearest curb, for a distance of
41 twenty-five (25) feet along both front lot lines, measured from the point of intersection of
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-57
the said intersecting lot lines. No natural plantings 1 or construction shall be permitted at a
2 height over three (3) feet within the isosceles triangle formed by connecting the ends of the
3 respective twenty-five (25) foot distances. The unobstructed view shall be maintained for
4 all spaces between three (3) and ten (10) feet in height.
5
6 Within the said triangle, and in cases where front yards are terraced, the ground elevation
7 of such front yards shall not exceed three (3) feet above the established curb elevation at
8 the said intersecting streets.
9
10 SECTION 28 – 1009 SETBACKS FROM MAJOR ROADS
11
12 In all districts there shall be minimum setbacks of forty (40) feet from the right-of-way line
13 or property lines bordering the following major roads:
14
15 l. U.S. Route 50
16 2. Md. Route 322
17 3. Md. Route 333
18 4. Md. Route 33 (except that portion east of MD Route 322; i.e. Bay Street)
19 5. Md. Route 328
20 6. Md. Route 331
21
22 SECTION 28 – 1010 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS GOVERNING THE PROVISION
23 AND APPROVAL OF COMMON USE AREAS AND/OR FACILITIES
24
25 28 – 1010.1 PURPOSE
26
27 It is the intent of this section to establish minimum standards and requirements which shall
28 constitute prerequisites for approval of all common use areas and/or facilities. These
29 provisions shall apply to all such proposed areas and facilities including but not limited to
30 cluster and multi-family development, shopping centers, office or business parks, and
31 industrial parks.
32
33 These provisions are designed to assure that all common use areas and/or facilities are
34 planned, constructed, managed, and maintained in a suitable manner. They are necessary
35 to assure that such areas become integral parts of various developments as proposed at the
36 time of approval.
37
38 28 – 1010.2 REQUIREMENTS
39
40 The following requirements governing the approval of common use areas and/or facilities
41 shall apply:
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-58
1
2 A. All such areas and/or facilities shall be planned as an integral part of all developments
3 and shall be so located as to permit accessibility to said areas by residents, users, or
4 occupants.
5
6 B. All such areas and/or facilities shall be reserved in perpetuity for residents, users, or
7 occupants of the proposed development or the general public.
8
9 C. All such areas and/or facilities shall be owned or controlled by the applicants at the
10 time of the submission. Evidence of such control, in the form of an appropriate legal
11 document, shall accompany said submission.
12
13 D. All such areas and/or facilities shall be controlled, beginning at a time determined by
14 the Planning Commission by residents, users or occupants of the proposed development
15 or the general public. Evidence of said controls shall be submitted to the Planning
16 Commission for their review.
17
18 E. Provisions for the continuing maintenance management and control, in the form of a
19 legal agreement such as deed restrictions, covenants, or by-laws, or agreement with the
20 Town of Easton, shall be provided the Planning Commission.
21
22 F. Once approved, none of the requirements for common use areas and/or facilities may
23 be changed, without the review and approval of the Planning Commission. The
24 Commission shall hold a Public Hearing before acting upon all such changes.
25
26 SECTION 28 – 1011 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES
27
28 Temporary buildings and structures including mobile homes, office trailers and storage
29 trailers incidental to construction work on the premises may be placed in all zones after a
30 permit has been issued. When such construction work is completed or abandoned, or in
31 six months, whichever comes first, such building or structures shall be removed unless the
32 zoning inspector shall grant an extension which in no event will allow the temporary
33 building or structure to remain on the premises past the time of completion of the
34 construction work on the premises. For residential projects a sales trailer is allowed with
35 a building permit, said trailer shall be removed upon issuance of occupancy permit for the
36 first unit.
37
38 SECTION 28 – 1012 SPECIAL YARD REQUIREMENTS – CRITICAL AREA BUFFER
39
40 The following special yard requirements shall apply within the Critical Area Overlay
41 District ("CAO"):
42
43 A. Except as provided for water dependent facilities in Article V, new
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-59
development activities, including structures, 1 roads, parking areas, impervious
2 surfaces, and septic systems are not permitted in the Buffer.
3
4 B. Qualifying grandfathered lots in a designated Buffer Exemption Area will be
5 exempted from the full Buffer requirements but shall comply with the
6 requirements of the Buffer Exemption Area as described in the Town's Critical
7 Area Program.
8
9 SECTION 28 – 1013 STANDARDS FOR PLACEMENT OF SATELLITE DISH
10 ANTENNAS
11
12 The following special requirements shall apply to the placement of satellite dish antennas:
13
14 A. Satellite Dish Antennas of two (2) feet or less in diameter shall be permitted on
15 the roof of structures and should be located out of view from public rights-of16
way if possible.
17
18 B. Dishes up to ten (10) feet in diameter are permitted provided they are located
19 in a side or rear yard and meet applicable setback regulations.
20
21 C. In commercial or industrial districts, satellite dishes of eight (8) feet or less in
22 diameter, may be located on a roof upon review of the Planning and Zoning
23 Commission.
24
25 SECTION 28 – 1014 LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERING
26
27 All districts or uses requiring landscaping, buffering, and vegetation/forest protection shall
28 meet the appropriate provisions of this Section. The provisions of this Section are
29 considered minimum standards. The Town recognizes that due to the peculiarities of any
30 given site and development proposal, the inflexible application of these landscape
31 improvement standards may result in impractical or unnecessary site improvements that
32 contribute little value toward enhancing the appearance of development. Therefore, the
33 Town (through the Planning Commission) may permit deviations from the presumptive
34 requirements of Section 28 – 1014 when the applicant can demonstrate that the proposed
35 land planning, site planning, architectural or landscape architectural design solutions offer
36 the appropriate “appearance” desired for development and growth in the Town of Easton.
37 For projects requiring overlay zoning designations, variances or special exceptions, the
38 Planning Commission may require additional landscape improvements.
39
40 28 – 1014.1 PURPOSE
41
42 A. Landscape, buffering, and vegetation/forest protection design shall be developed and
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-60
integrated with the site plan or subdivision design. It 1 shall be conceived in a total pattern
2 across the site, integrating the various elements of site design, preserving and
3 enhancing the particular identity of the site, and creating a pleasing site character.
4
5 B. Required landscape improvements shall be dominated by trees, but may include all
6 plant material types suitable and consistent with the flora and fauna of the region.
7 Additional landscape improvements may also include other elements including rocks,
8 water, sculpture, art, walls, fences, paving materials and street furniture.
9
10 C. This Section applies to all sites and to both new development and
11 renovation/redevelopment of existing sites. When conflicting ordinances or regulations
12 apply, the stricter of the regulations shall take precedence.
13
14 D. Sites or development activities under the jurisdiction of the Town of Easton Forest
15 Conservation Ordinance must also meet the requirements of that Ordinance, subject to
16 possible overlapping credits outlined herein.
17
18 28 – 1014.2 LANDSCAPE PLAN(S)
19
20 A. A “sketch” or “concept” landscape plan may be required during the site plan or
21 subdivision review process. Refer to applicable Zoning Ordinance sections for this
22 requirement. At a minimum, these plans shall indicate existing site vegetation to be
23 cleared and/or preserved, general location and type of proposed landscaping (ie.,
24 shade/canopy tree, evergreen tree, shrub/hedge, etc.) and preliminary tabular data
25 addressing landscape improvement requirements. Applicants are encouraged, and the
26 Planning Commission may require, the submission of additional sketches, cross27
sections, elevations or other graphic elements that help convey the design intent of
28 landscape improvements.
29
30 B. A “preliminary” (note: final plan in the Town of Easton equals an As-Built Plan)
31 landscape improvement plan or street tree/bufferyard plan (hereinafter referred to
32 collectively as landscape plans), prepared by a landscape architect registered in the
33 State of Maryland, or other person determined by the Town Planner to be qualified,
34 shall be submitted when required in the site plan or subdivision review process. At a
35 minimum, the preliminary landscape plan shall include the following:
36
37 1. tabular data indicating landscape improvement requirements and bufferyard
38 requirements
39
40 2. existing vegetation and vegetative specimens to be preserved and protective
41 measures proposed during construction and disturbance activities
42
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-61
1 3. proposed landscape improvement locations
2
3 4. planting specifications as to plant species, plant quantity, correct plant
4 nomenclature, and installation size and spacing
5
6 5. installation specifications and details if necessary
7
8 6. planting schedule and phasing
9
10 7. required inspection schedule and procedures (for contractor benefit)
11
12 8. reference to, or (preferred) inclusion of the any Forest Conservation
13 afforestation or reforestation plan as a sheet of the landscape plan set
14
15 C. All preliminary landscape plans shall include on the plan drawing, at a minimum, the
16 following standard notes, modified to suit specific projects or conditions.
17
18 1. Landscape installer shall verify the location of all underground utilities prior to
19 commencing work. Installer shall insure that final grades have been established
20 and the site is ready for landscape installation.
21
22 2. Landscape installer shall maintain the landscape improvement areas in a clean
23 condition, removing debris daily and at the completion of the installation.
24
25 3. Installer shall layout all beds and position plants per the plans. Adjust as
26 required for field conditions. Report significant adjustments to the Owner for
27 approval prior to plant installation. All bed areas shall be sprayed with herbicide
28 as needed to kill and/or remove all weed or grass vegetation.
29
30 4. Except for tree spade installations, all tree pits shall be excavated to a depth so
31 that the root ball will rest on solid soil at the proper height. Street trees planting
32 pits shall be excavated and worked in a rectangular form with the small
33 dimension twice the diameter of the root ball and the large dimension at least
34 three times the diameter of the root ball. Open area tree pits shall be excavated
35 to a minimum dimension of twice the rootball width. Trees planted on slopes
36 or side swales shall be installed at a height relating to the uphill side of the pit,
37 and mounded with soil around the lower side. All sides and bottom of tree
38 planting pits shall be scarified or loosened to permit root growth. Excavated
39 soils that have been previously undisturbed shall be loosened and utilized for
40 backfill. Compacted soils that cannot be restored to a reasonable planting soil
41 shall be removed and replaced with friable native soils from the region.
42
43 5. All shrub planting pits, landscape beds and planting mass areas shall be worked
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-62
to a depth of 12" (or raised slightly to achieve 1 a 12" friable soil depth). Shrub
2 planting areas shall be worked to 12" minimum outside the root ball.
3
4 6. All landscape beds shall be “v” edged and mulched with minimum 3" double
5 shredded hardwood bark mulch, or approved equal. Mulch to fence lines or
6 back of curbs where appropriate to eliminate narrow grass areas. Avoid mulch
7 piled against tree trunks, etc.
8
9 7. All trees to be staked and guyed with hardwood stakes, minimum of two (2) -
10 5' long, or other approved guying system. Stakes shall be driven into stable
11 soils. Provide wire guys with rubber protectant or other approved industry
12 practice.
13
14 8. Landscape Installer shall maintain all plant materials through the completion of
15 the landscape installation, and then as required by the Owner.
16
17 9. At the completion of the landscape installation (or by phased completion if
18 provided for on the plan), the Owner, or his designated representative shall
19 request an inspection by Town of Easton.
20
21 28 – 1014.3 MINIMUM PLANT MATERIAL SPECIFICATIONS
22
23 A. Plant Sources: All required plant material shall be obtained from reputable nursery
24 stock growers or relocated from on-site or other sites via nursery standard plant
25 handling and digging methods. The Town may reject plant material grown, handled or
26 installed improperly.
27
28 B. Species Selection: Acceptable plant species shall include most plant material native,
29 or successfully introduced and available in the Mid-Atlantic region with the following
30 exceptions:
31
32 1. Pyrus calleryana ‘Bradfordi’ Bradford Pear all locations
33 2. Ginkgo biloba (female) all locations
34 3. Ailanthus altissima Tree of Heaven street trees only
35 4. Sorbus acuparia Mountain Ash street trees only
36 5. Acer rubrum ‘October Glory’ Red Maple street trees only
37 6. Hybrid Poplar limittobuffers, open spaces
38 7. Lombardy Poplar all locations
39 8. White Birch street trees only
40 9. Morus alba Mulberry all locations
41 10. Osage Orange street trees only
42 11. Black, Honey Locust(species only) all locations
43
44 Species Appropriate to Certain Locations: Consult the advice of a qualified
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-63
professional when selecting plant species and 1 varieties for use in select areas. Small
2 ornamental, weeping or other low growing varieties shall not be utilized for street trees.
3 Consider plant form and growth habit along with physiological requirements when
4 selecting plant species. Provide a mix of species and varieties for any given project.
5 For most subdivisions, street tree species shall vary through the subdivision.
6
7 C. Plant Size at Installation: Unless otherwise specifically stated in Section 28 – 615, all
8 required plant material shall conform to the following minimum size specification at
9 installation.
10
11 Caliper = tree trunk diameter measured at 12” above finished ground level
12 Height = tree or plant height measured from finished ground level
13 Spread = horizontal width (diameter) of plant
14
15
16 1. Deciduous, Shade/Canopy Trees 2” Caliper
17 2. Understory, Flowering Trees 1.25’ caliper and minimum 7’
18 height
19 3. Evergreen trees minimum 7’ height
20 4. Upright Shrubs 18’ height
21 5. Spreading Shrubs 18’ spread
22 6. Groundcovers or Low Spreading Plans 12’spread
23
24 D. Other Landscape Improvement Standards
25
26 1. Earth Berms; minimum 3:1 side slopes and minimum 2’ wide crown unless
27 otherwise approved. (steeper slopes may be approved with adequate vegetation
28 and stabilization) Avoid planting on crown unless special provisions exist for
29 watering and maintenance. Berm layout shall vary and demonstrate varying
30 heights and widths. See Figure 10-1 (Note: all figures are provided at the end
31 of this Article).
32
33 2. Reverse Berms; combination cut and fill situations, same standards as for earth
34 berms. See Figure 10-2.
35
36 3. Walls and Fences shall incorporate materials and detailing used in the
37 applicants building architecture. Avoid long runs of straight wall or fence, vary
38 horizontal and vertical layout, soften impact of plain walls and fences with plant
39 material and/or berming. See Figure 10-3.
40
41 4. Chain Link Fencing is not preferred. Where chain link fencing is used to secure
42 land uses or areas for outside storage, service/loading or other visually
43 disruptive activities, and unless otherwise adequately buffered, the applicant
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-64
shall provide a combination of decorative 1 slats or opaque product addition in
2 subtle colors, greens and browns preferred, or colors that complement building
3 and landscape, and with added landscaping along the exterior perimeter of these
4 areas.
5
6 28 – 1014.4 WARANTY OF LANDSCAPE IMPROVEMENTS
7
8 A. Prior to issuance of an occupancy permit, the approved preliminary landscape plan
9 shall be implemented by the applicant. At completion, the applicant shall request
10 that the Town inspect the complete landscaping and issue the appropriate approval.
11 The Town recognizes that planting schedules and favorable weather/climatic
12 conditions do not always coincide. The Applicant shall make every reasonable
13 effort to coordinate building and site construction with landscape improvement
14 installation so that all project construction can be complete prior to request for
15 occupancy permits. Upon demonstrating that some or all of the required landscape
16 improvements should be postponed, and subject to the approval of the Town, the
17 applicant shall post an irrevocable financial surety equal to the estimated
18 installation costs as approved by the Town, guaranteeing the complete
19 implementation of the landscape plan within 6 months of occupancy or use of the
20 site or subdivision. After installation is complete and inspected and approved by
21 the Town, the applicant shall request in writing to the Town to release any unused
22 portion of the surety.
23
24 B. The owner/developer shall maintain all landscape improvements providing
25 adequate growing conditions to insure healthy, vigorous plant survival and growth.
26 The Town reserves the right to periodically review installed landscapes and report
27 any significant deficiencies to the owner/developer. At the end of two growing
28 seasons, and/or at any time prior to, the Town shall assess the landscape
29 improvements and direct replacement or revitalization of any deficient areas. The
30 owner shall repair or replace deficient items within 30 calendar days.
31
32 C. Failure to maintain, repair or replace the required and approved landscape
33 improvements shall be considered a violation of this Ordinance and shall be
34 enforced in accordance with Section 28 – 1308 herein.
35
36 28-1014.5 FOREST CONSERVATION OVERLAPPING REQUIREMENTS
37
38 A. Retention and preservation of existing forest under a related Forest Conservation
39 Plan for the same site, may, subject to conditions of this Section, be credited against
40 the minimum landscape improvement requirements of this Section.
41
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-65
B. Landscape plantings required in this Section, 1 and meeting the size and specification
2 requirements of this Section, may be credited against afforestation or reforestation
3 requirements of a related Forest Conservation Plan for the same site, in accordance
4 with the following schedule:
5
6 1. Deciduous, shade/canopy trees (assumed 22’ avg. canopy) 400 sq. ft. area
7 2. Evergreen trees (assumed 18’ avg. canopy) 250 sq. ft. area
8 3. Understory trees (assumed 12’ avg. canopy) 125 sq. ft. area
9 C. Afforestation or Reforestation plantings required under a related Forest
10 Conservation Plan for the same site, may be credited against the required landscape
11 improvements of this Section only when the plantings meet the minimum size and
12 locational requirements outlined in this Section.
13
14 28-1014.6 LANDSCAPE IMPROVEMENTS
15
16 A. Single Family Detached and/or Duplex Residential Subdivisions
17
18 1. Street trees shall be required on all streets except for alleys or as
19 otherwise determined by the Planning Commission. Determine number
20 of required trees by computing street centerline length(s) and dividing
21 by (25) equals total number of required street trees; credit against
22 requirement wherever existing forest or individual trees over 6” caliper
23 will be “effectively” preserved in or within 5’ of prescribed street r/w.
24 Street trees shall generally be consistently spaced, although some
25 clustering and massing at accent or focal points may be permitted. A
26 minimum of 80% of the required street tree plantings shall be deciduous,
27 shade/canopy type trees as approved by the Planning Commission.
28
29 2. Bufferyards required per 10-4.
30
31 B. Attached Residential Housing Development including Townhouse
32 Subdivisions, Condominiums, and Apartments or as otherwise determined by
33 Planning Commission (development product of these types that effectively
34 integrate attached housing within a mixed use or single family residential
35 subdivision may be excluded from the requirements of this section and shall
36 then comply with the applicable subdivision sections).
37
38 1. Overall minimum tree plantings required (excluding required
39 bufferyards) shall be three (3.0) trees per residential unit. At a minimum,
40 the required tree plantings shall be located as follow:
41
42 a. Street Trees (both public and private streets) - one(1) deciduous,
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-66
shade/canopy tree per 25’ 1 of street centerline length. Trees to
2 be planted along both sides of street, behind curb and inside
3 sidewalk wherever possible or otherwise within 15’ of curb line.
4
5 b. Parking Lots/Parking Courts- one (1) deciduous, shade/canopy
6 per five (5) spaces to be located within the parking lot interior.
7 See Figure 10-5. Trees shall be located within the parking bays
8 so that no more than 10 parking spaces form an uninterrupted
9 row. Trees shall be planted within an area of pervious space of
10 at least 64 sq. ft. allocated per tree, with no dimension of any
11 parking lot planting island less than six feet (6’).
12
13 c. All parking lots shall be landscaped with an evergreen shrub
14 hedge which will grow to a minimum 42” height within 5 years
15 along all sides excluding the building or facility access side(s).
16 Shrubs shall be spaced to form a continuous hedge within 5
17 years. Required Bufferyards may replace all or part of this
18 requirement when the applicant can demonstrate that effective
19 screening will be achieved. See figure 10-6.
20
21 d. Balance of required three (3) trees/unit to be planted around
22 structures, on lots and/or common open space areas. A minimum
23 of 25% of these trees shall be evergreen. Bufferyard plantings
24 may be supplemented with these trees if it can be demonstrated
25 to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission that the overall
26 appearance and screening needs of the project would be better
27 served.
28
29 2. Shrub and Groundcover Plantings- shrubs and groundcovers shall be
30 integrated into the site and landscape plan to complement architectural
31 design, screen objectionable views, separate pedestrian activities from
32 vehicular travel ways, stabilize sensitive or eroding areas and other
33 applications that contribute to the overall landscape appearance. The
34 applicant shall provide shrub and groundcover plantings or demonstrate
35 why they are unnecessary, impractical or not effective in providing an
36 acceptable landscape appearance.
37
38 C. Non-Residential Subdivisions
39
40 1. Street trees shall be required on all streets except for alleys or as
41 otherwise determined by the Planning Commission. Determine number
42 of required trees by computing street centerline length(s) and dividing
43 by (35) equals total number of required street trees; credit against
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-67
requirement wherever e 1 xisting forest or individual trees over 6” caliper
2 will be “effectively” preserved in or within 5’ of prescribed street r/w.
3 Street trees shall generally be consistently spaced, although some
4 clustering and massing at accent or focal points may be permitted. A
5 minimum of 80% of the required street tree plantings shall be deciduous,
6 shade/canopy type trees as approved by the Planning Commission.
7
8 2. Bufferyards required per Section 28 – 1014.7.E.
9
10 D. Commercial/Office and or Accessory Residential Uses in CR Zoning District
11
12 1. This land use type(s) presents many opportunities, limitations and site
13 specific challenges for landscape improvements. Typically, parking
14 areas are at a premium and area for landscaping is limited or non15
existent. Street tree plantings, parking lot interior plantings, buffering of
16 trash and service areas, and landscaping of pedestrian/public plaza space
17 shall be addressed. At a minimum, one (1) tree per 750 sq. ft. of building
18 footprint shall be provided on-site or as street trees in the public r/w
19 frontage of the site. All parking lots shall be landscaped with an
20 evergreen shrub hedge which will grow to a minimum 42” height within
21 5 years along street or alley frontages, and along all, or portions of sides
22 visible from streets, excluding building access sides. Shrubs shall be
23 spaced to form a continuous hedge within 5 years. Additional shrub and
24 groundcover landscape improvements shall be provided unless the
25 applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning
26 Commission why additional plantings are unnecessary, or create
27 practical difficulty.
28
29 E. Commercial/Office Uses (excluding CR Zoning District)
30
31 1. Overall minimum tree plantings required (excluding required
32 bufferyards) shall be based on site area to be disturbed. (Disturbed area
33 includes all site areas except for existing forest retention and
34 preservation, existing wetland preservation, significant non bufferyard
35 areas of larger sites to be preserved in a natural state, and required
36 bufferyard areas. The minimum tree requirement shall be:
37
38 a. Disturbed area up to 11,00 sq. ft. 1 tree/1000 sq. ft.
39 11,001 to 100,000 sq. ft. 1 tree/1500 sq. ft.
40 >100,001 sq. ft. 1 tree/2500 sq. ft.
41
42 2. The following planting location requirements shall be met, with the
43 balance of required tree plantings to be located on-site where
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-68
appropriate. Bufferyard plantings 1 may be supplemented with these trees
2 if it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission
3 that the overall appearance and screening needs of the project would be
4 better served. Existing specimen trees to be preserved within the
5 disturbed area may be credited toward any applicable planting location
6 requirement total.
7
8 a. Internal, on-lot public or private street tree plantings- one (1)
9 shade/canopy tree per 35’ of street centerline length. Trees to be
10 planted within 15’ of curb line. Streets integrated within the
11 parking lot area shall be included under the interior parking lot
12 planting requirement. See Figure 10-7.
13
14 b. Interior Parking Lot Plantings- 1 tree per 7.5 spaces to be
15 planted within the interior of the parking lot, see Figure 10-7.
16 Trees shall be located within the parking bays so that no more
17 than 15 parking spaces form an uninterrupted row. Trees shall
18 be planted within an area of pervious space of at least 64 sq. ft.
19 allocated per tree, with no dimension of any parking lot planting
20 island less than 6’.
21
22 c. All parking lots shall be landscaped with an evergreen shrub
23 hedge which will grow to a minimum 42” height within 5 years
24 along all street or alley frontages and along all, or portions of
25 sides visible from streets or alleys, excluding the building or
26 facility access side(s). Shrubs shall be spaced to form a
27 continuous hedge within 5 years. Required Bufferyards may
28 replace all or part of this requirement when the applicant can
29 demonstrate that effective screening will be achieved. See
30 Figure 10-7.
31
32 d. Building Facade Plantings- the landscape improvement plan
33 shall incorporate tree, shrub, groundcover and accent plantings
34 around entrance points, along the entrance face(s) of building(s)
35 and/or within the adjacent pedestrian paving areas. See Figure
36 10-8. These landscape planting areas (excluding turf) shall be
37 comprised as follows:
38
39 i. one (1) tree per 50’ of front building facade or portion
40 thereof
41 ii. landscape beds containing understory trees, shrubs,
42 groundcovers that cover 25% of the front building
43 facade. Minimum bed dimension shall be five feet (5’).
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-69
A building 1 with a sixty foot front facade would meet
2 these requirements with two trees located in two shrub
3 beds 7.5’ by 5’ on either side of the entrance door.
4 Required shade/canopy trees can be located within these
5 beds where the bed size equals or exceeds 64 sq. ft. Plant
6 type and form shall reflect the adjacent building form
7 and mass. Large or tall buildings shall incorporate larger
8 plantings and more trees.
9
10 e. Service/Loading Areas- includes areas for trash dumpsters,
11 compactors, trash and recycling staging areas, and truck loading
12 and staging areas. Unless otherwise screened from normal and
13 significant view, applicant shall provide minimum 6’ wall/fence
14 with at least 50% of face planted with evergreen shrubs or trees.
15 In lieu of 50% planting requirement, wall or fence shall be a
16 decorative architectural statement compatible with the
17 architectural design of the adjoining structure. Access
18 opening(s) to be oriented away from streets and predominant
19 pedestrian/traffic views, or gated to screen view.
20
21 f. Shrub and Groundcover Plantings- shrubs and groundcovers
22 shall be integrated into the site and landscape plan to
23 complement architectural design, screen objectionable views,
24 separate pedestrian activities from vehicular travel ways,
25 stabilize sensitive or eroding areas and other applications that
26 contribute to the overall landscape appearance. The applicant
27 shall provide shrub and groundcover plantings or demonstrate
28 why they are unnecessary, impractical or not effective in
29 providing an acceptable landscape appearance.
30
31 g. Bufferyards required per Section28 – 1014.7.E.
32
33 F. Industrial/Business and Service Uses
34
35 1. Overall minimum tree plantings required (excluding required
36 bufferyards) shall be based on site area to be disturbed. (Disturbed area
37 includes all site areas except for existing forest retention and
38 preservation, existing wetland preservation, significant non bufferyard
39 areas of larger sites to be preserved in a natural state, and required
40 bufferyard areas. The minimum tree requirement shall be one (1) tree
41 per 3000 sq. ft. of disturbed area.
42
43 2. The following planting location requirements shall be met, with the
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-70
balance of required tree 1 plantings to be located on-site where
2 appropriate. Bufferyard plantings may be supplemented with these trees
3 if it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission
4 that the overall appearance and screening needs of the project would be
5 better served. Existing specimen trees to be preserved within the
6 disturbed area may be credited toward any applicable planting location
7 requirement total.
8
9 a. Interior Parking Lot Plantings- 1 tree per 10 spaces to be planted
10 within the interior of the parking lot, see Figure 10-7. Trees
11 shall be located within the parking bays so that no more than 15
12 parking spaces form an uninterrupted row. Trees shall be planted
13 within an area of pervious space of at least 64 sq.ft. allocated per
14 tree, with no dimension of any parking lot planting island less
15 than 6’.
16
17 b. All parking lots shall be landscaped with an evergreen shrub
18 hedge which will grow to a minimum 42” height within 5 years
19 along all street frontages and along all, or portions of sides
20 visible from a street, excluding the building or facility access
21 side(s). Shrubs shall be spaced to form a continuous hedge
22 within 5 years. Required Bufferyards may replace all or part of
23 this requirement when the applicant can demonstrate that
24 effective screening will be achieved. See Figure 10-7.
25
26 c. Building Envelope Plantings- the entrance facade(s) and other
27 facades visible from a street shall incorporate tree plantings
28 within 50’ of these building facades. These plantings shall be
29 located to accent entrance and visitor areas, and sited to lessen
30 the visual impact of monolithic building masses. The minimum
31 tree planting requirement shall equal or exceed one (1)
32 deciduous, shade/canopy tree per twenty feet (20’) of the
33 affected facade(s) perimeter. See Figure 10-9.
34
35 option: substitute 1.5 evergreen or understory tree for 1
36 shade/canopy tree up to 50% of required minimum. (Note: plant
37 type and form shall respond to the adjacent building form and
38 mass. Large or tall buildings shall incorporate larger, taller tree
39 species and forms.
40
41 d. Service/Loading Areas- includes areas for trash dumpsters,
42 compactors, trash and recycling staging areas, and truck loading
43 and staging areas;
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-71
1
2 -unless otherwise screened from normal and significant on or
3 off-site view, applicant shall provide minimum 8’ wall/fence
4 with at least 50% of face planted with evergreen shrubs or trees.
5 In lieu of 50% planting requirement, wall or fence shall be a
6 decorative architectural statement compatible with the
7 architectural design of the adjoining structure. Access
8 opening(s) to be oriented away from streets and predominate
9 pedestrian/traffic views, or gated to screen view
10
11 option: evergreen tree buffer planting, minimum 7’ height at
12 installation, staggered spacing to create solid screen at
13 installation.
14
15 e. Earth Berming and Drainage/SWM Features- whenever
16 possible, utilize these features to accent site planning and
17 building siting. Properly formed, significant berming may be
18 considered toward credit for tree planting requirement.
19
20 f. Bufferyards required per Section 28 – 1014.7.E.
21
22 G. Large Lot Display Land Uses and Specialty Land Uses: Gas Stations, Car or
23 Equipment Dealerships, and other uses that require large paved areas for display
24 or storage of vehicles, equipment, and other uses as determined by Town
25 Planner. The Town recognizes the peculiar nature of these land use types and
26 the need for large, open expanses of paved area and adequate traffic flow
27 opportunities. Nevertheless, the appearance of this land use type can be greatly
28 enhanced with landscape improvements without detrimentally affecting these
29 site and user needs.
30
31 1. Overall minimum tree plantings required (excluding required
32 bufferyards) shall be based on site area to be disturbed. (Disturbed area
33 includes all site areas except for existing forest retention and
34 preservation, existing wetland preservation, significant non bufferyard
35 areas of larger sites to be preserved in a natural state, and required
36 bufferyard areas. The minimum tree requirement shall be one (1) tree
37 per 3000 sq. ft. of disturbed area.
38
39 2. The following planting location requirements shall be met, with the
40 balance of required tree plantings to be located on-site where
41 appropriate. Bufferyard plantings may be supplemented with these trees
42 if it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission
43 that the overall appearance and screening needs of the project would be
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-72
better served. Existing specimen 1 trees to be preserved within the
2 disturbed area may be credited toward any applicable planting location
3 requirement total.
4
5 a. Interior Customer Parking Lot Plantings- 1 tree per 7.5 spaces
6 to be planted within the interior of the visitor or customer
7 parking lot, see Figure 10-7. Trees shall be located within the
8 parking bays so that no more than 15 parking spaces form an
9 uninterrupted row. Trees shall be planted within an area of
10 pervious space of at least 64 sq. ft. allocated per tree, with no
11 dimension of any parking lot planting island less than 6’.
12
13 b. All visitor/customer parking lots shall be landscaped with an
14 evergreen shrub hedge which will grow to a minimum 42”
15 height within 5 years along all sides excluding the building or
16 facility access side(s). Shrubs shall be spaced to form a
17 continuous hedge within 5 years. See figure 10-8.
18
19 c. Building Envelope Plantings- the landscape improvement plan
20 shall incorporate tree, shrub, groundcover and accent plantings
21 around entrance points, and along all building faces visible from
22 streets or public ways. Service bay or equipment access areas are
23 excluded. These landscape planting areas (excluding turf) shall
24 be located along a minimum of 25% of the building face(s), see
25 Figure 10-8. Minimum planting bed dimension shall be five
26 feet (5’). Plant type and form shall reflect the adjacent building
27 form and mass. Large or tall buildings shall incorporate larger
28 plantings and more trees.
29
30 d. Bufferyards required per Section 28 – 1014.7.E.
31
32 H. Specialty Land Uses; Mini-Warehouses
33
34 1. As a supplement to any perimeter bufferyards required below, mini35
warehouse developments shall incorporate 1 evergreen tree and 1 shade
36 canopy tree per 50’ of parcel perimeter, unless the applicant can
37 demonstrate that the development will not be seen from adjoining public
38 ways. The Planning Commission may require additional screening
39 unless the applicant demonstrates enhanced architectural proposals,
40 enhanced fencing or wall screening or other design proposals that
41 mitigate the “typical” appearance of mini-warehouse developments.
42
43 2. Bufferyards required per Section 28– 1014.7.E.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-73
1
2 28 – 1014.7 BUFFERYARD STANDARDS
3
4 A. Bufferyard standards are proposed as part of this Section for many purposes,
5 including;
6
7 1. To buffer negative aspects of more intense land uses from less intense
8 land uses
9
10 2. To buffer the general public from “back of house image” and other non11
regulated homeowner improvements, i.e., fences, sheds, play structures,
12 etc.
13
14 3. To develop the framework for a town-wide landscape program where
15 street and development corridors over time become landscaped and
16 lined with street trees.
17
18 4. To enhance overall Town character and appearance.
19
20 B. Ownership and maintenance responsibilities and use of bufferyards shall be
21 clearly stated on subdivision plats, site plans, restrictive covenant and easement
22 agreements, forest conservation agreements and other such documents that help
23 to clarify these issues.
24
25 C. Bufferyards shall be completely implemented, installed and/or planted by the
26 owner/developer (herein referred to as the Applicant) prior to issuance of an
27 occupancy permit, or in the case of subdivisions, phased per development
28 sections, but completed prior to issuance of any occupancy permit for a phase
29 or section.
30
31 D. Bufferyards shall conform to the following general area and detail
32 specifications:
33
34 1. Bufferyards shall occupy part or all of the required building setback or
35 yard area and expand said setback or yard should the bufferyard width
36 be greater than the required setback dimension. In some cases, as part
37 of an integrated landscape design, bufferyard plantings may be more
38 effective if located nearer buildings and/or integrated with other
39 required on-lot plantings; the Planning Commission may approve this
40 option.
41
42 2. No development improvements, except for stormwater management
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-74
facilities and pedestrian/1 bikeways when the applicant demonstrates that
2 the screening effect of the bufferyard will not be diminished, utility
3 substations and signs, so long as no vegetation requirements are
4 reduced, are permitted within any bufferyard. No residential structures,
5 pools, or accessory structures are permitted within any bufferyard.
6 Fences and walls as part of a required bufferyard or landscape
7 improvement design shall be located along or near the interior side of
8 the bufferyard.
9
10 3. For bufferyards between more or less intense zoning or development
11 districts, the following shall apply:
12
13 a. If the adjoining parcel is vacant, the applicant shall provide 50%
14 of the required bufferyard width and planting requirement.
15
16 b. If the adjoining parcel is developed, the applicant shall provide
17 the full bufferyard width and planting requirement, unless he/she
18 can demonstrate that the adjoining parcel has provided and
19 agreed to long term protect existing screening meeting the
20 bufferyard standards herein. Under these conditions, 50% to
21 100% of the bufferyard requirement may be waived by the
22 Planning Commission.
23
24 4. Forest Conservation afforestation or reforestation otherwise meeting the
25 requirements of the Town of Easton Forest Conservation ordinance can
26 be located within bufferyards. Such plantings that meet the bufferyard
27 planting unit requirements, or that can be demonstrated to provide equal
28 or better screening and buffering, may be credited against the bufferyard
29 requirements.
30
31 5. Bufferyard planting requirements shall be based on a fifty foot (50’)
32 increment. Determine total length of affected area, divide by (50) and
33 round to the nearest whole number to determine minimum planting units
34 (425’ of affected frontage divided by 50 = 8.5 or 8 required planting
35 units, whereas 426’ of affected frontage divided by 50 = 8.52 or 9
36 required planting units. Affected area or frontage shall be reduced by
37 the width of street or access rights-of-way. Plant material sizes shall
38 equal or exceed the minimum plant material specifications in this
39 Section. The overall planting requirement can be reduced by areas of
40 existing forest to be preserved comprising 75% of the minimum
41 bufferyard width.
42
43 6. Bufferyard planting units and prescribed options shall be implemented
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-75
as defined below, 1 however, plant substitutions, berming proposals, etc.,
2 will be considered and may be approved by the Planning Commission
3 when it can be demonstrated that the screening or appearance benefits
4 will equal or exceed the prescribed Bufferyard planting unit
5 requirement.
6
7 7. Bufferyard improvements shall be located so as to provide effective
8 screening benefits and some sense of street tree plantings. See Figure
9 10-10.
10
11 E. Bufferyard Width and Planting Unit Standards (per 50’ increment)
12
13 1. Bufferyard ‘A’(for residentially zoned lots or land use applications to
14 buffer Major Roads as described in Zoning Ord., Sec. 28 – 1009).
15
16 a. 40’ width
17
18 b. Plant unit:
19
20 2 shade/canopy trees, 2 evergreen trees and 10 large shrubs
21
22 Note: where this Bufferyard is located between a parking lot and
23 street r/w, delete the shrub requirement.
24
25 c. Options:
26
27 1. Average 3’ berm, reduce evergreen tree height. to 5’,
28 reduce shrubs to 5.
29
30 2. Substitute 1.5 understory trees for 1 evergreen tree.
31
32
33 2. Bufferyard ‘B’(for non-residentially zoned lots or land use applications
34 to buffer Major Roads as described in Zoning Ord., Sec. 28 – 1010).
35
36 a. 25’ width
37
38 b. Plant unit:
39
40 2 shade/canopy trees and 1 evergreen tree
41
42 c. Options:
43
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-76
1. Average 3’ berm, reduce 1 evergreen tree height to 5’
2
3 2. Substitute 1.5 understory trees for 1 evergreen tree for
4 maximum 50% of required evergreen trees.
5
6 3. Bufferyard ‘C’ (for all residentially zoned lots or land use applications
7 to buffer all other streets equaling or exceeding Town of Easton
8 “Residential Collector Designation) This bufferyard is not required
9 along the street where the primary lot frontage is designated.
10
11 a. 20’ width
12
13 b. Plant unit:
14
15 1 shade/canopy tree, 2 evergreen trees & 5 large shrubs
16
17 Note: when this bufferyard is located between a parking lot and
18 street r/w, delete the shrub requiremet.
19
20 c. Options:
21
22 1. Substitute 1 evergreen tree for 5 shrubs
23
24 4. Bufferyard ‘D’ (for all non-residentially zoned lots or land use
25 applications (excluding CR zoned parcels) to buffer all other streets
26 equaling or exceeding Town of Easton “Residential Collector
27 Designation)
28
29 a. 15’ width
30
31 b.Plant unit: 1 shade/canopy trees, 1 evergreen trees & 5 shrubs
32
33 Note: when this Bufferyard is located between a parking lot and
34 street r/w, delete the shrub requirement
35
36
37 5. Bufferyard ‘E’ (along non-street, exterior property lines adjoining more
38 or less intense zoning or land use) The Planning Commission may
39 require additional buffering above the minimum standards listed below
40 when the proposed or adjoining land uses are substantially
41 incompatible.
42
43 a. 10’ width
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-77
1
2 b. Plant unit: 1 shade/canopy and 3 evergreen trees
3
4 c. Option:
5
6 1. 2 shade/canopy trees and 8 large evergreen shrubs
7
8 2. 4 evergreen trees
9
10 3. wall/fence with 3 large evergreen shrubs
11
12 SECTION 28 – 1015 SETBACKS FROM STREAMS
13
14 No structure or impervious surface shall be located within 100 feet of any perennial stream
15 or 50 feet of any intermittent stream. For the purposes of this Section, the terms perennial
16 and intermittent stream shall refer to any feature identified as such on the most recent
17 United States Geologic Survey’s 7.5-minute quadrangle of the area, or as confirmed by
18 field verification and at the discretion of the Town Planner. In cases where a greater
19 setback may be required by other rules or regulations (e.g. Critical Area Law) the greater
20 setback shall be required.
21
22 The Planning Commission may consider and approve alternative measures to a 100’ (or
23 50’) grass stream buffer. Such alternate Buffers must achieve the same Stormwater
24 Management and Nutrient Removal levels as the required 100 (or 50) foot buffer.
25
26 SECTION 28 – 1016 SIDEWALKS
27
28 A. In all non-residential Zoning Districts (i.e. all districts except A-1, R-7A, R-10A,
29 and R-10M) and in the PUD and HC Floating Zones, sidewalks shall be constructed
30 along any Town of Easton-owned right-of-way, with the following exceptions:
31
32 1. When abutting alleys; and
33
34 2. When abutting an approved open section (i.e. a roadway with no curb and
35 gutter) road.
36
37 B. In addition, the Planning Commission may require sidewalks on property adjacent
38 to any jurisdiction’s public road.
39
40 C. Any such required sidewalk shall be constructed adjacent to the site along the entire
41 frontage(s) of the property.
42
43 D. To the extent practicable, walkways shall also be constructed on the site to connect
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-78
building entrances and pedestrian pathway 1 systems into the existing or proposed
2 public sidewalk system.
3
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-79
1
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-80
1
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-81
1
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-82
1
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-83
1
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-84
1
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-85
1
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-86
1
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE X
10-87
1
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XI
11-1
1 ARTICLE XI
2 SIGN REGULATIONS
3
4 SECTION 28 – 1101 SIGN REGULATIONS
5 28 – 1101.1 PURPOSES
6
7 The purpose of this section is to prescribe standards for the location, design, color,
8 illumination, height and size of all types of signs within the Town of Easton in order to
9 protect the unique natural beauty and small-town character of the Town. This section
10 also intends to promote the following:
11
12 A. To encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication for the
13 convenience of the public by preventing their over-concentration, improper
14 placement and excessive size;
15
16 B. To maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment while promoting creativity
17 and the Town’s ability to attract sources of economic development and growth;
18
19 C. To minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private
20 property;
21
22 D. To protect and enhance the small-town character of Easton by requiring new and
23 replacement signage which is:
24
25 1. Creative and distinctive;
26
27 2. Compatible with its surroundings;
28
29 3. An integral component of the style and character of the building to which
30 it relates;
31
32 4. Appropriate to the type of activity to which it pertains
33
34 5. Expressive of the identity of individual proprietors or of the community as
35 a whole, and;
36
37 6. Appropriately sized for its context
38
39 E. To enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign restrictions; and
40
41 F. To preserve and protect the public health, safety and general welfare.
42
43 28 – 1101.2 APPLICABILITY-EFFECT
44
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XI
11-2
A sign may be erected, placed, established, 1 painted, created, or maintained in the Town
2 only in conformance with the standards, procedures, exemptions, and other requirements
3 of this Section.
4
5 The effect of this Section as more specifically set forth herein, is:
6
7 A. To establish a permit system to allow a variety of types of signs in commercial
8 and industrial zones and a limited variety of signs in other zones, subject to the
9 standards and the permit procedures of this Section;
10
11 B. To allow certain signs that are small, unobtrusive, and incidental to the principal
12 use of the respective lots on which they are located subject to the substantive
13 requirements of this Section, but without a requirement for permits;
14
15 C. To prohibit all signs not expressly permitted by this Section;
16
17 D. To provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this Section; AND
18
19 E. To require all signs to ultimately comply with the provisions of these regulations.
20
21 28 – 1101.3 ADMINISTRATION
22
23 A. PERMITS
24
25 1. No sign shall be erected, displayed, altered, or enlarged until an
26 application has been filed, and until a permit for such action has been
27 issued. Applications shall be on forms prescribed by the Zoning
28 Administrator. At a minimum, all applications shall include a scale
29 drawing specifying dimensions, materials, illumination, letter sizes, colors,
30 support systems, and location on land or buildings, with all relevant
31 measurements.
32
33 2. Permits shall be issued only if the Zoning Administrator determines the
34 sign complies or will comply with all applicable provisions of this
35 Ordinance and the Town Building Code. Such application may be filed by
36 the owner of the land or building, or any person who has the authority to
37 erect a sign on the premises.
38
39 3. The Zoning Administrator shall act within thirty (30) days of receipt of
40 such application together with the required fee. The Zoning
41 Administrator's action or failure to act may be appealed to the Board of
42 Appeals under the provision of Section 28 – 1303 of this Ordinance.
43
44 B. FEES
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XI
11-3
A schedule of fees for such permits may 1 be established and amended from time to
2 time by the Mayor and Council.
3
4 C. ENFORCEMENT
5
6 The Zoning Administrator and/or the Office of Code Enforcement are hereby
7 authorized to enforce this Ordinance. The Zoning Administrator and/or the office
8 of Code Enforcement are authorized to order the repair or removal of any sign and
9 its supporting structure which is judged dangerous, or in disrepair, or which is
10 erected or maintained contrary to this Ordinance.
11
12 D. REMOVAL OF SIGNS
13
14 1. Upon written notice that a sign is unsafe, damaged or deteriorated, the
15 owner of the site and/or the owner of the sign shall repair or remove the
16 sign. Immediate action is required for the repair or the removal of unsafe
17 signs. If repair or removal is not achieved within the time period specified
18 in the written notice, the sign shall be repaired or removed by the Town.
19
20 2. After use is discontinued, all on-site signs shall be removed in thirty (30)
21 days of the termination of the use. If any such sign is not removed within
22 said thirty (30) day limit, the Town may remove such signs.
23
24 3. Any sign which has been ordered removed, or is abandoned or
25 discontinued, shall be removed by the person, firm, or corporation
26 responsible for the sign within thirty (30) days of written notice to remove.
27 If any such sign is not removed within said thirty (30) day limit, the Town
28 may remove such signs.
29
30 4. Removed Signs deemed Refuse: Any sign or sign structure removed from
31 public property or within any public right-of-way may be deemed refuse
32 and disposed of by the Town.
33
34 5. Removed Signs to be Stored: Any sign or sign structure removed by the
35 Town, which are not deemed refuse, shall be held not less than thirty (30)
36 days by the Town during which period it may be recovered by the owner
37 upon paying the Town for cost of removal and storage, and upon payment
38 of any imposed fine. If not recovered within the thirty (30) day period, the
39 sign or sign structure is hereby declared abandoned and title thereto shall
40 be vested in the Town for disposal in any manner permitted by law.
41
42 E. VARIANCES FOR SIGNS
43
44 The Board of Zoning Appeals may hear and decide applications for variance from
45 these Sign Regulations in accordance with the provisions of Section 28 – 1303.5
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XI
11-4
(C) of this Ordinance. However, as 1 ample provision for premises identification
2 have been made herein and whereas design issues are a central theme of the Town
3 of Easton Comprehensive Plan, the Board shall examine all options when hearing
4 applications for Variances, in order to provide adequate identification, yet be
5 sensitive to design considerations (For example, this may mean granting an extra
6 building sign, rather than granting a height variance for a freestanding sign). For
7 Variances from the Sign Regulations, there is no presumption of an entitlement to
8 any particular type of signage.
9
10 28 – 1101.4 GENERAL
11
12 A. PROHIBITED SIGNS
13
14 1. Billboards, streamers, pennants, beacons, ribbons, spinners or other
15 similar devices shall not be constructed, posted, or erected in any zone.
16
17 2. Flashing signs and signs containing reflective elements which sparkle or
18 twinkle in the sunlight are not permitted.
19
20 3. Portable signs, inflatable signs or tethered balloons are not permitted.
21
22 4. Any sign advertising or identifying a business or organization which is
23 either defunct or no longer located on the premises is not permitted after
24 thirty (30) days said business or organization becomes defunct.
25
26 5. Wall signs in excess of two hundred (200) square feet.
27
28 6. Freestanding signs in excess of one hundred (50) square feet in area per
29 side.
30
31 7. No sign, except for a traffic, regulatory, or informational sign, shall use
32 the words "stop," "caution," or "danger," or shall incorporate red, amber,
33 or green lights resembling traffic signals, or shall resemble "stop" or
34 "yield" signs in shape and color.
35
36 8. No sign may be painted onto any wall or roof, except for the restoration of
37 historic wall signs, in the Historic District, upon approval of the Historic
38 District Commission.
39
40 9. Signs with exposed electrical wires.
41
42 10. Strings of bulbs are not permitted, except as part of a holiday celebration.
43
44 11. No person may erect a sign that constitutes a hazard to pedestrian or
45 vehicular traffic because of intensity or direction of illumination.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XI
11-5
1
2 12. No person may erect, maintain, or suffer to remain a sign which:
3
4 a. is structurally unsafe;
5
6 b. constitutes a hazard to public safety and health by reason of
7 inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or abandonment;
8
9 c. obstructs free entrance or exit from a required door, window, or
10 fire escape;
11
12 d. obstructs light or air or interferes with a proper functioning of the
13 building; or
14
15 e. is capable of causing electrical shock.
16
17 13. No sign shall exceed forty (40) feet in length.
18
19 14. No sign surface shall exceed a vertical dimension of fifteen feet.
20
21 15. No person may erect a sign which is affixed to a fence, utility pole, or tree,
22 shrub, rock, or other natural object.
23
24 16. Signs shall not cover architectural details such as, but not limited to
25 arches, sills, moldings, cornices, and transom windows.
26
27 17. No attached signs shall project more than 36" beyond the building line.
28
29 18. Electronic message centers that have any motion in the transitioning
30 between messages or that change more frequently than once every twelve
31 (12) seconds.
32
33 19. No signs shall be placed on or about public property or within any public
34 right-of-way except those installed by the Maryland State Highway
35 Administration and the Town of Easton for public safety and welfare or
36 pursuant to any governmental function, law, ordinance, or other
37 regulation.
38
39 B. NON-CONFORMING SIGNS AND SIGN STRUCTURES
40
41 Non-conforming signs and sign structures may be altered only as qualified below:
42
43 1. A non-conforming sign may be modified only to reflect a new trade name,
44 different words, letters, or numbers, new design, different colors or
45 different logo, provided that the changes do not increase the degree of
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XI
11-6
non-conformity of said 1 sign and further that such revision is for the
2 purpose of advertising the same business before and after the
3 modification. If the use of a premises changes, all signs for the new use
4 shall be brought into compliance with this Section.
5
6 2. Nothing in the Section shall be deemed to prevent keeping in good repair a
7 non-conforming sign, including sign maintenance, repainting, and
8 replacement of broken or deteriorated parts of the sign itself.
9
10 3. A non-conforming sign or sign structure which is destroyed or damaged
11 by any cause may be restored within six (6) months after such destruction
12 or damage only after the owner has shown that the damage did not exceed
13 fifty percent (50%) of the appraised value of the sign. If such sign or sign
14 structure is destroyed or damaged to an extent exceeding fifty percent
15 (50%), it shall be removed and shall not be reconstructed or replaced
16 unless such action makes the sign structure conforming in all respects.
17
18 4. A non-conforming sign or sign structure shall be removed within thirty
19 (30) days if the building containing the use to which the sign is accessory
20 is demolished or destroyed to an extent exceeding fifty percent (50%) of
21 the building's appraised value.
22
23 5. An electronic reader board may not be incorporated into a nonconforming
24 sign.
25
26 C. MEASUREMENT OF SIGN AREA
27
28 1. Sign measurements shall be based upon the entire area of the sign, with a
29 single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the actual sign
30 surface.
31
32 2. For a sign consisting of individual letters or symbols attached to a surface,
33 building, wall, or window, the area shall be considered to be that of the
34 smallest rectangle, square, triangle, trapezoid, circle or any combination of
35 these shapes which encompasses all of the letters and symbols.
36
37 3. The area of supporting framework (for example brackets, posts, etc) shall
38 not be included in the area if such framework is incidental to the display.
39
40 4. When a sign has two (2) or more faces, the area of all faces shall be
41 included in determining the area, except where two faces are placed back
42 to back and are at no point more than two (2) feet from each other. In this
43 case, the sign area shall be taken as either face, and if the faces are
44 unequal, the larger shall determine the area.
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XI
11-7
1 D. MEASUREMENT OF SIGN HEIGHT
2
3 1. The height of any sign shall be measured from the surface of the road up
4 to the highest point of the sign
5
6 28 – 1101.5 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
7
8 A. The following restrictions shall apply to permitted signs:
9
10 1. Architectural compatibility: A sign (including its supporting structure and
11 components, if any) shall be designed as an integral design element of a
12 building’s architecture, and shall be architecturally compatible, including
13 color, with any building to which the sign is to identify and with surrounding
14 structures as determined by the Town Planner and/or the Planning
15 Commission.
16
17 2. Clearance from Electric Conductors: Signs shall not be located with less than
18 five feet six inches (5’6”) horizontal or ten feet (10”) vertical clearance from
19 overhead electric conductors which are energized under seven hundred fifty
20 (750) volts. Signs shall not be located with less than eight feet six inches
21 (8’6”) horizontal or eleven feet vertical clearance from overhead electric
22 conductors which are energized in excess of seven hundred fifty (750) volts.
23
24 3. Component Painting: All light fixtures, conduit and shielding shall be painted
25 to match either the building or the supporting structure that serves as the
26 background of the sign.
27
28 4. Lighting Requirements:
29
30 a. Externally lit signs shall be illuminated only with steady, stationary,
31 shielded light sources directed solely onto the sign without causing
32 glare. Light bulbs or lighting tubes used for illuminating a sign shall
33 not be visible from adjacent public rights-of-way or residential
34 properties.
35
36 b. The intensity of sign lighting shall not exceed that necessary to
37 illuminate and make legible a sign from the adjacent road or closest
38 right-of-way; and the illumination of a sign shall not be obtrusive to
39 the surrounding area (in accordance with exterior lighting standards
40 promulgated by the Town Engineer).
41
42 c. The fixtures used to illuminate signs shall not be directed toward
43 nearby residential properties.
44
45 d. Internally illuminated signs are permitted in certain circumstances as
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XI
11-8
1 follows:
2
3 i. individual back lit letters which are silhouetted against a softly
4 illuminated wall;
5
6 ii. Individual letters with translucent faces, containing soft
7 lighting elements inside each letter; and
8
9 iii. Metal-faced box signs with cut-out letters and soft-glow
10 fluorescent tubes.
11
12 e. Fluorescent lights shall be allowed for indirect illumination when
13 placed in such a manner that the light tubes are not exposed to view
14 from the public right-of-way or sidewalk.
15
16 f. All lighted on-site signs shall be illuminated indirectly by either
17 interior or exterior fixtures.
18
19 5. Location:
20
21 a. No signs shall be placed on or about public property or within any
22 public right-of-way.
23
24 b. No sign or sign structure shall be erected in such a manner that any
25 portion of its surface or supports will interfere with free use of all fire
26 appliances; including hydrants, standpipes, automatic fire sprinkler
27 connections, and the like. Fire lanes shall not be obstructed by the
28 placement of any sign or sign structure.
29
30 c. No sign shall obstruct any window to such an extent that any light or
31 ventilation is reduced to a point below that required by any law or
32 ordinance.
33
34 6. Sign Materials: Sign materials shall be similar to or compatible with the
35 structure they identify. Signs utilizing carved and painted wood surfaces are
36 encouraged in the Historic District.
37
38 7. Visibility Triangle: Signs shall comply with the provisions of Section 28 –
39 1008 of this Ordinance pertaining to the obstruction of vision at intersections.
40
41 8. Signs indicating the current time and/or temperature are permitted provided
42 they meet all other provisions of this Ordinance.
43
44 9. No more than 75% of the display area of any sign may be devoted to a reader45
board (whether electronic or manual).
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XI
11-9
1
2 28 – 1101.6 SIGNS PERMITTED WITHOUT PERMITS
3
4 The following signs may be erected without issuance of a sign permit, provided all other
5 applicable standards of this Ordinance are met:
6
7 A. No more than one (1) temporary sign advertising the sale, lease, or rental of the
8 premises upon which the sign is located, with the total area of the sign not
9 exceeding four (4) square feet. Such signs shall be removed within ten days
10 following the sale, lease or rental of the premise.
11
12 B. Signs relating to political elections and activities
13
14 1. Signs relating to political elections and activities shall be permitted under
15 the following conditions:
16
17 2. That no sign be located upon property owned by the Town of Easton or
18 upon any street or sidewalk.
19
20 3. That no sign be installed until such time as the owner of the site has given
21 his or her permission in writing for the sign to be installed.
22
23 4. All political signs shall conform to the development standards set forth in
24 Subsection 28 – 1101.5.
25
26 5. The total sign area of any political sign shall not exceed ten (10) square
27 feet.
28
29 C. Professional name plates or sign denoting the name and address of the occupants
30 of the premises, which sign or name plate shall not exceed a total of one (1)
31 square foot in area.
32
33 D. Banners
34
35 1. All banners shall meet the following standards:
36
37 a. On-site banners; exhibited for non-profit events or festivals shall
38 not exceed sixty (60) square feet in area. Any such banner may be
39 erected; fifteen (15) days prior to the event or festival. Banners
40 shall be removed no later than three (3) days after the event or
41 festival.
42
43 b. Off-site banners; exhibited for non-profit events or festivals shall
44 not exceed 200 square feet in area and are limited to two (2) off45
site locations. Those off-site banners shall have the permission of
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XI
11-10
the property owner on which 1 the banner is erected and shall not
2 make those properties be in non-conformance by the addition of
3 off-site banners. Any such banner may be erected fifteen (15) days
4 prior to the event or festival. Banners shall be removed no later
5 than three (3) days after the event or festival.
6
7 c. Off-site banners are prohibited on public property or within any
8 public right-of-way.
9
10 d. On-site banner announcing the grand opening of a new business
11 shall not exceed eight (8) square feet in area. Any such sign must
12 be erected on the day of the official opening of the business and
13 shall be removed within thirty (30) days of said opening. Only the
14 words "Grand Opening" shall be permitted to appear on such a
15 banner. A grand opening banner may only be erected one time per
16 business.
17
18 e. On-site banner announcing the closing of a business shall not
19 exceed eight (8) square feet in area. Any such sign may be erected
20 up to thirty (30) days prior to the closing of the business and shall
21 be removed within two (2) days of the closing of the business.
22 Only the words "Going-out-of Business" shall be permitted to
23 appear on such a banner. A going-out-of business banner may only
24 be erected one time per business.
25
26 f. Vertically oriented banners erected on the premises of any
27 permitted “Institutional Use” or at an approved PUD if such
28 banners are submitted and approved as part of the required sign
29 plan.
30
31 g. There shall be no more than one (1) banner displayed on any
32 commercial or industrial parcel at any one time.
33
34 E. RESERVED
35
36 F. FLAGS AND BUNTINGS
37
38 1. All Flags and Buntings shall meet the following standards:
39
40 a. In addition to any flag encompassed by the definition of “Flag” or
41 “Decorative Flag” (see Article II, Definitions – under “Signs”),
42 any business or organization may display a flag which replicates its
43 business name, trademark, or logo. Any other flag not covered by
44 these definitions shall be governed by the rules of sections 28 –
45 1101.4 (A) 1 and 28 – 1101.6 (D).
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XI
11-11
1
2 b. Flags and buntings exhibited to commemorate holidays or seasons
3 shall not exceed eight (8) square feet in area for flags and four (4)
4 square feet in area per buntings. Any such flags and buntings may
5 be erected; fifteen (15) days prior to the holiday or season. Those
6 flags and buntings shall be removed no later than three (3) days
7 after the holiday, festival or season.
8
9 c. Flags attached to buildings shall not exceed eight (8) square feet in
10 area.
11
12 d. Flags flown from a pole may be no greater than 60 square feet in
13 area and shall not be flown from a flag pole which exceeds 40 feet
14 in height.
15
16 e. There shall be no more than four (4) flags and six (6) buntings
17 displayed on any commercial or industrial parcel at any one time.
18
19 f. No more than one (1) flag or decorative flag per residential unit.
20 Such flag shall not exceed eight (8) square feet in area and must be
21 flown via a flagpole attached to the residence.
22
23 G. Signs erected or posted and maintained for public safety and welfare or pursuant
24 to any governmental function, law, Ordinance, or other regulation.
25
26 H. Directional signs solely indicating ingress and egress placed at driveway
27 locations, containing no advertising material, and where display area does not
28 exceed three (3) square feet or extend higher than four (4) feet above ground
29 level. Such sign will conform in all respects with the requirements of this code;
30 and
31
32 I. Signs relating to trespassing and hunting, not exceeding two (2) square feet in
33 area.
34
35 J. “Self/full Serve” signs not to exceed three (3) square feet in area are permitted on
36 each end of each pump island.
37
38 K. Signs affixed to the top or sides of an operable fuel dispensing pump shall not
39 exceed three (3) square feet in area, and shall only display instructional or price
40 information, and shall not include advertising copy pertaining to any product, sale
41 or promotion.
42
43 L. CONSTRUCTION SIGNAGE
44
45 1. On commercial and industrial properties, no more than one (1) sign per
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XI
11-12
architect, engineer, or general contractor 1 which shall not exceed thirty-two
2 (32) square feet in area and one (1) sign per sub-contractor which shall not
3 exceed twelve (12) square feet in area, may be placed on premises where
4 construction, repair or renovation is in progress. Such sign shall be
5 removed prior to the final inspection for Use and Occupancy. Supplier
6 signage is prohibited.
7
8 2. On residential properties, no more than one (1) sign which shall not
9 exceed four (4) square feet in area may be placed on premises where
10 construction, repair or renovation is in progress Such sign shall be
11 removed prior to the final inspection for Use and Occupancy.
12
13 M. No more than one (1) sign advertising a real estate development, commercial
14 development, or subdivision. Said sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square
15 feet in area and shall be located on the property to be developed or subdivided.
16 Such sign shall be removed when 80 percent of the initially available property has
17 been sold.
18
19 N. No more than one sign identifying a sales office. Said sign shall not exceed
20 sixteen (16) square feet and shall be located on the same lot as the sales office.
21 Such sign shall be removed when 80 percent of the initially available property has
22 been sold.
23
24 28 – 1101.6 SIGNS PERMITTED AFTER ISSUANCE OF SIGN PERMIT
25
26 The following signs may be erected in the Town of Easton after issuance of a sign permit by
27 the Town:
28
29 Only signs which refer to a permitted use or an approved Special Exception use as set forth
30 in Article II of this Ordinance are permitted, provided that such signs conform to the
31 provisions of this Section, and are located on the same lot as said use.
32
33 Signage within shopping centers shall be developed in accordance with an approved General
34 Signage Plan as per Section 28 – 1007.2 (A) 23 (C) of this Ordinance.
35
36 A. BUILDING SIGNS
37
38 1. Wall Signs
39
40 a. Wall signs shall not project more than fifteen inches (15”) from the
41 building surface.
42
43 b. Wall signs shall not be mounted higher than the eave line or top of the
44 parapet wall of the building and no portions of the sign shall extend
45 beyond the ends of the wall to which it is attached.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XI
11-13
1
2 c. For each business on a separate property, wall-mounted signage for
3 each street frontage is permitted with a maximum area of one square
4 foot of signage per one lineal foot of street frontage of the building.
5
6 d. Buildings which have multiple businesses accessed by separate
7 entrances each business shall be permitted one building sign for each
8 street frontage with a maximum area of one square foot of signage per
9 one lineal foot of street frontage of the building dedicated to that
10 business.
11
12 e. When two (2) or more businesses occupy one (1) building with
13 common entrances (i.e. without separate entrances) they shall be
14 considered one (1) business for sign computation purposes. This
15 means that for wall or building signs, buildings of this nature are
16 limited to one building sign per street frontage plus one directory sign
17 per common entrance.
18
19 2. Awning or Canopy Sign: Any portion of an awning containing advertising
20 copy shall be treated as a wall or building sign and shall be included in the
21 overall area calculations for such signs.
22
23 a. Signs may be attached flat against awnings made of rigid materials,
24 and shall not project above the awning. Awnings of non-rigid
25 materials (e.g. canvas) shall have signs only appliquéd or painted on
26 them.
27
28 b. There shall be a minimum clearance of at least eight (8’) feet between
29 the bottom of the awning and the ground at grade.
30
31 3. Directory Signs: Directory signs may be provided to identify individual
32 businesses or occupants of the same building or building complex, in
33 accordance with the following:
34
35 a. The display board shall be of an integrated and uniform design.
36
37 b. No more than one sign panel not to exceed two (2) square feet in area
38 is permitted per directory for each tenant business.
39
40 c. Directory signs shall be placed in one or more groups nearest the
41 pedestrian entrances adjacent to the building complex only, and may
42 be wall-mounted or freestanding signs. Such signs shall not exceed six
43 (6’) feet in height.
44
45 d. The total area of any directory sign shall not exceed thirty (30) square
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XI
11-14
feet or te 1 n (10) square feet within the CR zoning district.
2
3 e. Property management companies are allowed one (1) identification
4 sign per building managed not to exceed two (2) square feet. Such
5 signs shall not count against total allowable directory signage.
6
7 f. Directory signs shall not contain advertising copy.
8
9 4. Marquee Sign: is a sign which utilizes changeable letters or copy and is
10 restricted to commercial uses for the purpose of advertising dramatic, musical,
11 entertainment, or motion picture events which occur on the premises on a
12 regular basis, subject to the following standards:
13
14 a. There shall be no more than one internally illuminated change-letter
15 marquee sign per property.
16
17 b. The area of a marquee sign shall not exceed forty-eight (48) square
18 feet in copy area. Such sign shall be incorporated into the main
19 freestanding sign or may be wall-mounted.
20
21 c. Letters or symbols shall not exceed twelve (12”) inches in height.
22
23 d. Any portion of a marquee sign incorporated into the main
24 freestanding sign or building sign shall be treated as such and shall be
25 included in the overall calculations for such sign.
26
27 5. Projecting and Suspended Signs: Projecting and suspended signs shall be
28 treated as building signs and shall be included in the overall area calculations
29 for building signs.
30
31 a. The two sides of a projecting or suspended sign must be parallel back
32 to back and shall not exceed twelve (12”) inches in thickness, and ten
33 (10) square feet in area.
34
35 b. A projecting sign shall be hung at right angles to the building and
36 shall not extend more than three (3’) feet from a building wall.
37
38 c. Projecting or suspended signs shall have a minimum clearance of
39 eight (8’) feet above grade and shall not project into a vehicular public
40 way.
41
42 d. The top of the sign, if suspended, should be in line with whichever is
43 the most successful application of scale, linear continuity or visibility
44 as determined by the Town Planner.
45
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XI
11-15
1 6. Roof Signs:
2
3 a. Signs shall not project above the peak of the roof or extend above the
4 top of a parapet wall.
5
6 B. FREESTANDING SIGNS:
7
8 1. No more than one free-standing sign per building lot, not exceeding fifty (50)
9 square feet (per side) in area, the top of which is not more than ten (10) feet in
10 height, and which contains only the name of the owner, trade names, trade
11 mark, products sold, and/or describes the business(es) or activity conducted on
12 the premises whereon such sign is located. Except in the CR Zoning District,
13 such sign shall be placed on a continuous base that is at least as wide as
14 horizontal width of the sign it supports. Such sign shall be set back at least
15 ten (10) feet from any property line. Signs setback a minimum of 100 feet
16 from property line may be enlarged to not more than one hundred (100)
17 square feet.
18
19 2. A landscaped area equivalent to the area of each side of a freestanding sign
20 shall be maintained by the permit holder. This area shall be kept in a neat and
21 clean condition, free of weeds and rubbish.
22
23 3. Each building must incorporate its legally assigned street number into its
24 freestanding sign.
25
26 4. In addition to the above, each gasoline/service station or other business selling
27 automotive fuel is permitted one price sign not to exceed eight (8) square feet
28 in area and eight (8’) feet in height and shall be incorporated into the main
29 freestanding sign.
30
31 5. No more than one (1) freestanding sign identifying a subdivision, multifamily
32 or Planned Development (PR, PUD, or HC) project. Such sign shall not
33 exceed fifty (50) square feet in area or ten (10) feet in height. The location of
34 such sign shall be indicated on required site plans or subdivision plats.
35
36 6. No more than one (1) freestanding off-site sign may be permitted only for
37 businesses which are accessed exclusively via an easement such that a sign
38 could not be placed in a manner which respects the setbacks. Such a sign
39 shall require written permission from the owner of the property on which the
40 sign is to be located.
41
42 C. SIDEWALK SIGNS:
43
44 1. In addition to permitted wall or building signage, no more than one (1)
45 sidewalk sign, one (1) projecting sign, or one (1) post mounted sign per lot
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XI
11-16
may be permitted in the CR Zoning District 1 only when an otherwise permitted
2 freestanding sign cannot be erected because it cannot meet the setback
3 requirements. Such signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in size. Post
4 mounted signs must be located entirely on private property. The post for such
5 sign may not exceed eight (8) feet in height above grade and the top of the
6 sign may not exceed seven (7) feet from grade. Such sign may not extend into
7 any pedestrian pathway or obstruct visibility for vehicular traffic. The post
8 for such sign shall have a maximum thickness of four (4) inches.
9
10 2. One sidewalk sign shall be permitted for each tenant of a shopping center.
11 Such sign shall be located in front of the business being advertised and must
12 provide six (6) feet of unobstructed sidewalk.
13
14 D. INSTITUTIONAL SIGNS
15
16 1. No more than one (1) free standing sign or bulletin board identifying a school,
17 place of worship, library, museum, civic, social or fraternal club or society,
18 which sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area, six (6) feet in
19 height and shall be located upon the premises of such institutions. These signs
20 may also contain other information customarily incidental to said places or
21 organizations. This provision is in place of, rather than in addition to, the
22 standards for freestanding signs outlined in Section 28 – 1101.6 B above.
23
24 2. No more than one (1) building sign or bulletin board identifying a school,
25 place of worship, library, museum, civic, social or fraternal club or society,
26 which sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area and shall be
27 located upon the premises of such institutions. These signs may also contain
28 other information customarily incidental to said places or organizations. This
29 provision is in place of, rather than in addition to, the standards for
30 freestanding signs outlined in Section 28-1101.6 A above.
31
32 3. Signage in excess (either in number or size) of the standards outlined in
33 subsections (1) and (2) above, may be considered and can be approved by the
34 Planning Commission. Applicants seeking such additional signage shall
35 prepare and submit a Comprehensive Signage Plan to the Planning
36 Department depicting the location, size, materials, etc., for all signs desired on
37 the property. In their review, the Commission shall consider the request in the
38 context of the site (i.e. is the property in a commercial area or a residential
39 neighborhood), the compatibility and consistency of the signs with themselves
40 and with respect to the building they are identifying, safety/visibility concerns,
41 lighting issues, and other neighborhood compatibility issues.
42
43 4. Signs on scoreboards shall be exempt from these standards provided that no
44 more than 25% of the scoreboard area is taken up with such advertising signs
45 and provided further that said signage is oriented to the spectators in the venue
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XI
11-17
in which the scoreboard is located. 1 Signage in excess of 25% of the
2 scoreboard may be considered by the Planning Commission in accordance
3 with subsection (3) above.
4
5 E. ELECTRONIC SIGNS
6
7 In addition to the requirements prescribed above for the applicable sign type (i.e.
8 freestanding, building, and/or institutional), electronic or digital signs shall comply
9 with the following supplementary standards for such signs:
10
11 1. Electronic or digital signs are only permitted as electronic reader boards (note:
12 this standard is not intended to prohibit internally illuminated signs that are
13 otherwise in conformity with the Town’s sign regulations).
14
15 2. Electronic signs shall be prohibited in the Historic Overlay District.
16
17 3. Electronic signs shall not change messages more frequently that once every
18 twelve (12) seconds.
19
20 4. There shall be no transition effects in the changing of messages, nor any
21 animation, flashing, blinking or similar effects utilized in the display of
22 messages.
23
24 5. Electronic signs shall be equipped with an automatic dimming photocell
25 which adjusts the display’s brightness based on ambient light conditions.
26
27 6. Brightness levels shall not increase by more than 0.3 foot candles (or 3.23
28 lumens per square meter or lux) (over ambient levels), measured within 100
29 feet of the sign.
30
31 7. Electronic Signs shall be limited to the use of a single color on any given
32 message or display (i.e. they shall be mono color signs).
33
34 8. Electronic signs located on a lot adjacent to any residentially-zoned parcel
35 shall be turned off between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
36
37 9. Video Boards shall not be permitted on any portion of an electronic sign.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XII
12-1
1 ARTICLE XII
2 NON-CONFORMING LOTS, USES, AND STRUCTURES
3
4 SECTION 28 – 1201 General
5
6 A. Within the zones established by this Ordinance or amendments that may later be
7 adopted there exist lots, structures, and uses of land which were lawful before this
8 Ordinance was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or
9 restricted under the terms of this Ordinance or future amendment.
10
11 B. It is the intent of this Ordinance not to encourage the survival of non-conformities.
12 Such uses are declared by this Ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses in the
13 zones involved. It is further the intent of this Ordinance that non-conformities shall not
14 be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, except as herein noted, nor be used as grounds
15 for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same zone.
16
17 C. A non-conforming use shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this Ordinance
18 by attachment on a building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from
19 off the premises, or by the addition of other uses of a nature which would be prohibited
20 in the zone involved.
21
22 D. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to require a change
23 in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual
24 construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment
25 of this Ordinance and upon which actual building construction has been diligently
26 carried on. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction
27 materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner; except that where
28 demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory
29 to rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction,
30 provided that work shall be diligently carried on until completion of the building
31 involved.
32
33 E. Any non-conforming use, including the non-conforming use of a lot, parcel or structure,
34 that is discontinued or abandoned for a period of six (6) months, shall not be resumed
35 thereafter and any future use of lot, parcel, or structure shall conform to the provisions
36 of this Ordinance. Any structure that is moved for any reason for any distance by the
37 owner, shall be required to conform to the regulations for the zoning district in which
38 it is located after it is moved. In the case of any dispute as to whether a non-conforming
39 use is abandoned or discontinued, the burden of proof shall be upon the property owner.
40
41 F. Any non-conforming single or two-family dwelling use located on any lot in the CR or
42 R-7A districts which is or has been destroyed through condemnation, fire or other
43 catastrophe to an extent of 100% of its assessed value at the time of its destruction may
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XII
12-2
continue said use as long as a single-family or 1 two-family residence is constructed and
2 made available for occupancy on said lot within eighteen (18) months of the date of its
3 destruction even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area, or width, or
4 both, that are generally applicable in the district.
5
6 SECTION 28 – 1202 Non-Conforming Lots of Record
7
8 A. In any zone in which single-family dwellings are permitted, notwithstanding
9 limitations imposed by other provisions of this Ordinance, a single-family dwelling and
10 customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the
11 effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance. Such lot must be in separate
12 ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. This
13 provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area, or
14 width, or both, that are generally applicable in the zone, provided that yard dimensions
15 shall conform to the regulations for the zone in which such lot is located. Any variance
16 of yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the Board of Appeals.
17
18 B. If two or more lots or combination of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage
19 in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this
20 Ordinance, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements for lot width and
21 area as established by this Ordinance, the lands involved shall be considered to be an
22 undivided parcel for the purpose of this Ordinance, and no portion of said parcel shall
23 be used or transferred which does not meet lot width and area requirements established
24 by this Ordinance, nor shall any division of the parcel be made which leaves remaining
25 any lot with width or area below the requirements stated in this Ordinance.
26
27 SECTION 28 – 1203 Non-Conforming Use of Land (Not within Structures)
28
29 Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, lawful use of land
30 exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms of this Ordinance as enacted or
31 amended, such use may be continued, subject to the provisions of Section 28 – 1205 so long
32 as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
33
34 A. No such non-conforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a
35 greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment
36 of this Ordinance;
37
38 B. No such non-conforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of
39 the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment
40 of this Ordinance;
41
42 SECTION 28 – 1204 Non-Conforming Structures
43
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XII
12-3
Where a lawful structure exists at the effective 1 date of adoption or amendment of this
2 Ordinance that could not be built under the terms of this Ordinance by reason of restrictions
3 on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or other characteristics of the structure or its location
4 on the lot, such structure may be continued subject to Section 28 – 1205 so long as it
5 remains otherwise lawful subject to the following provisions:
6
7 A. No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its non8
conformity;
9
10 B. Any such structure destroyed by any means to an extent of 100% of its assessed value
11 at the time of destruction as determined by two competent appraisers appointed by the
12 Planning and Zoning Commission, shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with
13 the provisions of this Ordinance.
14
15 C. Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall
16 thereafter conform to the regulations for the zone in which it is located after it is moved.
17
18 SECTION 28 – 1205 Non-Conforming Uses Contained within Structures
19
20 If a lawful use contained within a structure exists at the effective date of adoption or
21 amendment of this Ordinance that would not be allowed in the zone under the terms of this
22 Ordinance, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject
23 to the following provisions:
24
25 A. No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this Ordinance in the zone
26 in which it is located except dwellings, shall be enlarged, extended, constructed,
27 reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in changing the use of the
28 structure to a use permitted in the zone in which it is located;
29
30 B. Any non-conforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which
31 were manifestly arranged or designed for use at the time of adoption or amendment
32 of this Ordinance, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside
33 such building;
34
35 C. Any structure in which a non-conforming use is superseded by a permitted use shall
36 thereafter conform to the regulations for the zone in which such structure is located,
37 and the non-conforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
38
39 SECTION 28 – 1206 Elimination of Certain Non-Conformities
40
41 Certain non-conformities shall be terminated in accordance with the following provision:
42
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XII
12-4
A. Removal of a non-conforming mobile home 1 or trailer shall constitute loss of non2
conforming status for the site on which said non-conforming trailer or mobile home
3 was located.
4
5 SECTION 28 – 1207 Special Exception Uses Not Non-Conforming Uses
6
7 Any use for which a special exception is permitted as provided in this Ordinance shall not
8 be deemed a non-conforming use, but shall without further action be deemed a conforming
9 use in such zone.
10
11 SECTION 28 – 1208 Non-Conforming Yards and Setback
12
13 Whenever an existing structure does not conform to the yard or setback requirement, repair
14 and maintenance can be performed provided that the existing yards or setbacks are not
15 reduced or altered. No such existing yard or setback may be altered without approval of
16 the Board of Appeals.
17
18 SECTION 28 – 1209 Non-Conforming Lots of Record In the Critical Area Overlay Zone:
19
20 An unimproved lot or parcel of land located within the Town of Easton Critical Area
21 Overlay District ("CAO") may be improved with a single family dwelling and related
22 accessory uses in a Resource Conservation Area (RCA) and otherwise developed in
23 accordance with Subsection 28 – 510.2 if the lot is located in Limited Development Area
24 (LDA) and an Intensely Developed Area (IDA) provided the lot complies with the
25 provisions of Section 28 – 1012 (Yard Requirements) and further provided that it complies
26 with the following criteria:
27
28 A. Any lot of record established in the Town of Easton prior to the effective date of
29 the Town's Critical Area Program may be improved or developed with a single30
family residence if such lot could have been improved by a single family residence
31 prior to the effective date of the Town's Critical Area Program.
32
33 B. The owner of any lot who has obtained a permit to commence development activity
34 and who, pursuant to said permit, has commenced development activities to the
35 point of pouring foundations, footings or installing structural members or whose
36 right to carry on said development activities has otherwise vested prior to the
37 effective date of the Town's Critical Area Program, may complete construction as
38 provided by said permit.
39
40 C. Development may take place on lots created prior to 1 June 1984 subject to the
41 limitations on permitted uses contained in Article V and subject to the provisions
42 of Section 28 – 1012.
43
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XII
12-5
D. Development may take place on lots created between 1 1 June 1984 and 1 December
2 1985, for which "interim findings" (see MD. Annotated Code N.R. Section 8-1813)
3 have been made by the Town of Easton Planning Commission, the Town Board of
4 Appeals, or the Town Council.
5
6
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XIII
13-1
1 ARTICLE XIII
2 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
3
4 SECTION 28 – 1301 ZONING CERTIFICATES
5
6 28 – 1301.1 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
7
8 A. It shall be the duty of the Town Planner/Codes Administrator, under the supervision
9 of the Town Engineer, to administer the provisions of this Ordinance and to advise
10 all Town officials and agencies on matters relating to land use planning. The Town
11 Planner/Codes Administrator may delegate all or part of his duties and
12 responsibilities to other Town officials or employees.
13
14 B. Upon the effective date of this Ordinance, the Zoning Inspector shall have the
15 powers and duties set forth in this Ordinance. The Zoning Inspector shall be subject
16 to the supervision of the Town Planner/Codes Administrator.
17
18 C. All departments, officials and public employees of Easton which are vested with
19 the authority to issue permits or licenses shall conform to the provisions of this
20 Ordinance and shall not issue any permit or license for any use, building, structure,
21 or purpose which would be in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance. Any
22 permit or license, issued in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance, shall be
23 null and void. If the Zoning Inspector shall find that any of the provisions of this
24 Ordinance are being violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for
25 such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action
26 necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land,
27 buildings, or structure; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of additions,
28 alterations, or structural changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work being
29 done; or shall take any other action authorized by this Ordinance to insure
30 compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions.
31
32 28 – 1301.2 ZONING COMPLIANCE REQUIRED
33
34 No building certificate, occupancy certificate or other license or permit relating to the use
35 or development of land or any structure located thereon shall be issued nor shall any
36 structure shall be constructed, moved, added to, or structurally altered, or use of land
37 changed except in compliance with the terms of this Ordinance.
38
39 28 – 1301.3 ZONING CERTIFICATION REQUIRED
40
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XIII
13-2
A. It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use 1 or occupancy of any building,
2 or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created, constructed, changed,
3 converted or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a
4 Zoning Certificate shall have been issued therefore by the Town Planner/Codes
5 Administrator or his designee, stating that the proposed use of the building or land
6 conforms to the requirements of this Ordinance. Such certification, however, is not
7 the same as a building permit, an occupancy permit or any other permits or
8 certificates that may be required by the Town Building Inspector, and zoning
9 certification should not be construed as any sort of final approval relative to the
10 construction, demolition, or occupation of any building.
11
12 B. A temporary occupancy permit may be issued by the Zoning Inspector for a period
13 not exceeding six (6) months during alterations or partial occupancy of a building
14 pending its completion; provided that such temporary permit may require such
15 conditions and safeguards as will protect the safety of the occupants and the public.
16
17 C. The Town Planner/Codes Administrator shall maintain a record of all zoning
18 certificates and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person.
19
20 D. Failure to obtain zoning certification shall be a violation of this Ordinance and
21 punishable under Section 28 – 1308 of this Ordinance.
22
23 28 – 1301.4 CONSTRUCTION AND USE TO BE AS PROVIDED IN
24 APPLICATIONS, PLANS, AND ZONING CERTIFICATES
25
26 Zoning certificates issued on the basis of site plans and applications approved by the Town
27 Planner/Codes Administrator authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set
28 forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement, or
29 construction. Use, arrangement, or construction differing with that authorized shall be
30 deemed violation of this Ordinance, and punishable as provided by Section 28 – 1308
31 thereof.
32
33 SECTION 28 – 1302 PLANNING COMMISSION
34
35 28 – 1302.1 CREATION, DESIGNATION
36
37 Upon the effective date of this Ordinance, the Easton Planning and Zoning Commission
38 shall have the powers and duties set forth in this Ordinance.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XIII
13-3
28 – 1302.2 COMPOSITION, 1 APPOINTMENT, COMPENSATION, TERM,
2 REMOVAL, AND VACANCIES
3
4 A. The Commission shall consist of five (5) members, one (1) of whom may be a
5 member of the Town Council to serve in an ex officio capacity concurrent with his
6 or her term in office.
7
8 B. The members shall be appointed by the Mayor and thereafter confirmed by the
9 Council.
10
11 C. All members of the Commission shall serve as such without compensation, unless
12 the Council shall by resolution determine that appropriate compensation should be
13 made to the members.
14
15 D. The Commission shall elect a chairman from one of the appointed members and
16 create and fill such other of its offices as it may determine. The term of chairman
17 shall be one (1) year, with eligibility for reelection.
18
19 E. The Commission shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting each month. It shall
20 adopt rules for transactions of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions,
21 transactions, findings, and determinations, which records shall be a public record.
22
23 F. The terms of each member, except for any Town Councilman serving as an ex
24 officio member, shall be for five (5) years from the date of his or her appointment
25 or until his or her successor takes office.
26
27 G. Members may, after a public hearing, be removed by the Town Council for
28 inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office. The Council shall file a
29 written statement among its records of reasons for such removal. Vacancies
30 occurring otherwise than through the expiration of term shall be filled for the
31 unexpired term by the Mayor with the confirmation of the Council as herein above
32 set forth.
33
34 28 – 1302.3 POWERS AND DUTIES
35
36 The Planning Commission is charged with the following powers and duties:
37
38 A. Prepare, approve and recommend to the Town Council adoption of the
39 Comprehensive Plan and the Zoning Ordinance and amendments thereto.
40
41 B. Approve and publish plans for major geographic sections or divisions of the Town.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XIII
13-4
1
2 C. Recommend the boundaries of the various districts and appropriate regulations to
3 be enforced therein that the Town may avail itself of the zoning powers conferred
4 by the Annotated Code of Maryland, Article 66B.
5
6 D. Advise the Town Council and Board of Appeals on matters relating to zoning,
7 annexations, applications for special exceptions and variances when appropriate.
8
9 E. Review site plans for compliance with this Ordinance and standards herein.
10
11 F. Approve proposed subdivision plats and resubdivision of existing record plats. All
12 plats must bear the signature of the Chairman before legal filing in the Land
13 Records of Talbot County.
14
15 G. Review and hold public hearings on applications for Growth Allocation.
16
17 H. The mayor may appoint, subject to Council confirmation, an alternate member to
18 sit on the planning commission in the absence of any member of the commission.
19
20 I. Prepare, adopt, and file an annual report with the Town Council as per the
21 requirements of Section 309 of Article 66B of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
22
23 J. Review the proposed construction of any street, square, park, or other public way,
24 ground or open space, or public building or structure, or public utility, whether
25 public or privately owned to determine whether the location, character, and extent
26 of such development is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, as per Section 3.08
27 of Article 66B of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
28
29 K. Exercise any other powers, or discharge any other duties, granted to or imposed
30 upon planning commissions by any other Ordinance or Regulation of the Town of
31 Easton or by the laws of the State of Maryland.
32
33 SECTION 28 – 1303 BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
34
35 28 – 1303.1 MEMBERS OF BOARD
36
37 Upon the effective date of this Ordinance, the Easton Board of Zoning Appeals shall have
38 the powers and duties set forth in this Ordinance. The Board shall consist of three (3)
39 members appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Town Council, and removable for
40 cause, upon written charges, and after public hearing. Members shall be appointed for
41 terms of three (3) years each. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XIII
13-5
term. The Town Council shall designate (1) alternate 1 member for the Board of Appeals
2 who may be empowered to sit with the Board in the absence of any member of the Board.
3
4 28 – 1303.2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE BOARD OF APPEALS
5
6 A. The Board of Appeals shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs, and
7 in keeping with the provisions of this Ordinance. Meetings shall be held at the call
8 of the Chairman and at such other times as the Board may determine. The
9 Chairman, or in his absence the Acting Chairman, may administer oaths and compel
10 the attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public.
11
12 B. The Board of Appeals shall issue written decisions regarding applications or
13 appeals considered by it and shall keep minutes of its other proceedings, showing
14 the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote
15 indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official
16 actions, all of which shall be a public record and be immediately filed in the office
17 of the Board.
18
19 28 – 1303.3 HEARINGS; APPEALS; NOTICE
20
21 A. Appeals to the Board of Appeals concerning interpretation or administration of this
22 Ordinance, the Subdivision Regulations, and any other ordinance of the Town
23 authorizing appeals to the Board of Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved
24 by such decision or by any officer, Commission, or Department of the Town. Such
25 appeals shall be taken within thirty (30) days after any action by any Town official
26 or Board applying, granting or denying a request pursuant to this Ordinance, the
27 Subdivision Regulations, or any other ordinance of the Town authorizing appeals
28 to the Board of Appeals by filing with the Town Planner/Codes Administrator and
29 with the Board of Appeals a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The
30 Town Planner/Codes Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board all papers
31 constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
32
33 B. The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of appeal, give
34 public notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and hold a public
35 hearing upon the appeal. At least fifteen (15) days’ notice of the time and place of
36 such hearing shall be published in a paper of general circulation in the Town and
37 by posting the property. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent
38 or attorney. The Board shall then render a written decision affirming, reversing or
39 modifying the decision appealed from.
40
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XIII
13-6
1 28 – 1303.4 STAY OF PROCEEDINGS
2
3 An appeal stays all proceedings instituted by any Town official or agency to enforce the
4 decision appealed from, unless the official or agency from whom the appeal is taken
5 certifies to the Board of Appeals after the notice of appeal is filed with him, that by reason
6 of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life
7 and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining
8 order which may be granted by the Board of Appeals or by the Circuit Court on application,
9 on notice to the official or agency from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown.
10
11 28 – 1303.5 POWERS AND DUTIES
12
13 The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers and duties:
14
15 A. Administrative Review - To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is
16 error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning
17 Inspector, Building Inspector, Town Planner, Historic District Commission or the
18 Planning Commission in the enforcement of this Ordinance.
19
20 B. Special Exceptions; Conditions Governing Applications; Procedures - To hear and
21 decide only such special exceptions as the Board of Appeals is specifically
22 authorized to pass on by the terms of this Ordinance: to decide such questions as
23 are involved in determining whether special exceptions should be granted and to
24 grant special exceptions with such conditions and safeguards as are appropriate
25 under this Ordinance, or to deny special exceptions when not in harmony with the
26 purpose and intent of this Ordinance. A special exception shall not be granted by
27 the Board of Appeals unless and until:
28
29 1. A written application for a special exception is submitted indicating the
30 section of this Ordinance under which the special exception is sought and
31 stating the grounds on which it is requested.
32
33 2. The Board of Appeals has determined if Planning Commission review of
34 the application is necessary, and if so, the written findings and
35 recommendations of the Planning Commission have been received by the
36 Board. Planning Commission review shall only be necessary when the
37 granting of the proposed Special Exception would be of such magnitude to
38 be equivalent to a rezoning.
39
40 3. Notice shall be given at least fifteen (15) days in advance of public hearing.
41 The owner of the property for which special exception is sought, or his
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XIII
13-7
agent, sh 1 all be notified by mail. Notice of such hearings shall be posted on
2 the property for which special exception is sought and at the Town Hall,
3 and notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the
4 Town, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing. In addition,
5 notice to surrounding property owners shall be provided in accordance with
6 the provisions of Section 28 – 301.2 G of this Ordinance.
7
8 4. The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person, or by
9 agent or attorney
10
11 5. The Board of Appeals shall make a finding that it is empowered under the
12 section of this Ordinance described in the application to grant the special
13 exception, and that the granting of the special exception will not adversely
14 affect the public health, safety, security, morals, or general welfare, or
15 would result in dangerous traffic conditions, or would jeopardize the lives
16 or property of the people living in the neighborhood.
17
18 In granting any special exception, the Board of Appeals may prescribe
19 appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Ordinance.
20 Violation of such conditions and safeguards when made a part of the terms
21 under which the special exception is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this
22 Ordinance and punishable under Section 28 – 1308 of this Ordinance. No
23 change or addition may be made to a special exception granted by the Board of
24 Appeals until an application for such change has been reviewed and approved
25 by the Board of Appeals. Such application procedure shall be the same as for
26 a special exception.
27
28 The Board of Appeals shall prescribe a time limit within which the action for
29 which the special exception is required shall be begun or completed, or both.
30 Failure to begin or complete, or both, such action within the time limit set shall
31 void the special exception.
32
33 6. When hearing evidence necessary for granting of any special exception, the
34 Board shall consider all pertinent facts in the case, and render a decision in
35 accordance with the following principles:
36
37 a. the proposed use conforms in all aspects to minimum requirements
38 of the district in which it is located;
39
40 b. the proposed use is not adversely affecting the health, safety, and
41 general welfare of residents of the area;
42
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XIII
13-8
c. the proposed use will not interfere 1 with the adequate and orderly
2 provision of public facilities necessary to service the area or the
3 proposed special exceptions;
4
5 d. the proposed use will not create congestion in the streets or undue
6 traffic hazards, and that adequate egress and ingress are provided;
7
8 e. the proposed use will not adversely affect the area and surrounding
9 property due to adverse environmental characteristics including
10 undue smoke, odor, noise, improper drainage, or inadequate access;
11
12 f. the proposed use will not adversely affect the established character
13 of the area.
14
15 g. the proposed use shall be in conformity with the provisions of the
16 Easton Comprehensive Plan including those provisions of the
17 Comprehensive Plan relating to design and performance standards
18 for the development or redevelopment of land. In addition to the
19 criteria set forth elsewhere herein when considering an application
20 for additional principal uses upon an approved lot, the proposed
21 additional uses shall be compatible and complimentary and uses
22 customarily found near or in conjunction with one another. This
23 provision may not be used to permit shopping centers which are
24 governed by other provisions of this Ordinance.
25
26 When hearing any application for a special exception, the Board may consider
27 the design of the proposal, site plans, feasibility studies, or construction
28 drawings, as an integral part of the application.
29
30 7. The applicant for a special exception shall have the burden of proof on all
31 points material to the application which shall include the burden of
32 presenting credible evidence as to each material issue and the burden of
33 persuasion on each material issue. The Board may disregard evidence, even
34 if uncontroverted by an opposing party, if the Board finds such evidence not
35 to be credible.
36
37 C. Variances; Conditions Governing Applications; Procedures
38
39 To grant variances from the literal application of the terms of this Ordinance when the
40 applicant seeking the variance has demonstrated that the application complies with the
41 standards set forth in this Section. The Board of Appeals may not grant a variance from
42 the terms of this Ordinance unless and until:
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XIII
13-9
1
2 1. A written application for a variance is submitted indicating the Section or
3 Sections of the Ordinance for which the variance is sought and stating the
4 grounds upon which it is requested.
5
6 2. A notice of a public hearing shall be provided as is set forth in Section 28 –
7 1303.3. In addition, notice to surrounding property owners shall be
8 provided in accordance with the provisions of Section 28 – 301.2 G of this
9 Ordinance.
10
11 3. A public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person, by agent
12 or by attorney.
13
14 4. Before granting any variance, the Board of Appeals shall issue written
15 findings of fact that:
16
17 a. Granting the application: (i) will not be contrary to the public
18 interest, (ii) will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of the
19 Ordinance and (iii) will not be injurious to the neighborhood or
20 otherwise detrimental to the public welfare;
21
22 b. Owing to conditions peculiar to the property, which conditions are
23 not the result of any action taken by the applicant, a literal
24 enforcement of the Ordinance will result in practical difficulty to the
25 applicant.
26
27 5. Non-conforming uses of neighboring lands, structures or buildings shall not
28 be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance nor shall permitted
29 uses of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings.
30
31 6. The Board of Appeals shall be authorized to grant variances only with
32 regard to provisions of the Ordinance relating to density, bulk, or area
33 requirements. Under no circumstances shall the Board of Appeals grant a
34 variance to allow a use which is not permitted under the terms of the
35 Ordinance or is by implication prohibited by the terms of the Ordinance
36 relating to the zoning district in which the subject property is located.
37
38 7. In granting any variance, the Board of Appeals may prescribe appropriate
39 conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Ordinance. Violation of
40 such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which
41 the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance and
42 punishable under Section 28 – 1308 of this Ordinance.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XIII
13-10
1
2 8. The Board may grant a variance from the provisions of the Critical Area
3 Overlay District upon making the following findings of fact:
4
5 a. That special conditions or circumstances exist that are peculiar to
6 the land or structure involved and that a literal enforcement of the
7 provisions of the Critical Area Program would result in unwarranted
8 hardship;
9
10 b. That a literal interpretation of the provisions of this Ordinance
11 relating to the Critical Area Overlay Zones would deprive the
12 applicant of rights commonly shared by other properties in similar
13 areas within the Critical Area Overlay District;
14
15 c. That the granting of the variance requested would not confer upon
16 the applicant any special privilege that is denied by the provisions
17 of the Ordinance to other lands or structures within the Town's
18 Critical Area Overlay District;
19
20 d. That the variance requested is not based upon conditions or
21 circumstances which are the result of actions by the applicant, nor
22 does the request arise from any condition relating to land or building
23 use, either permitted or nonconforming, on any neighboring
24 property;
25
26 e. That the granting of the variance requested will not adversely affect
27 water quality or adversely impact fish, wildlife, or plant habitat
28 within the Town's Critical Area Overlay Zone, and that the granting
29 of the variance will be in harmony with the general spirit and intent
30 of the Critical Areas law and the regulations promulgated by the
31 State Critical Area Commission;
32
33 f. No hearing shall be held upon an application for a variance in the
34 Critical Area Overlay District until the State Critical Area
35 Commission has received a copy of the variance application at least
36 fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the scheduled public hearing.
37
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XIII
13-11
9. The applicant for a variance shall 1 have the burden of proof on all points
2 material to the application which shall include the burden of presenting
3 credible evidence as to each material issue and the burden of persuasion on
4 each material issue. The Board may disregard evidence, even if
5 uncontroverted by an opposing party if the Board finds such evidence not
6 to be credible.
7
8 10. Nothing in this chapter shall give the Board the authority to grant a variance
9 from the provisions of Section 28 – 1007.2 relating to the maximum size of
10 Major retail uses.
11
12 D. REASONABLE ACCOMODATIONS FOR THE NEEDS OF DISABLED
13 CITIZENS
14
15 The Board of Zoning Appeals may make reasonable accommodations to avoid
16 discrimination on the basis of a disability. Reasonable accommodations for the needs
17 of disabled citizens shall be permitted in accordance with the evidentiary requirements
18 set forth in the following paragraphs.
19
20 1. An applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating the following:
21
22 a. The existence of a disability;
23
24 b. Literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance would result
25 in discrimination by virtue of such disability;
26
27 c. A reasonable accommodation would reduce or eliminate the
28 discriminatory effect of the provisions of this ordinance;
29
30 d. The accommodation requested will not substantially impair the
31 purpose, intent, or effect, of the provisions of this ordinance as
32 applied to the property;
33
34 e. Environmental impacts associated with the accommodation are the
35 minimum necessary to address the needs resulting from the
36 particular disability of the applicant.
37
38 2. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall determine the nature and scope of any
39 accommodation under this section and may award different or other relief
40 than requested after giving due regard to the purpose, intent, or effect of the
41 applicable provisions of this ordinance. The Board may also consider the
42 size, location, and type of accommodation proposed and whether
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XIII
13-12
alternatives exist which accommodate the 1 need with less adverse effect.
2
3 E. DECISIONS OF THE BOARD OF APPEALS
4
5 In exercising on an appeal, the Board of Appeals may affirm, modify or reverse the
6 order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and, to that end, shall
7 have the powers of the official or agency from whom the appeal is taken. In
8 addition, when the Board reverses the order, requirement, decision or determination
9 appealed from, the Board may remand the matter back to the official or agency
10 from whom the appeal was taken for further action together with instructions from
11 the Board.
12
13 The concurring vote of the majority of the members of the Board shall be necessary
14 to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of any Town official
15 or agency, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is
16 required to pass under this Ordinance, or to effect any variation in the application
17 of this Ordinance.
18
19 If any application or request is disapproved on the merits by the Board, thereafter
20 the Board shall not accept application for substantially the same proposal, on the
21 same premises, until after one (1) year from the date of such disapproval.
22
23 If an appeal or application to the Board is perfected and the public hearing date set
24 and public notice given, and thereafter the applicant withdraws the appeal, he shall
25 be precluded from filing another application for substantially the same proposal on
26 the same premises for one (1) year from the date of withdrawal.
27
28 Provided, however, that the Board may dismiss, on its own motion, or at the request
29 of the applicant, any appeal or application when it finds that material changes in
30 the application or appeal, or in its supporting plans, specifications or other
31 documents have been made or when it finds that any other procedural error
32 prejudices the rights of any person or party to the appeal or application or otherwise
33 invalidates the appeal or application. Dismissal under this provision shall not be a
34 bar to re-application or re-appeal within one year of the date of dismissal at the
35 applicant's expense nor shall dismissal affect the right of any person to appeal a
36 decision of the Zoning Inspector to the Board. The Board may, at its discretion,
37 waive part or all of the costs of the re-application or re-appeal.
38
39 28 – 1303.6 APPEALS FROM THE BOARD OF APPEALS
40
41 A. Any person or persons, or any board, taxpayer, or department of the Town
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XIII
13-13
aggrieved by any decision of the Board of 1 Appeals may seek review by the Circuit
2 Court of such decision, in the manner provided by the laws of Maryland and
3 particularly by Article 66B, Annotated Code of Maryland.
4
5 B. All costs incurred by the Town in transcribing records of meetings and hearings
6 shall be borne by the appellants. All fees shall be paid to the Town, before any
7 record of the case is submitted to the appropriate court.
8
9 SECTION 28 – 1304 DUTIES OF TOWN OFFICIALS, BOARD OF APPEALS, TOWN
10 COUNCIL AND COURT ON MATTERS OF APPEAL
11
12 It is the intent of this Ordinance that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall
13 be first presented to the Town Planner/Codes Administrator and that such questions shall
14 be presented the Board of Appeals only on appeal, and that recourse from the decisions of
15 the Board of Appeals shall be to the courts as provided by law and particularly by Article
16 66B, Annotated Code of Maryland.
17
TOWN OF EASTON 2014 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XIII
13-14
It is further the intent of this Ordinance that the duties 1 of the Town Council in connection
2 with this Ordinance shall not include hearing and deciding questions of interpretation and
3 enforcement that may arise. The procedure for deciding such questions shall be as stated
4 in this section and this Ordinance. Under this Ordinance the Town Council shall have only
5 the duties of (1) considering and adopting or rejecting proposed amendments or the repeal
6 of this Ordinance, as provided by law, (2) hearing and approving or denying requests for
7 Planned Unit Development applications, Commercial Medical applications, and Planned
8 Redevelopment Applications, and (3) of establishing a schedule of fees and charges as
9 stated in Section 28-1305, below.
10
11 SECTION 28 – 1305 SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSES
12
13 A. The Town Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges, and expense, and a
14 collection procedure, for, building and occupancy permits, appeals, variances, special
15 exceptions, amendments, site plan and subdivision review and other matters pertaining
16 to this Ordinance. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the offices of the Town
17 Planner/Codes Administrator and may be altered or amended only by the Town
18 Council, upon recommendation of the Planning Commission.
19
20 B. No application shall be processed unless or until such costs, charges, fees, or expenses
21 have been paid in full, nor shall any action be taken on proceedings before the Board
22 of Appeals unless or until preliminary charges and fees have been paid in full. One
23 exception to this regulation is the fee for building permits which is determined during
24 the review of the application and shall be payable at the time of issuance.
25
26 SECTION 28 – 1306 TEMPORARY USE PERMITS
27
28 Temporary use permits may be approved by the Town Planner for specific uses identified
29 in Article II of this Ordinance. Uses not listed as permissible on a temporary basis may be
30 reviewed and permitted by the Planning Commission. Application for the permit must be
31 made at least ten (10) days prior to the event. Applicant shall furnish all information
32 required by the Planner in order to make determination on the application.
33
34 SECTION 28 – 1307 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
35
36 In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be
37 minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals or
38 general welfare. Whenever the requirements of this Ordinance are at variance with the
39 requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions
40 or covenants, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern.
41
42 SECTION 28 – 1308 VIOLATIONS
43
TOWN OF EASTON 2014 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XIII
13-15
A. Whenever a violation of this Ordinance occurs, or is alleged 1 to have occurred, any
2 person may file a written complaint. Such complaint, stating fully the causes and basis
3 thereof, shall be filed with the Zoning Inspector. The Zoning Inspector shall record
4 properly such complaint, immediately investigate, and take action thereon as provided
5 by this Ordinance.
6
7 B. Violation of the provisions of this Ordinance or failure to comply with any of its
8 requirements shall constitute a municipal infraction and fines may be levied in
9 accordance with the schedule approved by the Town Council. Each day such violation
10 continues shall be considered a separate offense.
11
12 C. The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any
13 architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person, who commits, participates in,
14 assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense
15 and suffer the penalties herein provided.
16
17 D. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Town from taking such other lawful action
18 as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
19
20 SECTION 28 – 1309 ADMINSITRATIVE REVIEW FOR CERTAIN DEVELOPMENT
21 ACTIVITIES ON IMPROVED LOTS
22
23 1. Applications for renovations, alterations or additions to existing improved lots which
24 violate the prescribed setback but are no closer to the property line than the existing
25 structure may be approved by the Town Planner. The application shall include a site plan
26 with sufficient information to review the request. If approved by the Town Planner,
27 nothing more than a building permit shall be required for such requests. Nothing in this
28 provision however shall permit construction in violation of the Town’s Building Code
29 without a Variance from said Code.
30
31 2. Applications for new construction which violate the prescribed setback or for additions or
32 new construction which exceed lot coverage limits or encroach closer to the property line
33 than the existing plane of the improved building, may be considered by the Town Planner
34 and may be approved provided that there is acceptable historical evidence that the property
35 was improved in a manner consistent with the request at some point in the past, prior to the
36 establishment of Zoning regulations for the property in question. Acceptable evidence may
37 include physical evidence, land records, assessment information, old surveys, or Sanborn
38 Insurance Maps. Such evidence shall not be construed to constitute automatic approval of
39 the request. It merely allows the Town Planner to consider a request that would otherwise
40 require a Variance. If in the Town Planner’s opinion the site plan should not be approved
41 via this administrative review option, the applicant shall still have the right to file for a
42 Variance from the necessary provision(s) of the Ordinance.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XIV
14-1
1 ARTICLE XIV
2 AMENDMENTS
3
4 SECTION 28 – 1401 GENERAL
5
6 The regulations, restrictions and boundaries set forth in this Ordinance may from time to
7 time be amended, supplemented, changed or repealed by the Town Council, in accordance
8 with rules and regulations for so doing as stated in Article 66B of the Annotated Code of
9 Maryland.
10
11 SECTION 28 – 1402 PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW
12
13 Any proposed amendment, supplement or change shall be referred by the Town Council to
14 the Planning Commission for an investigation and recommendation. The Planning
15 Commission shall cause such investigation to be made as it deems necessary and may
16 require the submission of all pertinent data and information by any person concerned; may
17 hold such public hearings as provided by its own rules; and shall submit its report and
18 recommendations to the Council within a reasonable length of time. The Planning
19 Commission may, on its own volition, suggest amendments to this Ordinance to the Town
20 Council.
21
22 SECTION 28 – 1403 PUBLIC HEARING
23
24 After receiving the recommendations of the Planning Commission, the Town Council shall
25 hold a public hearing in relation to the proposed amendment, at which parties in interest
26 and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. The time, place and nature of such
27 hearing together with a summary of the proposed amendment shall be published in a paper
28 of general circulation in Easton once a week for 2 successive weeks with the first such
29 publication appearing at least 14 days prior to the hearing. In the case of a change in
30 classification of a particular piece of property, the property shall also be posted.
31
32 SECTION 28 – 1404 BASIS FOR APPROVING REZONING
33
34 A. Where the purpose and effect of the proposed amendment is to change the zoning
35 classification of a specific parcel of land, the Town Council shall make findings of fact
36 in each specific case including, but not limited to, the following matters:
37
38 1. The relationship of such proposed amendment to the Town's Comprehensive
39 Plan.
40
41 2. The recommendation of the Planning Commission.
42
43 3. Population change.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XIV
14-2
1
2 4. Availability of public facilities.
3
4 5. Present and future transportation patterns.
5
6 6. Compatibility with existing and proposed development for the area.
7
8 7. Whether the applicant has demonstrated that there has been a substantial change
9 in the character of the neighborhood where the property is located, that there
10 was a mistake in the existing zoning classification or that the current zoning
11 classification of the property deprives the owners thereof of all beneficial use
12 of the property.
13
14 B. If the Town Council makes an affirmative finding of fact as to one or more of the
15 standards set forth in Section 28 – 1404.A. (7), it may enact an ordinance changing the
16 zoning classification upon the property. The fact that an applicant has shown change
17 or mistake shall not require the Town Council to grant the requested rezoning and the
18 Town Council shall have the authority to assign a zoning classification to the property
19 different from that requested by the applicant if the Council determines that such
20 classification is the most appropriate classification for the property. The ordinance
21 shall be subject to approval by the Mayor in accordance with the provisions of the
22 Town Charter relating to mayoral vetoes. In determining whether or not to enact an
23 ordinance, the Council may consider, in addition to the factors outlined above, other
24 factors it deems appropriate including but not limited to the degree to which the
25 proposed amendment:
26
27 1. Helps accomplish the coordinated, adjusted, and harmonious development of
28 the Town and its environs in accordance with present and future needs;
29
30 2. promotes health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity, and general
31 welfare; including among other things, adequate provisions for traffic, the
32 promotion of public safety, adequate provision for light and air, conservation
33 of natural resources, the prevention of environmental pollution, the promotion
34 of the healthful and convenient distribution of population;
35
36 3. exemplifies good civic design and arrangement and the stewardship of the
37 Chesapeake Bay and the land as a universal ethic;
38
39 4. encourages the conservation of resources, including a reduction in resource
40 consumption;
41
42 5. is located in at a location suitable for it given existing and reasonably
43 foreseeable development; and
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XIV
14-3
1
2 6. encourages appropriate and sustainable economic growth.
3
4 C. A complete record of the hearing and the votes of all members of the local legislative
5 body shall be kept.
6
7 D. The provisions of §28 – 1405 A shall not be applicable to floating zone map amendment
8 applications.
9
10 SECTION 28 – 1405 TIME LIMITATION ON REHEARING REZONING
11 APPLICATIONS
12
13 A. If the Town Council fails to enact an ordinance granting the requested rezoning, no
14 application for a reclassification will be accepted for filing by the Town for a period
15 of one year after the date of the Council’s decision or the date of finality of any
16 judicial review of the Council’s decision, whichever is later.
17
18 B. The provisions of Section 28 – 1403 relative to public hearings and official notice
19 shall apply equally to all reclassifications.
20
21 SECTION 28 – 1406 AMENDMENT REQUIREMENTS IN THE CRITICAL AREA
22 OVERLAY DISTRICT
23
24 A. The Mayor and Town Council may from time to time amend the provisions of this
25 Ordinance as they relate to the Critical Area Overlay District, amend the land use
26 management classification of properties in the Critical Area Overlay District or amend
27 the Critical Area District Boundary.
28
29 B. In addition, the Mayor and Council shall review and propose any necessary
30 amendments, as required, to the land use management classification in the Critical Area
31 Overlay District at least every four (4) years.
32
33 C. All such amendments shall be approved by the Maryland Chesapeake Bay Critical Area
34 Commission as established in Subsection 8-1803 of the Critical Area Law, Subtitle 18.
35 Standards for Critical Area Commission approval of proposed amendments are as set
36 forth in the Critical Area Law, Subtitle 18 Subsection 8-1809 (i). The Critical Area
37 Commission process for approval of proposed amendments are as set forth in the
38 Critical Area Law, Subtitle 18, Subsection 8-1809 (d).
39
40 D. The procedure for amending the provisions of this Ordinance relating to the Critical
41 Area Overlay District shall be the same as that set forth for other amendments to this
42 Ordinance except as follows:
43
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XIV
14-4
1. Proposed amendments to the text of 1 this Ordinance as it relates to the Critical
2 Area Overlay District may only be initiated by the Planning Commission or the
3 Mayor and Council.
4
5 2. Amendments involving specific properties shall first be submitted to the
6 Planning Commission.
7
8 3. For all proposed amendments the Planning Commission shall first hold a public
9 hearing relating thereto, as per Section 28 – 1403 of this Article.
10
11 4. The Planning Commission shall then forward the proposed amendments to the
12 Mayor and Council for a decision. If a favorable decision is made, the Mayor
13 and Council will forward the amendments to the Critical Area Commission.
14
15 5. After receiving the recommendations of the Mayor and Council, the Critical
16 Area Commission will approve or disapprove the amendment. If approved, the
17 Mayor and Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment in
18 accordance with Section 28 – 1403 of this Article.
19
20 E. Amendments to the Critical Area Overlay District Map may be permitted only upon a
21 proof of mistake in the existing Land Use Management Classification.
22
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XV
15-1
1 ARTICLE XV
2 DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES AGREEMENTS
3
4 SECTION 28 – 1501 AUTHORITY
5
6 The Town of Easton shall exercise the authority granted by Section 13.01 of Article 66B
7 Zoning and Planning, of the Annotated Code of Maryland to enter into development rights
8 and responsibilities agreements.
9
10 SECTION 28 – 1502 APPLICABILITY
11
12 Any person having a legal or equitable interest in real property located within the
13 boundaries of the Town may petition the Town of Easton to enter into an agreement
14 pertaining to the development of that property.
15
16 SECTION 28 – 1503 CONTENTS OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS AND
17 RESPONSIBILITES AGREEMENT
18
19 A. At a minimum, a development rights and responsibilities agreement shall contain the
20 following:
21
22 1. A legal description of the real property subject to the agreement;
23
24 2. A certification that the petitioner has either a legal or equitable interest in the
25 property;
26
27 3. The names of all parties having an equitable or legal interest in the property,
28 including lien holders;
29
30 4. The duration of the agreement, including any proposed phasing plan of the
31 development;
32
33 5. The permissible uses of the real property;
34
35 6. The density or intensity of use of the real property;
36
37 7. The maximum height and size of structures to be located on the real property;
38
39 8. A description of the permits required or already approved for the development
40 of the real property;
41
42 9. A statement that the proposed development is consistent with applicable
43 development regulations and the Comprehensive Plan of the Town;
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XV
15-2
1
2 10. A description of the conditions, terms, restrictions or other requirements
3 determined by the Mayor and Council, or its designees, to be necessary to
4 ensure the public health, safety and welfare;
5
6 11. In addition, the agreement shall include provisions for the following matters to
7 the extent that they are applicable to the proposed development project:
8
9 a. Dedication of portions of the real property for public use;
10
11 b. Protection of sensitive areas;
12
13 c. Preservation or archaeological investigation of prehistoric sites which
14 may provide information not commonly available from similar sites in
15 the County or Town; and preservation or restoration of significant
16 historical structures for which preservation or restoration, and
17 maintenance, are economically reasonable and feasible; and
18
19 d. Construction or financing of public facilities and extension or
20 improvement of necessary utilities.
21
22 e. A provision requiring the developer to reimburse the Town for its
23 attorney’s fees, costs and expenses incurred in the event an agreement
24 is abandoned or breached by the petitioner.
25
26 B. In addition to the matters set out in Subsection A, an agreement may fix the period in
27 which and terms by which development and construction may commence and be
28 completed, as well as provide for other matters consistent with this title, including the
29 phasing of development in such a manner that public facilities and services may be
30 provided in an orderly and sequential fashion in the discretion of the Town of Easton.
31
32 SECTION 28 – 1504 REFERRAL TO PLANNING COMMISSION; COMPLIANCE WITH
33 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
34
35 Upon receipt of a petition to enter into an agreement, the petition shall be referred to the
36 Planning Commission for a determination of whether the proposed agreement is consistent
37 with the Town’s Comprehensive Plan. The Town of Easton may not enter into an
38 agreement unless the Planning Commission determines whether the proposed agreement is
39 consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
40
41
42
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XV
15-3
SECTION 28 1 – 1505 PUBLIC HEARING; MANNER OF APPROVAL
2
3 A. Before an agreement may be executed by the Mayor, the Town Council shall hold a
4 public hearing on the proposed agreement. Notice of the hearing shall be published in
5 a newspaper of general circulation within the Town once each week for two
6 consecutive weeks, with the first such publication of notice appearing at least 14 days
7 prior to the hearing. The notice shall contain the name of the petitioner, a brief
8 description sufficient to identify the property involved, a fair summary of the contents
9 of the petition and the date, time and place of the public hearing. This hearing may be
10 combined with other required public hearings for the proposed development.
11
12 B. If after consideration of all information produced as a result of the public hearing, the
13 Town Council determines that execution of an agreement is in the best interests of the
14 Town and furthers the purpose and intent of this Article, the Town Council shall enact
15 a resolution approving the agreement and authorizing the Mayor to execute and deliver
16 the same.
17
18 SECTION 28 – 1506 AMENDMENT OF AGREEMENT
19
20 A. Subject to paragraph B of this subsection and after a public hearing, the parties to an
21 agreement may amend the agreement by mutual consent.
22
23 B. The parties may not amend an agreement unless the Planning Commission determines
24 whether the proposed amendment is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
25
26 SECTION 28 – 1507 TERMINATION OF AGREEMENTS; SUSPENSION
27
28 A. The parties to an agreement may terminate the agreement by mutual consent.
29
30 B. After a public hearing, the Town Council may determine that suspension or termination
31 is essential to ensure the public health, safety or welfare.
32
33 SECTION 28 – 1508 APPLICABLE LAWS, REGULATIONS AND POLICIES
34
35 A. Except as provided in paragraph B of this subsection, the laws, rules, regulations and
36 policies governing the use, density or intensity of use or development of the real
37 property subject to the agreement shall be the laws, rules, regulations and policies in
38 force at the time that the Mayor and the petitioner execute the agreement.
39
40 B. An agreement may not prevent compliance with the laws, rules, regulations and
41 policies enacted after the date of the agreement, if the Town Council determines that
42 imposition and compliance with these laws and regulations is essential to ensure the
43 public health, safety or welfare of residents of all or part of the Town.
TOWN OF EASTON 2018 Edition
ZONING ORDINANCE ARTICLE XV
15-4
1
2 SECTION 28 – 1509 RECORDING AGREEMENTS IN THE LAND RECORDS
3
4 A. An agreement shall be void if not recorded in the Land Records of Talbot County within
5 20 days after the day on which the Mayor and the petitioner execute the agreement.
6
7 B. When an agreement is recorded, the Town of Easton and the petitioner, and their
8 successors in interest, are bound to the agreement.
9
10 SECTION 28 – 1510 ENFORCEMENT BY INTERESTED PARTIES
11
12 Unless terminated under Section 28 – 1507 of this Article, the Town or the petitioner, and
13 their successors in interest, may enforce the agreement.
14
APPENDIX A
TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
DIMENSIONAL
REQUIREMENT
A-1 R-7A R-10A &
R-10M
CR CG HC CL I-1 & I-2 PRD PUD
Minimum District
size
-- -- -- -- -- 1 acre -- -- -- 5 acres; smaller possible
under specific conditions
Minimum Lot Size 1 acre 7,500 sq. ft
50% of lots
in SD may
be smaller.
75% of
these must
be 5,000 sq.
ft. or
greater.
10,000 sq.
ft. In R-10A
50% of lots
in SD may
be smaller.
75% of
these must
be 7,000 sq.
ft. or greater
5,000 sq. ft. 5,000 sq. ft. Set by
Planning
Commiss.
60,000 sq.
ft.
40,000 sq.
ft.
-- Set by Planning
Commission.
Minimum
Building Envelope
42’ deep x
84’ wide
60’ deep x
44’ wide
55’ deep x
54’ wide
20’ deep x
30’ wide
20’ deep x
30’ wide
-- -- 30’ deep x
80’ wide
-- --
MAXIMUM
DENSITY
1 du/ac 3.5 du/ac
SF;8 du /ac
MF; 2 du/lot
duplex
3.5 du/ac
SF; 5 du/ac
MF; 2 du/lot
duplex
See R-7A
for res. uses
-- 8 du/ac -- -- 20 du/ac 16 du/ac generally. 30
du/ac if PUD is created in
CR district or represents
redevelopment of existing
strip shopping center
MINIMUM
FRONTAGE
30' 30' 35' 30' 60' 100' 200' 100' Set by
Planning
Commiss.
Set by Planning
Commission
MINIMUM
SETBACKS:
Front 50' from
accessways;
8' otherwise
15' 15' / 30’ Existing or
25'
25' 50' 40' 40' Set by
Planning
Commiss.
on a case by
case basis
Set by the Planning
Commiss. on a case by
case basis. See also
Supplemental Stds. For
Big Box retail and
Shopping Centers –
Campus style.
Rear 25' setback* 30' setback* Existing or
15'
15' 20' 15' 30'
One Side -- -- 0' -- -- -- --
Both Sides 8' 8' 0' 10' 15' 10' 10'
MAXIMUM
LOT
COVERAGE
10% 100% within bldg. envelope.
No more than 50% of rear
yard area outside of bldg.
env.; must be located
between side setback lines
70% 50% 35% 35% 35% Set by
Planning
Commiss.
Set by Planning
Commission.
MAXIMUM
BUILDING SIZE
-- -- -- 25,000 sq.
ft.**
-- -- -- -- -- --
MAXIMUM
HEIGHT
35' 35' 35' 50' 50' 50' (40' for
access.
bldgs)
50' 35' Set by
Planning
Commiss.
Set by Planning
Commission.
* Garages and parking stalls shall be setback a minimum of 15' from the centerline of any alley.
** These limits may be exceeded by Special Exception
NOTE: MANY USES ARE SUBJECT TO SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS WHICH MAY INCLUDE SPECIAL DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS. PLEASE CONSULT SECTION 1008 FOR
SUCH STANDARDS
APPENDIX_B1_Sketch_SP_Checklist
APPENDIX B-1
SKETCH PLAN
SUBMITTAL CHECKLIST
NOTE: THIS CHECKLIST REPRESENTS THE MINIMUM INFORMATION
TO BE SUBMITTED ON A SITE PLAN. ADDITIONAL
INFORMATION MAY BE REQUIRED FOR UNIQUE SITUATIONS.
COMPLETE THE CHECKLIST AND SUBMIT IT WITH THE PLAN. IF
AN ITEM IS NOT APPLICABLE, ENTER “N/A”.
1. Location map,
2. Boundary,
3. Topography,
4. General proposed land uses drawn to scale, and
5. The Forest Stand Delineation as detailed in the Town of
Easton’s Forest Conservation Ordinance.
6. The location of any easements, rights-of-way or any other
encumbrances which pertain to the property subject to
the site plan review.
7. Conditions of concern, for example, water courses, wetlands,
floodplains, or other environmentally sensitive features.
8. Location of refuse collection, exterior lighting, fencing, and
all pedestrian walkways and sidewalks.
9. General location and description (r.e. intended function,
proposed species, etc.) of proposed landscaping.
10. Location of parking including layout and landscaping.
11. Conceptual building elevations or renderings illustrating the
character, scale, and materials of all proposed structures.
Such elevations or renderings shall be sealed by a licensed
professional as described above.
12. A statement describing the extent to which the application
complies with the Recommended Design Principles for
Easton set forth on pages 29-31 of the Comprehensive Plan
This checklist completed by _________________________________________ Date ____________
APPENDIX B-2
SKETCH STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN
SUBMITTAL CHECKLIST
EFFECTIVE MAY 4, 2010
NOTE: THE FOLLOWING CHECKLIST REPRESENTS THE MINIMUM INFORMATION
TO BE SUBMITTED FOR SUPPORT OF A STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CONCEPT
PLAN, SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN, AND/OR FINAL DESIGN PLAN. THE TOWN MAY
REQUEST ADDITIONAL INFORMATION AS DEEMED NECESSARY.
COMPLETE THE APPROPRIATE CHECKLIST AND SUBMIT IT WITH THE PLANS,
APPLICATION FORM, NARRATIVE OR REPORT, AND FEE. ITEMS IN BOLD ARE
REQUIRED FOR CONCEPT AND/OR SITE DEVELOPMENT PHASE REVIEW.
I. Sketch Plan Submittal
A. Site and Resource Map
Natural Resources Identified on Plan, including, but not limited to:
Please use these responses for the following:
(Provided = P; Not Provided = NP; Not Applicable = N/A)
Tidal and Non-Tidal Wetland Boundaries __________
Wetland Buffers __________
Floodplain Boundaries and Elevations __________
Streams and other Waterways __________
Stream Buffers __________
Forest Boundaries __________
Forest Buffers __________
Critical Areas __________
Steep Slopes (>25%) __________
Erodible Soils __________
Areas of High Recharge __________
Springs __________
Soil Types and Hydrologic Soil Groups __________
Bedrock and/or other Geologic Features __________
Vegetative Cover __________
Existing Drainage Areas and Flow Patterns __________
Existing Stormwater Outfalls __________
Site and Resource Map field verified by a properly
licensed design professional. __________
Existing contours (1’ max intervals) and utilities shown.__________
Large tracts of contiguous open spaces, forested areas and
other important resources protected by conservation
easements. __________
Opportunities for afforestation identified. __________
Wetland, stream and forest buffers enhanced and/or
expanded. __________
B. Site Fingerprinting and Development Layout
Locations of proposed impervious areas provided. __________
Proposed contours (1’ max intervals) and utilities shown. __________
Preliminary locations of proposed Environmental Site
Design (ESD) practices provided. __________
Locations of stormwater outfalls and conveyance
provided with offsite storm drains, culverts and grass
channels with size and slope. __________
Limit of disturbance and extent of clearing & grading. __________
Site natural resources protected during construction.
If site natural resources must be disturbed during
construction, please include an explanation in the
stormwater narrative. __________
Better Site Design Techniques incorporated, including:
Sheetflow and overland flow provided wherever possible __________
Building footprint and site layout designed to protect
conservation areas __________
Proposed streets, rights of way, and/or sidewalks with
modifications to reduce impervious area __________
Landscaped medians and/or cul-de-sacs __________
Stormwater management features in medians or cul-de-sacs __________
Private open road section with grass channels and/or
biofilters __________
Minimize numbers of parking spaces and sizes __________
Narrow frontages to reduce road length __________
Site graded to encourage runoff from impervious areas to
pervious areas or other natural conveyance systems __________
C. Stormwater Narrative
Title Page includes:
Job Name __________
Owner/Developer __________
Design Professional __________
Date Prepared __________
Seal and Signature (properly licensed Design Professional) __________
Project is identified as new development or redevelopment. __________
(Redevelopment projects have =40% total site
imperviousness)
Project and streets designed for 2-year and 10-year
quantitative management. __________
Project is identified as being within the Tanyard Branch
Watershed. (Projects within this watershed must manage
proposed 10-year storm flows to the existing 2-year storm
discharge rate.) __________
A narrative that supports the concept and describes
how the design will achieve:
Natural resource protection and enhancement __________
Maintenance of natural flow patterns __________
Reduction of impervious areas through better site design,
alternative surfaces, and non-structural practices __________
Implementation of ESD planning techniques and practices
to the Maximum Extent Practicable (MEP) __________
Preliminary ESD sizing calculations provided __________
Integration of erosion and sediment controls (ESC) into
the stormwater strategy __________
D. Sketch Plan Meeting
Following the Sketch Plan submittal, a meeting will be
scheduled between the Town of Easton Planning & Zoning,
Town Engineer, the Talbot County Soil Conservation
District (SCD) ESC reviewer, the owner/developer, the
SWM and ESC designer(s), and any other reviewers
deemed necessary by the Town of Easton and/or the
Talbot County SCD. Official Minutes from the Sketch
Plan Meeting must be submitted for review and
acceptance by all parties. These minutes must
accompany all future submittals. ___________
This checklist completed by _________________________________________ Date ____________
APPENDIX B-3
DEVELOPMENT SITE PLAN
SUBMITTAL CHECKLIST
NOTE: THIS CHECKLIST REPRESENTS THE MINIMUM INFORMATION
TO BE SUBMITTED ON A DEVELOPMENT SITE PLAN.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION MAY BE REQUIRED FOR UNIQUE
SITUATIONS.
COMPLETE THE CHECKLIST AND SUBMIT IT WITH THE PLAN. IF
AN ITEM IS NOT APPLICABLE, ENTER “N/A”.
1. Vicinity map showing relationship to surroundings, including
existing, proposed, or mapped streets within 1,000 feet and
municipal boundaries within 1,000 feet of the tract.
2. Each sheet numbered and the relationship shown to total
number of sheets.
3. Dimensions in feet and decimal parts.
4. North arrow.
5. Boundary survey or survey of record of the property showing
courses, distances and area.
6. Detailed plans drawn at a scale that is legible, preferably on
one (1) sheet.
7. Existing contours with intervals not more than one (1) foot.
Elevations shall be based on NAVD88 datum (include
benchmark on plan).
8. Location, width and names of existing platted streets or other
public streets, railroad and utility rights-of-way, parks, open
space areas, and municipal corporation lines within or
adjoining the tract.
9. Proposed public improvements, highways, or other major
improvements planned on or near the site.
10. Rights-of-way for all drainage purposes and utilities
11. All existing and proposed utilities, including location, grade
and size of, service entrances, meter locations, transformer
locations and sizes of mains:
a) Storm drain (including invert elevations and profiles).
b) Sewerage facilities (including invert elevations and
profiles).
c) Catch basins.
d) Drainage ways, channels.
e) Pumping Stations.
f) Water mains.
g) Streetlights.
h) Electric, telephone, and/or cable television lines.
i) Fire hydrants.
j) Direction of, distance to and size of nearest water mains
and sewers if not located on or adjacent to the site.
k) Gas
12. Conditions on adjoining lands; direction and gradient of
ground slope, embankments, retaining walls, railroads and
towers or other influences when identified by the applicant
or Town Planner to be of concern.
13. Locations of all existing or proposed buildings, structures,
parking facilities and other improvements. Submission
shall include a scale dimension from the property line
to the proposed building.
14. If alteration is made to an existing building, structure, or
other improvement, dotted lines shall denote features or
locations to be abandoned and solid lines shall denote
proposed features.
15. Building setback lines.
16. Signature and seal of licensed surveyor, registered professional
engineer, registered architect, registered landscape architect
or planner (AICP), responsible for the accuracy of the site
plan.
17. Drainage calculations and certification.
18. Legend which clearly indicates existing and proposed
improvements and natural features. The legend or title
block must include the following information:
a) Zoning district.
b) Tax map and parcel number.
c) Developer’s name and address.
d) Owner’s name and address.
e) Scale.
f) Date of drawing; date and type of revisions.
g) Utility symbols.
h) Name of projects.
19. Notes which identify:
a) Board of Appeals’ case number/approval date
(if applicable).
b) Projected building schedule:
i. Start
ii. Finish
c) Number of parking spaces
i. Existing
ii. Proposed
iii. Required
d) Number of residential units by type (if applicable).
e) Residential density in units per acre (if applicable).
20. Location of refuse collection, exterior lighting, fencing, and
all pedestrian walkways and sidewalks.
21. The location, size, height, number, and orientation of all
of all proposed signs.
22. Landscaping plan and legend prepared in accordance with
Section 615 of this Ordinance.
23. If residential development, include homeowner’s association
documentation when common open space and buffer
areas are provided.
24. Certificates and statements.
25. Sedimentation and erosion control plan.
26. The Forest Conservation Plan and Forest Conservation
worksheet shall be submitted in accordance with the
provisions of the Town of Easton’s Forest Conservation
Ordinance.
27. Renderings or sketches which accurately depict the
architecture of any proposed structures.
This checklist completed by _________________________________________ Date ____________
APPENDIX B-4
DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN
SUBMITTAL CHECKLIST
EFFECTIVE MAY 4, 2010
NOTE: THE FOLLOWING CHECKLIST REPRESENTS THE MINIMUM INFORMATION
TO BE SUBMITTED FOR SUPPORT OF A STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CONCEPT
PLAN, SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN, AND/OR FINAL DESIGN PLAN. THE TOWN MAY
REQUEST ADDITIONAL INFORMATION AS DEEMED NECESSARY.
COMPLETE THE APPROPRIATE CHECKLIST AND SUBMIT IT WITH THE PLANS,
APPLICATION FORM, NARRATIVE OR REPORT, AND FEE. ITEMS IN BOLD ARE
REQUIRED FOR CONCEPT AND/OR SITE DEVELOPMENT PHASE REVIEW.
II. Preliminary Development Site Plan Submittal
All information provided in Sketch Plan submittal included. ___________
Comments received from Sketch Plan submittal addressed,
and included. ___________
A. Stormwater Management Plans
Vicinity Map provided. ___________
Determination of final site layout and acreage of impervious
area. ___________
Proposed topography. ___________
Proposed drainage areas. ___________
Soil boring locations shown on plans. ___________
Infiltration Testing Report. ___________
Proposed drainage and utility easements. ___________
(ESD devices, stormwater practices and BMP structures
must be recorded in the land records of Talbot County
and remain unaltered by subsequent property owners.
Prior approval from the Town of Easton shall be
obtained before any alterations are made.)
The location and size of ESD practices and all non-structural,
alternative surfaces, and micro-scale practices used to the
MEP. ___________
ESD practices identified with MDE alpha-numeric symbol. ___________
Stormwater design details and specifications, including
representative cross sections for all components of the
proposed drainage system or systems, and SWM practices,
BMPs and ESD devices. ___________
Indication ownership and maintenance responsibility for
SWM practices, ESD devices, and BMP structures. ___________
Include Operation and Maintenance schedule on plans. ___________
Landscaping Plan in accordance with 2009 Design Manual. ___________
Table of materials to be used for SWM facility planting.___________
Construction Cost Estimate provided. ___________
Plans signed and sealed by properly licensed design
professional and owner/developer. ___________
B. Water Quantity Management (if required)
Drainage areas, subareas and study points. ___________
Times of concentration paths shown in segments. Each
segment labeled with length and slope. ___________
Hydrology computations to include the following:
Existing and Proposed RCN ___________
Existing and Proposed Tc Calculations ___________
Existing and Proposed Peak Discharge Computations ___________
Allowable Discharge Computations (2- and 10-year storms
managed, 100-year storm safely passed) ___________
Computations for storage of runoff required and provided ___________
If project is identified as being within the Tanyard Branch
Watershed, proposed 10-year storm flows have been
managed to the existing 2-year storm discharge rate. ___________
Stage-storage table and curve provided. ___________
Stage-discharge table and curve provided. ___________
Detail design and plans of orifice and weir flow provided. ___________
2-year, 10-year and 100-year routing (TR-20) provided. ___________
C. Stormwater Management Report
Title Page Information from Sketch Plan Narrative included. ___________
Table of Contents, including:
Sections List ___________
Appendix List ___________
Figures and Table List ___________
Narrative, including:
Introduction ___________
General Site Information ___________
Narrative Elements from Sketch Plan Narrative ___________
Affects of Development on Downstream Properties
and/or Watercourses ___________
Affects of Development on Adjacent Properties ___________
Impacts on Existing/Proposed Utilities ___________
Conclusions and Recommendations ___________
ESD Sizing Calculations and ESD Targets identified. ___________
Reduced Runoff Curve Number (RCN) and Channel
Protection Volume (CPv) storage calculations if ESD
targets not met.
___________
Water quantity calculations and peak discharge rate
analysis, if required. ___________
For each ESD device and/or BMP provide narrative and
computations in response to each of the Performance
Criteria presented in chapters 3 and 5 of the 2009 Design
Manual. ___________
For ESD Devices:
Performance Criteria ___________
Constraints ___________
Design Guidance ___________
Construction Criteria ___________
Inspection Criteria ___________
Maintenance Criteria ___________
For BMP Structures:
Feasibility Criteria ___________
Conveyance Criteria ___________
Pretreatment Criteria ___________
Treatment Criteria ___________
Landscaping Criteria ___________
Maintenance Criteria ___________
Hydraulic computations for all storm drain systems:
Onsite stormdrain systems for public streets shall be
Designed to convey the 10-year post-developed flows. ___________
Allowable gutter spread for roadways shall be 8 feet
or half the lane width adjacent to the curb,
whichever is smaller. ___________
Report signed and sealed by properly licensed design
professional and owner/developer. ___________
D. Erosion and Sediment Control Overlay Plans
Preliminary erosion and sediment control plans showing the following:
Limits of disturbance ___________
Sensitive areas, buffers and forests that are to be preserved ___________
Proposed phasing ___________
Construction sequencing ___________
Stabilization techniques ___________
An overlay plan showing the location of stormwater ESD
practices and proposed erosion and sediment controls. ___________
Locations of areas that must remain undisturbed,
protected or used for erosion and sediment control. ___________
Identifiable areas where construction equipment may
compact soil and will need rehabilitation after grading
operations. ___________
Removal of sediment from the locations of ESD practices. ___________
E. Redevelopment
Project has =40% imperviousness within the LOD ___________
Stormwater management has been addressed for
redevelopment according to the following criteria
(Alternative SWM measures may be implemented
on a case by case basis):
Existing impervious area within LOD reduced by 50% ___________
ESD practices implemented to provide water quality
treatment of at least 50% of the existing impervious area ___________
Combination of impervious area reduction and ESD
implementation for at least 50% of the existing impervious
area ___________
III. Final Development Site Plan Submittal
All information provided in Sketch Plan and Site
Development Plan submittals included. ___________
Comments received from Sketch Plan and Site
Development Plan submittals addressed, and included. ___________
Finalized SWM and ESC Plans and SWM report
(all comments addressed). Plans and report should be
signed and sealed by properly licensed design
professional, owner/developer, and reviewing agencies. ___________
Easement plat and rights-of-way plat showing ESD
components and structural BMP facilities with applicable
description. Maintenance responsibilities should be defined. __________
This checklist completed by _________________________________________ Date ____________
APPENDIX B-5
SITE PLAN REVIEW CHECKLIST FOR TRAFFIC ISSUES
The following checklist is intended to be used to assist communities in reviewing transportation
related issues during site plan review. These standards could be added to the zoning ordinance,
as appropriate. The standards are from many of the reference materials used in preparing the
handbook. The standards may need to be tailored to a particular community or situation.
OFF-SITE CIRCULATION & ACCESS
The distance between the driveway and adjacent intersections or other driveways
meets standards (these access standards can be in the road agencies code/rules or
the zoning ordinance). Spacing based on posted speed limits is common.
(example – 230 feet spacing for 40 mph).
Driveway is aligned with driveways across the street or offset at least 150 feet apart
for local and collector roads, or 250 feet apart along arterial roads (or other
specified access management standards).
Driveway design is sufficient for the type of traffic expected and site conditions.
This includes reviewing the need for a by-pass lane, center turn lane, deceleration
lane, deceleration taper, and width and number of ingress/egress lanes.
If site access is available via a side street or service drive, access to an arterial should
be limited or discouraged, where appropriate.
Is the length of the driveway sufficient to provide storage for vehicles waiting to
enter or exit without creating conflicts?
Driveway radii for both inbound and outbound are sufficient to accommodate the
types of vehicular traffic that is expected to enter the site (typically 25-30 feet).
Is the driveway grade too steep? Driveways or circulation roads should not have
grades in excess of two percent near the main roadway approach.
Ensure that pedestrian crossing is addressed, if appropriate, at all site driveways.
If a boulevard design is used, carefully review island design including width, length,
and radii. Also driveways likely to be aligned or nearly aligned with an existing or
future driveway on the opposite side of the road should typically not include a
median/island.
Is sight distance at the proposed driveway location sufficient? Will proposed signs
and/or landscaping obscure sight distance?
Is this a location where a shared driveway, frontage road, rear service drive or
connecting parking lots would be appropriate? Are such facilities recommended
in a corridor plan, master plan or zoning ordinance?
Setbacks from future rights-of-way should be noted. Is a right-of-way dedication
or preservation desired?
ON-SITE CIRCULATION (including pedestrians)
Minimize conflicts near entrances, such as cross traffic, through the use of
landscaped islands. Islands can also be used judiciously to control and slow
traffic maneuvering through a large parking lot.
Where public transit, school bus, or semi-truck traffic is expected, insure that the
site designer has provided adequate internal radii to accommodate trucks or transit
vehicles without conflicting with circulation or parking (check using a turning
template – a transparent diagram to scale which illustrates the turning radii for
different types of vehicles). Review of emergency vehicle accessibility should
also be completed.
Ensure that traffic backing out of parking spaces does not conflict with traffic on
circulation roads.
Where islands are used at the ends of parking rows, the design should discourage
vehicles from backing out into major traffic aisles.
Parking Island Design – The radii of parking islands should be shown to ensure
vehicles can easily move through the parking lot. The depth of parking islands
should be about two feet less than the depth of the adjacent parking space.
Generally, intersections within the parking lot should be no more than three-way
intersections and at most four-way. Avoid intersections with five or more
approaches.
Pedestrian circulation should generally be down the aisle (parallel to) or provided
through separate facilities.
Minimize vehicular conflicts for pedestrians near building entrances. Traffic lanes
should not abut the building; a protected area for pedestrians should be provided.
Ensure that there is sufficient room to maneuver to pick up dumpsters without
backing into vehicles parked on the opposite side of an aisle (again, use a
turn template).
For drive-through facilities, ensure that the drive-through lane does not conflict
with maneuvering from parking spaces or traffic circulation. Are the number of
stacking spaces on site adequate to accommodate expected queues?
Maximum cul-de-sac length should be considered. Community standards range
typically from 600 feet to no maximum. ITE recommends a maximum length of
1500 feet for low density development (up to 2 dwelling units/acre), 1000 feet
for medium density development (2.1-6 units per acre) and 700 feet for higher
density developments. Some communities and agencies in Michigan specify a
maximum number of units which can be served by a single access point (usually
25-50 units).
PARKING AND LOADING
Parking lots should be shared to reduce parking area where the types of uses and
their parking demand patterns make this possible.
Are the required number of barrier free and regular parking spaces provided? Do
their dimensions meet ordinance requirements? While most ordinances address
minimum parking, some communities also consider the maximum parking needed.
Often, parking lots are over designed leading to excessive storm water runoff and
poor aesthetics.
Does sufficient space exist for snow storage?
Parking bays or aisles should be aligned perpendicular to the building. This provides
better safety for pedestrians rather than walking between parked vehicles.
Is barrier free access adequate?
Is the loading/unloading area large enough and functionally designed with the proper
surfacing materials? Is it separated from through traffic lanes?
Loading areas and loading docks should generally be on the rear or side of the
building not visible to a residential district or the public street.
NON-MOTORIZED FACILITIES
Provision for non-motorized facilities (sidewalks and bike paths)
? adequate width (suggest minimum 5 feet along local streets, 6-7 feet along
arterial streets)
? acceptable grade
? alignment where sidewalk crosses driveway
? connection between the street sidewalk and building entrances
? barrier free requirements
? consideration of pedestrian connections between residential developments
? convenient pedestrian ways to on-site or nearby bus stops
Provisions for transit facilities (if appropriate)
? if there will be on-site transit service, adequate turning radii should be illustrated
? location of bus shelters or drop-off areas
? for larger projects, request written comments from the transit agency
Pedestrian access across sites is typically overlooked along commercial strips.
Pathways worn into the turf by pedestrians may demonstrate a need. If sidewalks
are not needed at the present time, but may be needed in the future, consider
requiring a bond issue for future sidewalk construction.
This checklist completed by _________________________________________ Date ____________
APPENDIX B-6
Record Drawing Checklist
Effective August 1, 2010
General:
1. Record Drawings will show accurate locations of site grading, stormwater
management, storm drains, sewer, water mains and other water appurtenances,
structures, light standards, vaults, streets, sidewalks, landscaping areas, building
footprints, pavement markings, property lines, easements, etc.
2. Record Drawings shall be sealed by a professional surveyor, licensed in the State of
Maryland, that the locations and elevations shown have been reviewed and meet the
current standards of accuracy. Any deviations shall be noted by the surveyor along
with corrective action required.
3. Stormwater management plans shall be reviewed for compliance by a professional
engineer licensed in the State of Maryland. The review shall include all volumes,
elevations and function as compared to the approved design. Recalculation and
submission of an as-constructed stormwater management report shall be performed
where site modifications exceed allowances.
4. As-built CAD requirements for water, sewer and storm drains are included under
CAD Standards for New Construction and Renovation Projects dated October 2009.
All utility and stormwater management (public or private) system installations
completed by a Developer or Contractor at the direction of Easton Utilities or the
Town of Easton must be delineated on the Record Drawings in CAD format.
5. The Town of Easton requires Record Drawings in accordance with these
requirements prior to release of bonds and prior to issuance of a final site approval.
6. Record Drawings – To the fullest extent possible, the record drawings should be done
in conjunction with approved plans, in order to readily identify any variances from
the plans. Submit prints for approval. Upon approval of the record drawings, provide
three (3) sets of prints, and one (1) digital copy.
7. The following checklists shall be completed and submitted with Record Drawings.
General Information:
____ Each drawing must be submitted on minimum 24”x36” sheets.
____ Each drawing must contain north arrow.
____ Each drawing must contain survey benchmarks and other reference points.
____ Each Drawing must contain the Engineer’s and Surveyor’s Certification Statement.
____ Provide a location map.
____ Provide property lines with boundary, easements.
Title Block Information:
____ Project Name, including “Record Drawings”.
____ Name, address, telephone number and fax number of the individual preparing the plan.
____ Scale matching original plans.
____ Date of survey measurements.
____ Name of the Town, County and State.
____ Signature and seal of Maryland Professional Engineer or Professional Land Surveyor.
Roadways:
Edge of Pavement:
____ Show deviations from the approved plans for the width of pavement. Confirm distance from Centerline of
the Street R-O-W at all curve tangents. Show notation of the field measurements on the as-built layer.
Centerline of Pavement:
____ Show any deviations of the centerline to the Street R-O-W.
____ Confirm elevations as profiled and at all grade breaks, and note on the as-built drawing layer.
____ Show deviations from the plans on the profile of the center of pavement.
(Confirm at intervals to match design plans and record on profile.)
Flow line of curb:
____ Confirm as-constructed elevations at intervals per the design plans (at each curve tangent and at grade
changes).
____ Confirm grades between each grade break and at sumps.
____ Provide centerline stationing for all curb cuts.
____ Show deviations from the proposed grades on the profile of the flow line of the curb.
Sidewalks:
____ Show any deviations from the planned location from the curb, width and grade of the sidewalks.
____ Measure and record cross slopes at 25 foot intervals.
Ramps:
____ For each ramp, confirm the location, length, grade of ramp and cross slope.
Structures within the Street R-O-W:
____ Confirm the location and rim elevation of all storm drain manholes and inlets as well as communications,
traffic control or utility structures within the street. Include water meters and sanitary sewer cleanouts,
street lights, electric boxes, communications boxes, gas cutoffs, gas vents and other at grade features.
Show any deviation from the plans.
Street lights:
____ Locate all and denote type.
Grading:
____ Confirm general conformance to plans of site and lot grading. For deviations, include spot elevations and
contours within Street R-O-W and beyond sidewalk area.
Survey Markers:
____ Confirm the location, type and elevation of all survey markers installed within and at the edge of Street RO-
W.
Traffic Control:
____ Confirm the location of lane paint, crosswalks or other lines, signage (Stop, Yield, Street Name, etc.) and
traffic signalization. Show deviations on the As-built drawing layer.
____ Confirm the placement of parking spaces. Show deviation from plans.
Landscaping:
____ Confirm the location, size and type of each tree planted within the project.
____ Show deviations from plans.
Sewer Collection System:
Pipes:
____ Detail as constructed location, size and type of each sewer.
____ Detail pipe slope and elevations for profile and plan.
Manholes:
____ Measure length from manhole centerline to manhole centerline.
____ Establish inverts of all pipelines.
____ Establish frame elevation.
Laterals:
____ Locate lateral with cleanout.
____ Establish distance from low manhole to lateral on sewer perpendicular to cleanout.
____ Establish distance from lower manhole to cleanout wye branch.
____ Note length of lateral to cleanout from sewer main.
Water Distribution:
Pipes:
____ Confirm as constructed location of main site and material type for each pipe run.
____ Note lengths from major components (i.e. tees, crosses, bends, sleeves, etc.) in plan view. Include a
connection reference with each length recorded (e.g., “Tee to Sleeve”). If necessary, note any As-built
lengths in profile that cannot be shown in the plan view (e.g., water main offset).
____ Note service locations, size and material (1”, 1 ½”, and 2”). Locate valves, meter pits, curb stops, etc.
Establish distance along water main run to tap from known station, hydrant, main valve, etc.
____ Provide detail drawing of hydrant assembly. Include hydrant, bends, water main offset that cannot be
clearly dimensioned on plan view.
____ Detail pipe slope and elevations for profile and plan.
Storm Sewer:
Manholes/Inlets:
____ Measure length from manhole centerline to manhole centerline or manhole centerline to inlet centerline.
____ Establish inverts material and size of all pipelines.
____ Establish frame and grate elevations for inlets. Establish inlet type, (grated inlet, cog, combination inlets,
yard inlets or others).
____ Document elevation for front and back of inlet at centerline.
Outfalls:
____ Confirm type of outfall
____ Locate and confirm elevation at end walls, flaired and section, etc.
____ Confirm rip rap type, size and shape including approximate depth.
Roadside Swales:
____ Confirm location of swale and contours.
____ Provide spot grades of swale centerline at minimum 50 foot intervals.
____ Confirm swale cross section.
Stormwater Management Record Drawings
Submittal Requirements:
____ Record Drawing survey plan in accordance with the items of this Checklist.
____ Supporting calculations in accordance with the items of this Checklist.
____ A copy of the completed Construction Record Drawings Survey Submittal Checklist.
____ Geotechnical engineer’s report, if applicable.
Record Drawing Plan Requirements:
Title Block Supplemental Requirements:
____ Name, address, telephone and fax numbers of party responsible for maintenance of the stormwater facility
(i.e., owner, or maintenance corporation representative).
Delineate and properly label the following (as applicable):
____ Roads adjoining the stormwater facility.
____ Property lines with boundaries adjacent to the stormwater facility.
____ Easements (i.e. drainage, utility, access, etc.) adjacent to the stormwater facility.
____ Maintenance access to and around the stormwater facility.
____ Maintenance set aside area location and dimensions.
____ Location of maintenance marker in the forebay to indicate if sediment has been removed.
Provide the following as it relates to the stormwater facility’s storage volume:
____ Record Drawing contours of the stormwater management facility including forebays, micropools and
elevations below permanent pool at 1-foot intervals based on the datum of the approved plan.
____ Pond bottom elevations on a fifty-foot grid with high and low points noted.
____ Lowest top of bank elevation at fill for embankment/combination pond or lowest top of bank elevation for
excavated pond. The acceptable top of bank elevation may be no lower that the design elevation for top of
bank.
____ Flow line and cross slopes of swales or ditches.
____ Actual cross section showing elevations, inside slopes, benching, top width and backslope, as applicable (to
scale).
____ Elevation of permanent pool.
____ Calculations of the volume of the pond as constructed with incremental storage and cumulative storage
volumes in the cubic feet for each one-foot elevation contour. Note: The allowable variances from the
design volume of the basin is ten percent.
Provide the following information related to the inlet and outlet structures within the stormwater facility. Note: The
allowable variances for invert elevations on any structure is 0.1ft.
____ Diameter and material of all inlet and outlet pipes.
____ Invert elevations of all inlet and outlet pipes.
____ Dimensions (length, width, depth, d50) for all areas of rock outlet protection.
____ Dimensions and materials of outfall structures.
____ Profile through principal spillway showing inverts and dimensions of all pipes, weirs, orifices, risers and
other appurtenances, as applicable (to scale).
____ Cross-section of emergency spillway (to scale).
____ Profile through emergency spillway (to scale).
____ Calculations of outflow from the stormwater management facility for all design storms. Routing
computations must be based on the record drawing volumes and elevations for the facility.
Stormwater quality and subsurface systems shall require periodic documentation during their construction to
adequately prepare record drawings. Provide the following information related to these systems.
____ Diameter and material of inlet/outlet and underdrains.
____ Location and elevation of setting bed fabric on subsurface structures with all pipe data for connected piping
and chambers.
____ Chamber and sump size, inverts, location and separation.
____ Inspection port locations.
____ Top of stone bed and fabric and clearance to paving.
____ Denote type of Environmental Site Design (ESD) feature and represent area, length, width, depth, slope,
etc. for conformance with design detail.
____ Document all living plantings within an ESD.
General Site Plans:
____ Document private water and sewer lines and services. Denote line size, materials, etc.
____ Document pipe inverts and slopes for storm drains and sanitary sewer.
____ Locate all manholes, cleanouts, meters, valves, etc.
____ Document all stormwater management features as defined herein.
____ Document location of all parking systems, streetlights and sidewalks including confirmation of compliance
with ADA requirements.
____ Record elevations of finished handicap ramps and denote grades at all changes of slope.
____ Document all building structure and fixed site features shown on approved plans.
____ Document by measurement stormwater management systems inclusive of environmental site design
features. Refer to prior requirements for such systems.
____ Verify site contours and provide periodic spot elevation as constructed. Document that facility as
constructed does not encroach or impact on other private property.
____ Illustrate rights of way and easements.
This checklist completed by _________________________________________ Date ____________
APPENDIX B-7
Design Engineer?s Certification
___________________________ ____________
Project Name Project Number
By Signing this affidavit I, the Engineer in charge of this Project, certify that I am a professional
engineer with personal knowledge of the approved design plans (approved plan) and the
improvements as constructed and do hereby certify to the best of my knowledge, information and
belief, the referenced improvements have been constructed in general compliance with the
approved design plans and the applicable standards and specifications of the Town of Easton
(Town).
Please initial the items below that are in compliance with the statement above. For items that are
not in compliance with the statement above please mark with an „x? and attach to this document
appropriate information describing the variation. For items that do not apply to the subject
project please mark “NA”.
As-Built Drawing
___ I am submitting with this document an as-built drawing representing the postdevelopment
condition of the site consistent with the minimum requirements for such
drawing, outlined in Appendix B of the Zoning Ordinance: As-Built Submittal Checklist.
Grading
___ Site has been generally graded per the approved plan and graded in a manner as to divert
water away from structures on-site or off-site and not graded in a way that will adversely
affect an adjoining property owner.
Structures
___ The location of all structures is as indicated on the approved plan and meet the minimum
setbacks required by the Town.
___ The vertical dimension of all structures (measured from grade to the highest point of the
structure) are as indicated on the approved plan and do not exceed the maximum height
permitted by the Town.
Parking
___ The surface material of the parking area is as indicated on the approved plans and in
compliance with the minimum standards required by the Town
___ The location of all parking areas and drive aisles are as indicated on the approved plan and
meet the minimum setbacks permitted by the Town
___ The number of parking spaces on the site are as indicated on the approved plan and meet
the minimum requirements of the Town
___ The dimensions of all on-site parking spaces are as indicated on the approved plan and meet
the minimum dimensions required by the Town
___ Location, quantity, dimensions, striping and signage of accessible parking spaces are as
indicated on the approved plan and meet the minimum requirements of the Town
Landscaping
___ All landscaping is located as indicated on the approved plan and the location of landscaping
meets the minimum requirements of the Town
___ The species of all landscaping is as indicated on the approved plan and meets the minimum
requirements of the Town
___ The size of all landscaping material is as indicated on the approved plan and meets the
minimum requirements of the Town
___ All landscape material has been planted and/or installed as indicated on the approved plan
and as required by the Town
Exterior Lighting
___ All exterior site lighting is located as indicated on the plan and meets the minimum
requirements of the Town
___ The vertical dimension of all exterior site lighting is as indicated on the approved plan and
does not exceed the maximum allowed by the Town
___ The level of all exterior site lighting shining off site is as indicated on the plan and does not
exceed the maximum level permitted by the Town
Free standing signs
___ The location of all signage is as indicated on the approved plan and meets the minimum
setbacks required by the Town
___ The sign area of all signage is as indicated on the plan and does not exceed the maximum
area allowed by the Town
___ The vertical dimension of all signage is as indicated on the approved plan and does not
exceed the maximum allowed by the Town
Storm Water Management
___ All storm water management improvements are as indicated on the approved plans and meet
the minimum requirements of the Town.
___ I have submitted and received approval from the Town, an as-built drawing of the storm
water management improvements consistent with the minimum requirements for such
drawing as outlined in Appendix B of the Zoning Ordinance: Storm Water Management
As-Built Submittal Checklist and/or if applicable: Stormtech Chambers Inspection
Checklist.
All Improvements intended to be Dedicated to the Town and/or Improvements
Constructed on Town Property
___ Built per approved plans and applicable Town Standards
Signature and Seal of Engineer:
I _______________________________, hereby state that the property located at
_____________________________________________________________________ has been
improved in accordance with the approved plan and is in accordance with all applicable
Town standards as indicated above.
_______________________________________ _______________
Name of Engineer Date
Seal of Engineer:
APPENDIX B-8
Subsurface SWM Inspection Checklist
(to take place during construction)
Prior to installation of stone bed.
____ Perform recommended compaction testing on prepared subgrade. (Owners Geotechnical Co to submit
documentation)
Inspection should take place prior to backfilling system with crushed angular stone. TOWN INSPECTION
#1
____ Ensure chambers are installed level and plumb.
____ Check depth of stone bed complies with Construction Plans.
____ Check invert of chambers matches Construction Plans. (Owners Surveyor to Document)
____ Check inlet structure has 2 ft sump per manufacturer requirements.
____ Confirm presence of filter fabric between invert of stone bed and sub-grade.
____ Confirm presence of filter fabric wrapped around Isolator Row as indicated on Construction Plans.
____ Confirm sizes of header pipe and chamber inlet pipes match sizes indicated on Construction Plans.
____ Confirm locations of all inspection ports conform to Construction Plans.
____ Confirm row separation distances between chambers and around perimeter of chambers per manufacturer
requirements.
____ Confirm installation of under drain if applicable.
____ Confirm inside of chambers are clear of any sediment build-up or other trash.
____ Locate corners of structures to verify installation per plan. (Owner’s Surveyor to Document)
After Installation of Stone. TOWN INSPECTION #2
____ Confirm entire stone bed is wrapped in filter fabric.
____ Confirm minimum stone cover over chamber of 6”
____ Confirm minimum distance between top of chamber and underside of future paving section is a minimum
of 18”.
After Completion of System.
____ Owner shall provide maintenance agreement to Town from the system supplier or approved agent to
perform routine inspections and maintenance per manufacturer’s recommendations.
Signature and Seal of Engineer:
I _______________________________, hereby state that the property located at
_____________________________________________________________________ has been improved in
accordance with the approved plan and is in accordance with all applicable Town standards as indicated
above.
_______________________________________ _______________
Name of Engineer Date
Seal of Engineer:
2010
As Amended by:
Ordinance No. 549
Subdivision Regulations
2
CONTENTS
Article I Introduction ........................................................................................................ 4
Section 100 Purpose .............................................................................................. 4
Section 101 Intent ................................................................................................. 4
Section 102 Interpretation and Application of Regulations .................................. 4
Article II Definitions ......................................................................................................... 5
Section 200 General .............................................................................................. 5
Section 201 Specific ............................................................................................. 5
Article III Control and Penalties ....................................................................................... 8
Section 300 Subdivision Control .......................................................................... 8
Section 301 Building Permits and Certificates of Occupancy .............................. 8
Section 302 Plat Approval Required..................................................................... 8
Section 303 Penalties for Violation ...................................................................... 8
Article IV Procedures and Requirements ......................................................................... 9
Section 400 Sketch Plat Purpose........................................................................... 9
Section 401 Sketch Plat Procedures ...................................................................... 9
Section 402 Sketch Plat Requirements ............................................................... 11
Section 403 Preliminary Subdivision Plat Purpose ............................................ 12
Section 404 Preliminary Plat Procedures ............................................................ 12
Section 405 Preliminary Plat Requirements ....................................................... 13
Section 406 Improvement Plans ......................................................................... 15
Section 407 Final Plat Purpose ........................................................................... 16
Section 408 Final Plat Procedures ...................................................................... 16
Section 409 Final Plat Requirements .................................................................. 17
Section 410 Recording Procedures ..................................................................... 21
Section 411 Effect of Recording Final Plat ........................................................ 22
Section 412 Minor Subdivisions ......................................................................... 22
Section 413 Combination of Lots in Common Ownership ................................. 22
Section 414 Subdivision Plat Approval Expirations……………………………22
Article V Design Requirements ...................................................................................... 24
Section 500 Compliance Required...................................................................... 24
Section 501 Subdivision Design Requirements .................................................. 24
Article VI Required Improvements ................................................................................ 26
Section 600 Purpose ............................................................................................ 26
Section 601 Improvements ................................................................................. 27
Section 602 Inspections ...................................................................................... 27
Section 603 Repair of Damaged Improvements ................................................. 27
Section 604 Public Works Agreement ................................................................ 27
Article VII Standards ...................................................................................................... 28
3
Section 700 Application ...................................................................................... 28
Section 701 General Provisions .......................................................................... 28
Section 702 Street Hierarchy .............................................................................. 28
Section 703 Street Design and Layout ................................................................ 34
Section 704 Street Improvements ....................................................................... 37
Section 705 Sanitary Sewerage System and Water Supply System ................... 38
Section 706 Gas, Electric, Cable and Telephone Service ................................... 38
Section 707 Landscaping .................................................................................... 38
Section 708 Community Parks............................................................................ 38
Section 709 Park Development Fees .................................................................. 39
Section 710 Survey Monuments and Markers .................................................... 40
Section 711 Engineering and Surveying ............................................................. 40
Article VIII Improvement Guarantees ............................................................................ 42
Section 800 Contracts ......................................................................................... 42
Section 801 Guaranty .......................................................................................... 42
Section 802 Acceptance of Improvements ......................................................... 42
Article IX Changes and Amendments ............................................................................ 44
Section 900 Changes and Amendments .............................................................. 44
Article X Administration ................................................................................................ 45
Section 1000 Hardship ........................................................................................ 45
Section 1001 Conditions ..................................................................................... 45
Section 1002 Fees ............................................................................................... 45
Section 1003 Severability ................................................................................... 45
Section 1004 Public Hearing .............................................................................. 45
Section 1005 Enforcement Officer ..................................................................... 46
Section 1006 Appeals ......................................................................................... 46
Article XI Subdivision Activity in the Chesapeake Bay Critical Area ........................... 47
Section 1100........................................................................................................ 47
Appendix Town of Easton CAD Standards .................................................................... 48
4
ARTICLE I – INTRODUCTION
SECTION 100 PURPOSE
The purpose of these Regulations is to regulate and control the division of land within the
corporate limits of the Town of Easton, in order to promote the public health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the citizens of the Town of Easton.
SECTION 101 INTENT
It is the general intent of these Regulations to regulate the division of a land as to:
(a) Assure sites suitable for building purposes and human habitation, and to provide for the
harmonious development of the Town of Easton in accordance with the Comprehensive
Development Plan and the Zoning Ordinance;
(b) Coordinate streets within the subdivisions with other existing, planned, or recorded streets or
with any street plan adopted or approved by the Town of Easton;
(c) Insure adequate open space for recreation, light and air;
(d) Further the orderly and appropriate development of land with a variety of design concepts;
(e) Regulate the flow of traffic;
(f) Facilitate adequate provisions for transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other
public facilities;
(g) Establish minimum standards, and to provide for the necessary administrative procedures to
implement these regulations;
(h) Insure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided land and to aid Town and
County officials in securing adequate records of land title.
SECTION 102 INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS
The provisions of these Regulations shall be held to be minimum requirements to meet the stated
purpose and intent of these Regulations. Whenever the Regulations are at variance with the
requirements of any other laws, rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions, or covenants, the
most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
5
ARTICLE II – DEFINITIONS
SECTION 200 GENERAL
For the purpose of these Regulations, words and terms used herein shall be interpreted as
follows:
(a) Words used in the present tense include the future;
(b) The singular includes the plural; the plural includes the singular;
(c) The word "person" includes a corporation, institution, partnership and association as well as
the individual;
(d) The word "lot" includes the word "tract" or "parcel;"
(e) The word "Commission" and the words "Planning and Zoning Commission" mean the Town
of Easton Planning and Zoning Commission;
(f) The word "Council" means the Town Council of Easton;
(g) The words "Town Engineer" mean the officially appointed Town Engineer of Easton or
his/her designated representative;
(h) The words "Town Clerk" mean the officially appointed Town Clerk of Easton or his/her
designated representative.
(i) The words "Town Planner" shall mean the officially appointed Planner charged with the
responsibility for administering the Town's Planning and Zoning programs.
(j) The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive;
SECTION 201 SPECIFIC
(a) ALLEY: A public way affording a secondary means of access to the rear or sides of the lot.
(b) APPLICANT: Any person who submits to the Planning and Zoning Commission subdivision
plans for the purpose of obtaining approval thereof.
(c) APPLICATION FEE: Fee collected on a per lot basis, collected at the time of Preliminary
Plat submittal; established by resolution of the Easton Town Council.
(d) AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC (ADT): Average Daily Traffic is the total volume during a
given time period (in whole days greater than one day and less then one year) divided by the
6
number of days in that time period. For new residential streets and driveways, the expected ADT
is determined by using the Trip Generation Rate table found in Section 702 (d).
(e) BLOCK: An area of land containing one or more lots and bounded by streets providing
access to such lot or lots. Block boundaries may also include a railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided
acreage, river, live stream or any other barrier to the continuity of development.
(f) BUILDING: Any structure which is designed built or occupied as a shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, or chattels including any tent, cabin, trailer, or mobile home.
(g) CUL-DE-SAC (COURT): A street having one end open to traffic and having the other end
permanently terminated by a vehicle turnaround space.
(h) DEDICATION: The deliberate setting aside or appropriation of land by its owner for any
general and public uses, reserving to himself no other rights than such as are compatible with the
full exercise and enjoyment of the public uses to which the property has been devoted.
(i) DEVELOPER: An individual, partnership or corporation (or agent therefore) that undertakes
the responsibility for any or all of the activities covered by these Regulations, particularly the
preparation of the subdivision plat and improvement plans showing the layout of the land and the
public improvements involved therein. Inasmuch as the subdivision plat is merely a necessary
means to the end of assuring a satisfactory development, the term "developer" is intended to
include the term "sub-divider" even though the personnel involved in successive stages of the
project may vary.
(j) DRIVEWAY: A driveway is a private minor vehicular access way between a street and a
parking area within a lot or property.
(k) IMPROVEMENTS: Those physical additions, installations and changes, such as streets,
curbs, sidewalks, water mains, sewers, drainage facilities, public utilities, and other appropriate
items required to render land suitable for the use proposed.
(l) IMPROVEMENT PLANS: Construction plans of the required improvements submitted upon
approval of a Preliminary Plat.
(m) LOT: A piece or parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal building
or use or group of buildings and accessory buildings and uses, including all open spaces and
yards required by the Zoning Ordinance and having access to a street.
(n) LOT LINE REVISION: An adjustment or revision of a line, line of record, or lines on a
recorded plat which does not require any improvements or create any new lots or parcels.
(o) PARKING: ON-LOT. The number of parking spaces required by the Town of Easton's
Zoning Ordinance to be provided off-street. These spaces are intended to serve the normal daily
parking needs of the dwelling unit occupants.
7
(p) PLAT REVIEW FEE: Review fee paid at each submittal of a plat; established by resolution
of the Easton Town Council.
(q) PUBLIC WORKS AGREEMENT: A contract, between the developer and the Town, to
complete the necessary improvements in accordance with approved plans and specifications by a
given date; such contract to be guaranteed by an approved surety bond or performance bond, a
certified check, cash, irrevocable letter of credit or such other security as the Town deems
appropriate.
(r) RESUBDIVISION: The revision of any plat of record for any purpose.
(s) SETBACK: A line beyond which no building or structure is permitted to
extend. All setbacks extend from property line to property line.
(t) STREET: A public way which provides a means of access to abutting property. The term
shall include road, street, avenue, drive, circle, highway, or similar term.
(u) STREETS CLASSIFICATION MAP: A map, adopted by resolution of the Easton Town
Council, classifying existing streets within the Town of Easton.
(v) STREET LINE: The line dividing a street from a lot.
(w) STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or
anything attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Structures may include,
but are not limited to, buildings, mobile homes, walls, billboards, poster panel and fences in
excess of forty-eight (48) inches in height.
(x) SUBDIVISION: (1) The division of a single lot, tract, or parcel of land or part thereof into
two (2) or more lots, tracts, or parcels of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of
transfer of ownership or of building development; except, for purposes of these Regulations, the
transfer or sale of land between owners of adjoining properties which does not involve the
creation of any new buildable lots shall not constitute a subdivision. (2) The term "subdivision"
includes "re-subdivision" and when appropriate to the context shall relate to the process of
subdividing or to the land subdivided.
(y) SUBDIVISION, MINOR: The division of a single lot, tract or parcel of land into four (4) or
fewer lots, tracts, or parcels of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of
ownership or of building development. Provided the proposed lots, tracts, or parcels of land
thereby created have frontage on an improved street or streets, and provided that there is not
created by the subdivision any new street or streets.
8
ARTICLE III - CONTROL AND PENALTIES
SECTION 300 SUBDIVISION CONTROL
No land in a subdivision created after the adoption of these Regulations shall be transferred or
sold until the Final Plat of such subdivision has been recorded in accordance with these
Regulations and until the improvements required in connection with the subdivision have either
been constructed or guaranteed as hereinafter provided. After approval of a Preliminary Plat shall
have been obtained, an applicant may offer such land for sale provided that the contract of sale
shall be conditioned upon the approval and recordation of the final plat and that this condition is
stated upon the contract of sale.
SECTION 301 BUILDING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
No building permit shall be issued for any lot within a subdivision until such time as the final
plat of such subdivision has been recorded. No certificate of occupancy for any structure on a lot
in a subdivision shall be issued until such time as the required improvements have been
completed to an extent satisfactory to the Town Engineer.
SECTION 302 PLAT APPROVAL REQUIRED
No final plat of any subdivision shall be recorded until it has been approved by the Town Planner
and the Planning and Zoning Commission as provided herein. The plat shall not be approved
unless it satisfies the requirements of these Regulations.
SECTION 303 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION
Violations by a landowner or his agent of the provisions of Section 300 of these regulations or
requirements and restrictions imposed by the Planning and Zoning Commission as conditions for
approval of a subdivision plat shall constitute a misdemeanor. Upon conviction thereof, the
offender shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or to imprisonment for a period of
thirty days, or both, at the discretion of any Court of competent jurisdiction.
Any conveyance of a lot or parcel of land in violation of the provisions of these regulations shall
be violable at the option of the purchaser.
9
ARTICLE IV - PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 400 SKETCH PLAT PURPOSE
(a) The purpose of the sketch plat is to provide the applicant with an opportunity to resolve
problems early in the proceedings and to make necessary modifications and revisions prior to
incurring the expense of preparing a Development and final plat. The Sketch plat also allows an
opportunity for other parties to comment on the subdivision. A sketch plan shall show those
areas, which are best suited for development on the site. This includes delineation of areas not
suitable for development such as floodways delineated on the FEMA Floodway maps; areas of
high value forest cover; areas of non-tidal wetlands; areas located within the Chesapeake Bay
Critical area buffer and any other areas not developable due to natural site conditions.
(b) The determination of street classification according to Section 702 shall be determined during
the sketch plan review.
SECTION 401 SKETCH PLAT PROCEDURES
(a) Applicant prepares sketch plan and application and submits ten (10) copies of the sketch plan,
the application and plat review fee (See Section 1002) to the Town Planner;
(b) The Town Planner shall check the submission and;
(1) if the submission is incomplete, return the submission to the applicant and/or indicate
to the applicant the deficiencies therein.
(2) if the submission is complete, accept the sketch plan and application;
(3) and deposit fees with the Town Clerk.
(c) The Town Planner shall distribute copies of the sketch plan and application to:
(1) Town Engineer - Two (2) copies
(2) Planning and Zoning Commission – five (5) copies
(3) Easton Utilities Commission - one (1) copy
(4) Planning office file (2) copies
(d) The Town Planner shall publish notice at least seven (7) days in advance for a public hearing
to be held at the next scheduled Planning Commission’s meeting and post notice of such hearing
on the property. Notification of adjacent and nearby property owners shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements of the Town of Easton Zoning Ordinance.
(e) The Town Planner shall, within a reasonable time:
(1) review the applicant's submission;
(2) review reports by the Town Engineer, and Easton Utilities.
10
(3) prepare staff report and forward said report to the Planning Commission for their
consideration,
(f) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall;
(1) hold a public hearing to receive public comment on proposed subdivision.
(2) evaluate the applicant's submission, presentation, discussion with the applicant, and
agency reports;
(3) determine whether the sketch plan meets the objectives and requirements of these
Regulations and other regulations, ordinances and plans of the Town;
(4) inform the applicant of their decision, including required changes in the sketch plan.
(g) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall not approve a sketch subdivision plan unless
they determine that the proposed subdivision satisfies each of the following requirements.
Failure to satisfy any single requirement shall be just cause to deny a subdivision application,
even if all others are satisfied. For each subdivision, the Planning Commission shall make
findings that:
(1) The proposed subdivision provides against such scattered or premature subdivision
of land as would involve danger or injury to health, safety, or prosperity by reason of the
lack of water supply, drainage, transportation, schools, fire protection, or other public
services, or necessitate the excessive expenditure of public funds for the supply of such
services;
(2) The proposed subdivision provides for harmonious development of the municipality
and its environs;
(3) The proposed subdivision requires the proper arrangement and coordination of streets
within subdivisions in relation to other existing or planned streets;
(4) The proposed subdivision provides for open spaces of adequate proportions (or
satisfies this requirement by other acceptable means);
(5) The proposed subdivision provides suitably located streets of sufficient width to
accommodate existing and prospective traffic and afford adequate light, air, and access
for fire-fighting apparatus and equipment to buildings, and is coordinated so as to
compose a convenient system;
(6) The proposed subdivision provides parks of reasonable size for neighborhood
playgrounds or other recreational uses on land suitable for such uses (or satisfies this
requirement by other acceptable means) in accordance with the standards of Section 708
of these Regulations;
(7) The land indicated on the plats submitted to the Planning Commission is of such
character that it can be used for building purposes without danger to public health, safety,
or general welfare;
11
(8) The proposed subdivision prescribes minimum areas of lots in conformance with the
Town’s Zoning Ordinance and such additional areas as may be needed for each lot for
on-site sanitary facilities (if needed);
(10) The proposed subdivision promotes the orderly growth of the Town of Easton,
providing for public and other open space and for proper development of land while
preventing, through the Commission's discretion, such scattered, premature and
undesirable subdivision and development of land as would involve danger, or injury to
health, safety or property, by reason of lack of water supply, sewage, drainage,
transportation, or other public services or would necessitate in the Commission’s
judgment an excessive expenditure of public funds for the supply of such services, or
would be injurious to maintenance of the integrity of the adopted Town Comprehensive
Plan;
(11) The proposed subdivision satisfies all technical requirements of these
Regulations; and
(12) The proposed subdivision meets all design requirements of the Town of Easton,
including those described in the Town’s Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Ordinance, and
any Design Guidelines as may be adopted by the Town Council.
The Planning Commission may approve a sketch subdivision plat subject to conditions intended
to insure compliance with these requirements.
SECTION 402 SKETCH PLAN REQUIREMENTS
Data furnished in the sketch plan shall include the following information:
(a) name of the subdivision;
(b) name and address of the owner;
(c) Title References
(d) tract boundaries;
(e) north point and date;
(f) streets on and adjacent to the tract;
(g) significant topographical and physical features;
(h) proposed general street layout indicating street classification according to street hierarchy;
(i) proposed general lot layout;
(j) delineation of Chesapeake Bay Critical Area, nontidal wetlands and FEMA Floodplain;
(k) Forest Stand Delineation as per Town of Easton Forest Conservation Ordinance;
(l) where the subdivision plat covers only a portion of the owner's holdings, the sketch shall be
submitted of the prospective street layout for the remainder of the tract;
(m) physical features within 500' of the subdivision boundary and any other features which may
affect the layout and design of the subdivision;
(n) proposed phase lines, if applicable.
12
(o) “sketch or “concept” landscape plan as per the Zoning Regulations. Sketch Landscape Plan
must be on a separate sheet.
SECTION 403 PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAT PURPOSE
(a) The purpose of the Preliminary Plat is to facilitate review and obtain conditional approval of
the proposed subdivision in a detail such that the improvements can be designed and constructed.
(b) A Preliminary Plat and all information and procedures relating to shall in all respects be in
compliance with the provisions of these Regulations.
(c) The approval of the Preliminary Plat shall constitute conditional approval of the subdivision
but shall not constitute approval of the final plat.
SECTION 404 PRELIMINARY PLAT PROCEDURES
(a) After receiving approval of the sketch plan the applicant prepares Preliminary Plat and
application; and submits five (5) blue or black line copies of the Preliminary Plat, an application
and appropriate fees (See Section 1002) to the Town Planner;
(b) In addition to the plats applicant must submit digital CAD file(s) that are fully compatible with ESRI
ArcGIS format. (This drawing shall at a minimum include: tract boundary(s), property lines, setbacks, lot
numbers, rights of way, street names, and easements. This drawing shall be on the Maryland State Plane
Coordinate System with coordinates shown on at least 2 corners. Additional Information may be required
to be included with such digital CAD file(s) when deemed appropriate by the Town Planner.
(bc) The Town Planner shall check the submission; and (1) if the submission is incomplete,
return the submission to the applicant and/or indicate to applicant the deficiencies therein. (2) if
the submission is complete, accept the Preliminary Plat, applicant form and fees.
(cd) The Town Planner shall distribute copies of the Preliminary Plat and application to:
(1) Town Engineer - one (1) copy
(2) Easton Utilities Commission - one (1) copy
(3) Any other utility company serving the subdivision - one (1) copy each
(4) Maryland Department of Transportation
(de) The Town Planner shall, within a reasonable time:
(1) review the applicant's submission;
(2) review reports by the Town Engineer and Easton Utilities Commission Staff;
(3) determine whether the Preliminary Plat is in accordance with the approved sketch
plat, meets objectives and requirements of these Regulations and other regulations,
ordinances, and plans of the Town;
(4) inform the applicant in writing of required changes if necessary in the Preliminary
Plat.
13
(ef) As applicable, the submission will also be examined by the staff for conformity with the
Town of Easton Critical Area Local Program, the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and
Subdivision Regulations of the Town and the recommendations of any authorized Federal, State
and County agencies.
(fg) After the applicant has received approval of the Preliminary Plat, one (1) paper and two
reproducible copies shall be submitted to the Town Planner. The Town Planner shall review the
plat to see that they are as approved and sign both reproducible copies. One copy shall be
returned to the applicant. Submittal of improvement plans shall include a copy of the approved
Preliminary Plat.
SECTION 405 PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIREMENTS
The Preliminary Plat shall meet the following standards and show or be accompanied by the
following information:
(a) Drafting Standards
(1) The plat shall be scaled to fit sheets no larger than twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36)
inches unless otherwise permitted.
(2) Dimensions shall be in feet and decimals to the nearest hundredth of a foot and the
bearings in degrees, minutes, and seconds.
(3) Each sheet shall be numbered and shall show its relationship to the total number of
sheets.
(4) Where any revision is made, or when the plat is a revision of a previously approved
plat, dotted lines shall be used to show features or locations to be abandoned and solid
lines to show the presently proposed features.
(5) The boundary line of the subdivision shall be shown as a solid heavy line.
(b) General Information
(1) Name of the subdivision.
(2) Name and address of the owner(s).
(3) Title References
(4) Name, address, and seal of the surveyor responsible for the plat.
(5) Present zoning classification.
(6) Date, meridian, scale, and direction of all lines by bearings and distances.
(7) A location map for the purpose of locating the site to be subdivided showing the
relation of the tract to adjoining property and streets.
(c) Existing Features
(1) Complete Boundary survey of the property to be subdivided, showing all bearings,
distances, area, and tie-ins to all adjacent street lines and adjacent Town Boundary lines.
(2) The location, names, and widths of streets, the location of property lines and names of
adjacent owners, the location of water courses and other natural features within two
hundred (200) feet of any part of the land to be subdivided.
(3) Location of all existing markers and monuments.
14
(4) Location, size, purpose, and ownership of all underground utilities and rights-of-way
and/or easements within the property.
(5) Topography with contours on one (1) foot intervals, the location of existing buildings,
the outline of all wooded areas, marshy areas, and areas subject to flooding.
(6) Forest Conservation Plan with worksheets shall be submitted on a separate sheet
drawn to the same scale as the subdivision plat.
(7) Landscaping Plan in accordance with the provisions of LANDSCAPING AND
BUFFERING Section of the Zoning Ordinance. Landscaping plans must be on a separate
sheet.
(d) Proposed Layout
(1) Lot layout, including bearings, distances, and area and numbering of lots under such
system as the Commission may designate.
(2) The names, classification (as per Section 702 STREET HIERARCHY), and widths of
all proposed streets and alleys.
(3) Sufficient data to readily determine the location, bearing and length of every street,
lot, and boundary line. Data shall include total distances of all such street lines, tangent
lengths and central angles for each total street curve and central angles for each lot corner
around a cul-de-sac.
(4) The building setback lines.
(5) Accurate location of all monuments, markers and reference points.
(6) The location, width, and purpose of all easements or rights-of-way and the boundaries
by bearings and distances.
(7) Land offered for dedication for parks, schools, and widening of streets, or other
community uses.
(8) When the subdivision is to be developed in two or more phases, the lines delineating
such phases shall be shown.
(e) The words "PRELIMINARY PLAT - NOT TO BE RECORDED," shall be shown on the
plat.
(f) For proposed subdivision located in the Critical Area Overlay District, the following
additional information will be shown on the Preliminary Plat as applicable:
(1) Critical Area and Buffer boundaries.
(2) Location and area of all soils exhibiting the following characteristics as determined by
the Soil Survey:
a. Septic Limitations, if applicable.
b. Wet soils.
c. Hydric Soils and soils with hydric properties, and
e. Highly erodible soils (soils on slope greater then 15 percent or soils on slope
greater than 5 percent with "K" values greater than 0.35)
(3) Location of all forested area located on the site;
(4) location of tidal and non-tidal wetlands on the site;
15
(5) Known locations of the habitat of any threatened or endangered species or species in
need of conservation on or adjacent to the site, or within 1/4 mile of the site in the case of
bald eagle habitats;
(6) Locations of plant and wildlife habitat as described in the Towns Critical Area
Program;
(7) Location of anadromous fish spawning streams(s) on or adjacent to the site and a
delineation of the watershed area of the stream on the site;
(8) In conjunction with submission of the Preliminary Plat, the applicant shall submit an
Environmental Assessment prepared by a qualified person. The Environmental
Assessment shall provide a coherent statement of the manner in which the proposed
development addresses the goals and objectives of the Town of Easton's Chesapeake Bay
Critical Area Local Program. At a minimum, the Environmental Assessment shall
include:
a. a statement of existing conditions found upon the property to be subdivided,
including the amount and types of forest cover, the amount and type of wetlands,
soil types, topography and, where applicable, a description of existing agricultural
activities upon the parcel;
b. a description of the proposed development, including number and type of
residential units, amount of impervious surfaces, proposed sewer treatment and
water supply, acreage devoted to development, proposed open space and habitat
protection areas;
c. a description of all of the proposed development impacts upon water quality,
Habitat Protection Areas, and when applicable, wetlands; and
d. adequate documentation of all correspondence and findings.
The Town Planner shall not approve a Preliminary subdivision application until such time as it
finds that the application complies with the requirements of the Town of Easton's Chesapeake
Bay Critical Area Program and the provisions of the Easton Zoning Ordinance specifically
relating to the Critical Area Overlay Zone.
SECTION 406 IMPROVEMENT PLANS
(a) If required, upon approval of a Preliminary Plat the applicant shall submit two (2) paper sets
and (1) CAD set (in accordance with the Town of Easton CAD standards) of the Improvement
plans to the Town Planner. The improvement plans shall include a copy of the approved
Preliminary Plat and shall address all those improvements required in SECTION 601 herein.
(b) The Town Planner shall review the submittal and if complete he shall forward the plans to the
Town Engineer for his review.
(c) The Town Engineer shall review the Improvement plans and submit written comments to the
Town Planner who will forward the comments on to the applicant.
16
(d) Once the Improvement Plans have been approved by the Town Engineer, the applicant shall
submit two (2) reproducible sets and a CAD copy in compliance with the Town of Easton CAD
standards as amended. of the approved improvement plans to the Town Planner. The Town
Planner will sign both sets and one set shall be returned to the Applicant. Applicant shall
resubmit a digital PDF of each sheet with approvals by Town Planner.
(e) Upon approval of the improvement plans the Final plat can be submitted.
(f) Approval of Improvement plans expires after three (3) years from the date signed by the
Town Planner unless work has begun and diligently pursued; or the Town Planner elects to
extend the approval.
SECTION 407 FINAL PLAT PURPOSE
(a) The purpose of the final plat is to establish a public record of the property as it will become a
part of the land records of Talbot County after final approval by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
(b) A final plat shall be submitted conforming to the changes recommended during the
Preliminary Plat procedure. The final plat and all information and procedures relating thereto
shall in all respects be in compliance with the provisions of these Regulations. Development and
final plat procedures may be executed simultaneously.
SECTION 408 FINAL PLAT PROCEDURES
(a) Applicant shall submit to the Town Planner (not more than three years after receiving
approval of the Preliminary Plat):
(1) subdivision application;
(2) four (4) blue or black line copies;
(3) appropriate fee (See Section 1002).
(4) two copies of conveyance deed for any parks, rights-of- ways, or open space.
(5) two copies of public works agreement (see Article VIII)
(b) The Town Planner shall check the submission and:
(1) if the submission is incomplete, return the submission to the applicant and/or indicate
to the applicant the deficiencies therein;
(2) if the submission is complete, accept the final plat, application form and additional
fees, if any.
(c) The Town Planner shall distribute copies of the final plat and application to the following
agencies for review & comments:
(1) Town Engineer - one (1) copy
17
(2) Easton Utilities Commission (Survey Division) – one (1) copy
(d) The Town Planner shall distribute copies of of conveyance deed for any parks, rights-ofways,
or open space and copy of public works agreement to Town Attorneys office for review.
(e) Upon receipt of comments the Town Planner shall within a reasonable time:
(1) Evaluate plat to determine whether plat is in conformance with approved Preliminary
Plat,
(2) Determine whether the final plat meets the objectives and requirements of these
Regulations and other regulations, ordinances and plans of the Town,
(3) Once it is determined that the plat is ready for recordation the Town Planner shall
request the applicant to submit four (4) reproducible film copies and five (5) blue or
black line paper copies with original signatures.
(4) Upon the receipt of the signed plats the Town Planner shall sign the plats and take
them to the Planning and Zoning Commission at their next meeting.
(f) If approved, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall adopt a resolution approving the final
plat and authorize the Chairman to sign the plat.
SECTION 409 FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS
The final plat shall meet the following standards and show the following information:
(a) Drafting Standards
(1) The size of the sheet and scale shall be in accordance with the requirements of the
Clerk of the Circuit Court of Talbot County.
(2) The plat shall be drawn using black ink on transparent mylar (or linen) or black–line
photo process comparable to original quality that will conform to archival standards.
(3) A space or recording block shall be provided of not less than three (3) inches by four
(4) inches located three inches from the top right corner of all pages of a final plat to
accommodate the County Clerk’s recording information and seal.
(4) Dimensions shall be in feet and decimals to the nearest hundredth of a foot, and the
bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds.
(5) Each sheet shall be numbered and shall show its relationship to the total number of
sheets.
18
(6) Where any revision is made, or when the plat is a revision of a previously approved
plat, dotted lines shall be used to show features or locations to be abandoned and solid
lines to show the presently proposed features.
(7) The boundary line of the subdivision shall be shown as a solid heavy line.
(b) General Information
(1) Name of subdivision.
(2) Name and address of the owner(s).
(3) Name and address of the surveyor responsible for the plat.
(4) Title references
(5) Present zoning classification.
(6) Date, meridian, scale, and direction of all lines by bearing and distances.
(7) A location map for the purpose of locating the site to be subdivided showing the
relation of the tract to adjoining property and to streets.
(c) Existing features
(1) Complete boundary survey of the property to be subdivided, showing all bearings,
distances, area, and tie-ins to and all adjacent street lines and adjacent Town Boundary
lines.
(2) The location, names, and widths of streets, the location of property lines and names of
adjacent owners, the location of water courses, and other natural features where they
constitute property boundaries.
(3) Location of all existing markers and monuments.
(4) Location, size, purpose and ownership of any rights-of-way and/or easements within
the property.
(d) Proposed Layout
(1) A complete survey of the subdivision including street and lot layout, showing
bearings, distances, area, and numbering of lots under such system as the Commission
may designate.
19
(2) The names and widths of all proposed streets and alleys.
(3) Sufficient data to readily determine the location, bearing and length of every street,
lot, and boundary line. Data shall include total distances of all such street lines, tangent
lengths and central angles for each total street curve and central angles for each lot corner
around a cul-de-sac.
(4) The building setback lines.
(5) Accurate location of all monuments, markers and reference points.
(6) The location, width, and purpose of all easements or rights-of-way and the boundaries
by bearings and distances.
(7) Land offered for dedication for parks, schools, widening of streets, or other
community uses.
(e) Acknowledgements and Formal Notations
(1) The following notations shall appear on all Final Plats and be certified by the
subdivision owner(s):
ALL STREETS AND STREET WIDENINGS, PARKS AND OTHER LANDS
INTENDED FOR PUBLIC USE ARE RESERVED BY THE OWNER FOR FUTURE
CONVEYANCE TO THE TOWN OF EASTON.
ALL EASEMENTS SHOWN ARE HEREBY DEDICATED FOR PUBLIC USE.
A UTILITIES DISTRIBUTION RIGHT-OF-WAY AND EASEMENT IS HEREBY
DEDICATED TO THE TOWN OF EASTON IN AND OVER STRIPS OF LAND TEN
(10) FEET IN WIDTH ALONG THOSE BOUNDARY LINES CONTIGUOUS TO
ANY STREET OR ALLEY AND FIVE (5) FEET IN WIDTH ON EACH SIDE OF
SIDE LOT LINES.
THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION MAY WAIVE OR TERMINATE,
UPON RESUBDIVISION, SUCH UTILITY EASEMENT WHICH HAS NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY USE THEREOF. UPON RECEVING APPROVAL FROM THE
TOWN ENGINEER.
PLANS FOR COMMUNITY WATER SUPPLY AND COMMUNITY SEWERAGE
SYSTEMS OF THIS SUBDIVISION HAVE BEEN APPROVED BY MARYLAND
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENT AND WILL AVAILABLE TO ALL LOTS
OFFERED FOR SALE.
WE, THE OWNERS OF THE PROPERTY SHOWN AND DESCRIBED HEREON,
HEREBY ADOPT THIS PLAN OF SUBDIVISION.
20
(2) The following notation shall appear on all final plats and be certified by the County
Health Officer:
THIS SUBDIVISION IS APPROVED FOR COMMUNITY WATER SUPPLY AND
COMMUNITY SEWAGE AND THEIR USE IS IN ACCORDANCE WITH TALBOT
COUNTY COMPREHENSIVE WATER AND SEWERAGE PLAN AND MDE
REGULATION 26.04.03.
(3) Other notations shall appear on all final plats:
BUILDING PERMITS SHALL BE ISSUED ONLY IF SUFFICIENT CAPACITY IS
AVAILABLE IN THE COMMUNITY WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM, SEWERAGE
SYSTEM, AND SOLID WASTE ACCEPTANCE FACILITY SERVING THE
SUBDIVISION.
LAND SHOWN UPON THIS PLAT MAY CONTAIN NON-TIDAL WETLANDS
REGULATED UNDER COMAR 08.0504; THE FEDERAL WATER POLLUTION
ACT SECTION 404; OR THE RIVERS HARBOR ACT SECTION 10.
DEVELOPMENT AND CONSTRUCTION WITHIN WETLANDS ARE SUBJECT TO
FEDERAL AND STATE REGULATIONS AND MAY BE PROHIBITED OR
RESTRICTED BY SUCH REGULATIONS.
(f) Signatures
The following signatures shall be placed directly on the plat in black ink:
(1) The owner or owners of the land. If the owner of the land is a corporation, the
signatures of the duly authorized officers of the corporation shall appear.
(2) Acknowledgement of owner’s signature.
(3) The licensed surveyor who prepared the plat.
(4) Talbot County Health Officer.
(5) Chairman of Planning and Zoning Commission.
(6) The Town Planner
(g) Seals
(1) The seal of the licensed surveyor responsible for the plat.
(2) The corporation seal, if the applicant is a corporation.
(3) Notary signature and seal.
21
(h) Additional requirements for final plats for subdivisions located in the Critical Area Overlay
Zone.
In addition to the requirements set forth in this section, the following additional information must
be provided upon any final plat involving land located within the Critical Area Overlay Zone of
the Town:
(1) Location of Critical Area Overlay Zone and Buffer boundaries;
(2) Location of any non-tidal wetlands and location of buffer areas around each wetland;
(3) Location of any other Habitat Protection Area; and
(4) Designation of any area designed to remain in open space or under forest cover.
(i)Notes regarding Requirements for Forest Conservation, if required, must be included.
SECTION 410 FINAL PLAT - RECORDING PROCEDURES
(a) At such time as the Planning Commission has approved the final plat and the required
improvements have been constructed or guaranteed in accordance with Articles V, VI, and VII of
these Regulations and any outstanding fees and/or capital charges have been paid, the Town
Planner shall record the plat, and distribute copies as follows:
(1) The Clerk of the Circuit Court - two (2) reproducible film copies for the purpose of
recording among the Land Records of Talbot County.
(2) The applicant - one (1) reproducible film copy for the applicant's future use.
(3) Town Office - two (2) copies.
(4) Maryland Department of Assessment and Taxation - one (1) copy.
(5) Easton Utilities Commission - one (1) reproducible film copy.
(6) Surveyor is required to submit digital CAD file(s) that are fully compatible with ESRI ArcGIS
format. (This drawing shall at a minimum include: tract boundary(s), property lines, setbacks, lot
numbers, rights of way, street names, and easements. This drawing shall be on the Maryland
State Plane Coordinate System with coordinates shown on at least 2 corners. Additional
Information may be required to be included with such digital CAD file(s) when deemed
appropriate by the Town Planner.
(b) Failure on the part of the owner or subdivider to construct or guarantee the construction of
the required improvements within three (3) years from the date of approval of the final plat may,
at the discretion of the Commission, cancel and make void its previous approval.
22
SECTION 411 EFFECT OF RECORDING FINAL PLAT
(a) Easements, and other public improvements shown on the final plat to be recorded shall be
offered for dedication to the Town by formal notation thereof on the plat, or the owner must note
on the plat those improvements which have not been offered for dedication to the Town.
(b) Recording of the final plat shall not be deemed to constitute or effect an acceptance by the
Town of the dedication.
SECTION 412 MINOR SUBDIVISIONS
Minor subdivisions, lot line revisions or boundary adjustments shall be submitted in final plat
form as per the requirements of Section 408 hereof. Lot line revisions and/or boundary
adjustments need only show the lots affected by the change and shall refer to the subdivision
being amended. A copy of a new deed must be recorded so that no remnant is created.
Applications shall be submitted to the Town Planner who will route the plat to the appropriate
agencies for review and comments. Upon the finding of the staff that the plat is in compliance
with these regulations and the payment of the appropriate fees the Town
Planner shall present the plat to the Chairman of the Planning & Zoning Commission who shall
be authorized to sign the plat. Should the Chairman AND Town Engineer feel it necessary for
review of the entire Commission he may have it placed on the agenda of their next meeting.
SECTION 413 COMBINATION OF LOTS IN COMMON OWNERSHIP
Construction across lot lines of two (2) or more lots in common ownership shall be permitted
pending the approval of the Town Planner and Town Engineer. If approved, said lots shall be
considered one parcel until such time as the structures are removed/demolished.
SECTION 414 SUBDIVISION PLAT APPROVAL EXPIRATIONS
The various plats involved in the subdivision approval process shall be deemed to be valid upon
their approval for the period of time specified below. Expired plats shall be of no effect and
applicants must begin the review process over again for any property that had an approved plat
which expired. Approvals may be extended no more than twice by the appropriate approving
agency provided that a written request to do so is received prior to the expiration of the plat.
23
Type of Plat Approval Expires after:
Sketch Plat 3 years
Development Plat 3 years
Improvement Plans 3 years
Final Plat 3 years (to construct or
guarantee the construction of the
required improvements)
24
ARTICLE V – DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 500 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED
(a) All subdivisions submitted to the Easton Planning and Zoning Commission for
approval shall comply with and will be reviewed against the design elements,
policies, and standards as described in the Easton Comprehensive Plan, the following
requirements of this Article, and any Design Guidelines that may be adopted by the
Town of Easton.
(b) The Planning Commission shall not approve any subdivision found to be not in
compliance with the design standards specified herein, unless the standards provide
for some measure of relief and said relief is satisfied.
SECTION 501 SUBDIVISION DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
(a) BLOCK STANDARDS
(1) The maximum block length shall be 600 feet. The maximum block length
may be increased by the Planning Commission upon a specific determination
by the Commission that a longer block is desirable for a specific reason, such
as topographic or physiographic characteristics of the land, to accommodate a
specific design theme acceptable to the Commission but precluded by shorter
blocks, etc.
(2) Lot sizes within blocks shall be mixed to accommodate a variety of house
types and sizes.
(b) ALLEYS
(1) Alleys are encouraged as the primary means of access to garages and for
services such as trash pick-up.
(2) A minimum of 60% of the lots created in a major subdivision shall be
accessed via an alley. At the discretion of the Planning Commission, this
requirement may be waived for subdivisions that propose too few lots to
warrant the use of alleys.
(3) Alley right-of-way and pavement width shall be as specified in Section 702.5
of these Regulations.
(c) LOTTING PROVISIONS
(1) No protected area or its associated buffer shall be located on any building lot.
Such areas shall include, without limitation, nontidal wetlands and their
25
associated buffer, Chesapeake Bay Critical Area Buffers, and Forest
Conservation Protection Areas.
(2) Landscaping Buffers adjacent to public streets shall be located outside
building lots and shall be maintained by a Homeowner’s Association or
another means acceptable to the Town Engineer.
(3) Storm water Management Ponds shall be designed as a site amenity.
26
ARTICLE VI - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION 600 PURPOSE
(a) The purpose of this article is to establish and define the community improvements which will
be required to be guaranteed or constructed by the applicant prior to final plat approval.
(b) All construction shall be completed in accordance with specific conditions of the
commitment and approved plans and specifications (the improvement plans), and in the manner
acceptable to the Town Engineer and the Easton Utilities Commission.
(c) All proposed construction shall be coordinated in design and in construction scheduling with
the existing improvements and the requirements or activities of other agencies.
(d) All on-site infrastructure construction such as roadway and utility work shall be performed by
The Town of Easton or a contractor that has been pre-approved by the Town Engineer.
SECTION 601 IMPROVEMENTS
(a) The following improvements shall be designed and constructed by the developer in
accordance with the standards and service tariffs of the Town of Easton and the Easton Utilities
Commission and the approved plans and specifications:
(1) Streets and alleys
(2) Curb and gutter
(3) Sidewalks
(4) Storm water drainage and management systems
(5) Sanitary sewerage system
(6) Water supply system
(7) Landscaping/Screening (in accordance with Landscaping requirements found in of the
Town of Easton Zoning Ordinance)
(8) Community Parks
(b) The following improvements will be provided for by the developer in accordance with the
regulations, standards and service tariffs of the Easton Utilities Commission, the Telephone
Company, and any other utility companies serving the subdivision, and the approved plans and
specifications:
(1) Gas service
(2) Electric service
(3) Telephone service
(4) Cable service
(5) Street lighting
27
(C) Plans for the required improvements shall be prepared, submitted, revised, and approved in
accordance with procedures and requirements established by Easton Utilities and the Town
Engineer.
(D) Final grades for entire development including building lots and park areas must be shown.
(E) Off-site utility design and construction process shall be as follows:
(1) Utilities shall be designed to the site in Accordance with The STANDARD DETAILS
FOR PUBLIC WORKS AND UTILITIES CONSTRUCTION IN THE TOWN OF
EASTON and Easton Utilities Service Tariffs.
(2) Upon design completion and approval, Easton Utilities shall publicly bid the
construction drawings and with the developers consent, shall award the bid in accordance
with the bid procedures of Easton Utilities and the Town of Easton. The contract shall be
between Easton Utilities and the contractor. The engineering, inspection, management
fees and construction costs shall be borne entirely by the developer.
SECTION 602 INSPECTIONS
All improvements shall be inspected by the Town Engineer or appropriate agencies for
compliance with approved plans, prior to final acceptance.
SECTION 603 REPAIR OF DAMAGED IMPROVEMENTS
The developer shall be required to repair damage to roads or streets, storm drainage systems,
curb and gutter, sidewalks, utilities, survey markers, and any other required improvements as a
result of grading or construction activities by the developer in the subdivision.
SECTION 604 PUBLIC WORKS AGREEMENT
A public works agreement consistent with the Town provided model shall be submitted with the
improvement plans and a executed copy shall be submitted prior to construction of any
improvements or recordation of plat.
28
ARTICLE VII – STANDARDS
SECTION 700 APPLICATION
(a) The standards outlined herein shall be considered minimum standards for the promotion of
the public health, safety, morals and general welfare.
(b) Where literal compliance with the standards herein specified is clearly impractical, the
Planning Commission and/or the Town Engineer may modify or adjust the standards to permit
reasonable utilization of property while securing substantial conformance with the objectives of
these Regulations. The Planning Commission and/or the Town Engineer shall not have the
authority to modify any provision of any other ordinance of the Town of Easton.
SECTION 701 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(a) All portions of a tract being subdivided shall be taken up in lots, streets, public lands, or other
proposed uses, so that remnants and/or landlocked areas shall not be created.
(b) Where trees, waterways, scenic points, historic spots, graveyards, or other assets and
landmarks are located within a proposed subdivision, every possible means shall be provided to
preserve and provide access to these features.
(c) Land subject to flooding or property and land deemed to be topographically unsuitable shall
not be subdivided or developed for residential occupancy or for such other uses as may endanger
health, life, or property, or aggravate erosion or flood hazards until all such hazards have been
eliminated or unless adequate safeguards against such hazards are provided by the final plats.
Such land within a subdivision shall be set aside on the plat for uses that will not be endangered
by periodic or occasional inundation or will not produce unsatisfactory living conditions.
(d) The subdivision shall conform to the Comprehensive Development Plan and the Zoning
Ordinance of the Town of Easton.
(e) The subdivision name approved by the Commission and recorded, shall constitute the
subdivision's official and only name. No other name may be used unless an approved and
amended plat is recorded bearing the revised name.
SECTION 702 STREET HIERARCHY
(a) The purpose of this Section is to establish appropriate standards for the design of streets in
subdivisions.
(b) These provisions shall be applicable to the design and construction of all new residential
streets. The design of streets in commercial and industrial subdivisions shall be in accordance
with the specifications of the Town of Easton and Easton Utilities Commission Standard Details.
29
(c) Amendments or additions to subdivisions established prior to the adoption of the street
classification system (established July 1993), shall comply with these provisions in so far as
possible. The Commission is hereby authorized to modify the provisions of this section as
necessary in order to accomplish the purpose established herein.
(d) HIERARCHY REQUIRED. There is hereby established a street hierarchy which is intended
to tailor the design of each street to its function. Each proposed residential street shall be
classified to meet or exceed the minimum standards for one of the following street types:
(1) Residential Access Street: This is the lowest order street in the hierarchy. It is
intended to carry the least amount of traffic at the lowest speed. Developments should be
designed so that all, or the maximum number possible, of the homes will front on this
class of street.
(2) Residential Sub-collector Street: This is the middle order street in the hierarchy. It
will carry more traffic than the residential access street. It should provide an acceptable if
not optimum environment for a residential neighborhood.
(3) Residential Collector Street: This is the highest order street that could be classed as
residential. It will carry the largest volume of traffic at higher speeds. In large residential
developments, this class of street may be necessary to carry traffic from one
neighborhood to another or from the neighborhood to streets connecting to other areas in
the community. This level of street is unsuitable for providing direct access to homes and
such access should be avoided.
30
Figure 1 – Street Hierarchy
Note: These illustrations are reprinted, with permission, from Residential Streets, Second
Edition.
31
702.1 Special Purpose Streets: Under special circumstances a new residential street may be
classified as one of the following:
Alley: An alley is a special type of street which provides a secondary means of access to lots. It
will normally be on the same level in the hierarchy as a residential access street, although
different design standards will apply.
Divided Streets: For the purpose of protecting environmental features the Town may require that
the street be divided. In such a case, the design standards shall be applied to the aggregate
dimensions of the two street segments.
702.2 RESIDENTIAL ACCESS STREETS
(a) SERVICE RESTRICTIONS. A residential access street is a frontage street which provides
access to abutting properties; it shall be designed to carry no more traffic than that which is
generated on the street itself. Each residential access street shall be designed so that no section of
the street conveys an average daily traffic (ADT) volume more than 200. Each half of a loop
street may be regarded as a single local access street and the total calculated traffic volume
generated on a loop street shall not exceed 400 ADT.
(b) STREET ACCESS. Residential access streets may intersect or take access from any street
type. Both ends of a loop street, however, must intersect the same collecting street and be laid
out to discourage through traffic.
(c) PAVEMENT WIDTH AND CURBING. Pavement width shall be twenty-six (26) feet.
Driveway Access shall be permitted and curbing shall be required.
702.3 RESIDENTIAL SUBCOLLECTOR STREETS
(a) SERVICE RESTRICTIONS
(1) A residential sub-collector is a frontage street which provides access to abutting
properties and which may also conduct traffic from residential access streets that intersect
it.
(2) Each sub-collector street shall be designed so that no section of it will convey a traffic
volume greater than 500 ADT. (Each half of a loop sub-collector street may be regarded
as a single sub-collector street and the total traffic volume conveyed on a loop street shall
not exceed 1000 ADT).
(3) Sub-collector streets should be designed to discourage external through traffic which
has neither origin nor destination on the sub-collector or its tributary residential access
streets.
32
(b) STREET ACCESS. Every sub-collector must be provided with no fewer than two access
intersections to streets of higher classification in the streets hierarchy if the total traffic volume
exceeds 500 ADT on the street. For sub-collector streets designed for 500 ADT or less, one
access intersection to a street of higher order is allowed.
(c) PAVEMENT WIDTH AND CURBING. Pavement width shall be thirty-six (36) feet.
Driveway access shall be permitted and curbing shall be required.
702.4 RESIDENTIAL COLLECTOR STREETS
(a) SERVICE RESTRICTIONS
(1) A residential collector street is a street which carries residential neighborhood traffic,
but which provides no or limited frontage. Whenever possible, residential collector
streets should be designed to have no residential lots directly fronting on them. In
addition, only lots having frontage of 100 feet or greater may front on collector streets
and space shall be provided on these lots for turnaround so that vehicles will not have to
back out onto collector streets. Residential collector streets are required when the
average daily traffic anticipated on the street will exceed the limits for residential
Sub-collectors.
(2) Residential collectors shall be laid out to discourage through traffic unless linkage
between streets outside of the subdivision is determined by the Town Engineer to be
desirable.
(3) If the anticipated ADT will exceed 3000, the street shall be classified as a street of a
higher order than residential collector. The Town engineer shall determine the required
design standards. These standards may be in excess of the minimum standards
established for residential collectors by this Ordinance.
(4) On-street parking shall be prohibited on residential collector streets.
(b) STREET ACCESS. Every residential collector must be provided with no fewer than two
access intersections to streets of equal or higher classification in the streets hierarchy.
(c) PAVEMENT WIDTH AND CURBING.
(1) Pavement widths for collector streets shall be twenty-six (26) feet of pavement with
six (6) foot grass shoulders.
(2) Curbs should not be provided along collector roads unless they are required by the
Town Engineer.
702.5 ALLEYS
33
(a) SERVICE RESTRICTIONS. Alleys are permitted only under the following circumstances:
(1) Frontage on an alley shall not be construed to satisfy the requirements of this
Ordinance for frontage on an approved street.
(2) No parking shall be provided for or permitted within the right-of-way of the alley.
(3) Street systems within which alleys are a part shall be designed to discourage through
traffic on alleys.
(b) STREET ACCESS. Alleys may only intersect residential access or sub-collector streets.
(c) ALLEY LENGTH. Alley length shall not exceed a distance of 600 feet.
(d) PAVEMENT WIDTH AND CURBING
(1) Alleys shall provide a minimum paved width of 14 feet.
702.6 RIGHTS-OF WAY
(a) RIGHTS-OF-WAY. Minimum rights-of-way shall be provided as follows:
Residential Collector - 60 feet
Residential Sub-collector - 60 feet
Residential Access - 50 feet
Special Purpose Streets:
Alley - 20 feet
(b) INCREASE IN RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH
(1) If proposed lots are large enough for further subdivision which may change the street
classification in the future to a higher order street, the municipality may require that the
right-of-way width for the higher order street be provided.
(2) In unusual circumstances, the minimum widths listed in Section 702.6 (a) may be
insufficient to accommodate all necessary improvements and therefore rights-of-way
widths in excess of the minimum established in Section 702.6 (a) may be required.
702.7 DRIVEWAYS
(a) DRIVEWAYS TO SINGLE-FAMILY LOTS
34
(1) Driveways shall be located not less than 40 feet from the tangent point of the curb
radius of any intersection. Driveways to corner lots shall gain access from the street of
lower classification when a corner lot is bounded by streets of two different
classifications.
(2) The following standards shall apply to the driveway apron at the edge of the
pavement:
a. Minimum curb cut or driveway width at the pavement edge: 12 feet
b. Maximum curb cut or driveway width at the pavement edge: 20 feet.
(3) A single common driveway serving no more than four single family dwelling units is
permitted provided a joint access easement has been recorded.
(b) SHARED RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAYS FOR MULTI-FAMILY DEVELOPMENT
(1) All entrance drives serving 4 or less dwelling units may be designed to single family
driveway standards above.
(2) All entrance drives serving more than 4 dwelling units, but which may be expected to
convey less than 200 ADT, shall be laid out to conform to the design, service, and access
standards established in this Ordinance for residential access streets.
(3) All entrance drives which may be expected to convey greater than 200 ADT, but less
than 1000 ADT, shall be laid out to conform to the minimum design, service, and access
standards specified in this Ordinance for residential sub-collector streets.
(4) All entrance drives which may be expected to convey greater than 1000 ADT shall be
laid out to conform to the minimum design, service, and access standards specified in this
Ordinance for residential collector streets.
SECTION 703 STREET DESIGN AND LAYOUT
(a) Streets shall be laid out to avoid areas such as floodplains, cliffs, steep slopes or large ravines.
A secondary means of access to a higher order street which does not go back through the same
hazard area shall be provided when one of the access streets into a subdivision of more than
twenty dwelling units crosses through a hazard area.
(b) All streets and alleys shall be designed and constructed in accordance with standards and
regulations promulgated and administered by the Town Engineer.
(c) The developer shall provide all necessary roadway signs and traffic signalization as may be
required by the Town, based upon Town standards, state standards and a traffic impact study if
required
35
(d) TRIP GENERATION RATES
The following chart shall be used to determine the anticipated daily traffic levels of proposed
residential development:
HOUSING TYPES AVERAGE WEEKDAY TRIP GENERATION RATES
Single-family detached 10.0 trips/du
Duplex (twin), Multiplex,
Townhouse, etc.
8.1 trips/du
Apartment 5.4 trips/du
Mobile Homes 5.38 trips/du
Retirement Community 3.3 trips/du
(e) TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDY
A traffic impact study shall be prepared by a Maryland Licensed professional engineer shall be
submitted for any non-residential subdivision or for any residential subdivision proposing more
fifteen (15) or more dwelling units, or if for good cause the Planning Commission requests such
a study to be completed regardless of the number of units proposed. Should the Planning
Commission deem it appropriate, they may require that the developer fund a traffic impact study
to be prepared by an engineer selected by the Town. At a minimum, the following information
shall be included in the study:
(1) Project Description – Provide a brief description of the proposed project and the
limits of the traffic study. The limits of the study area shall be subject to the
revision by the Planning Commission. The total build-out of the project
anticipated by the proponent should be clearly stated.
(2) Existing Conditions – Provide physical characteristics of each roadway within the
study area. Traffic volumes shall be examined for the study area. Average
weekday volumes shall be shown for twenty-four (24) hours and the AM and PM
peak hours in all cases. Accident diagrams summarizing local police reports may
be needed for problem locations. An existing conditions capacity and level of
service analysis shall be provided in accordance with the Transportation Research
Board’s Highway Capacity Manual Report 209 (latest edition). The analysis shall
include delay and queue length information. Weave, merge, diverge, and road
segment analyses should be included where applicable.
(3) Project Site Traffic Projection – Provide estimated peak hour and daily traffic
generated by the project on roadways within the study area. Include an analysis
of the distribution of off-site generated traffic as it relates to the existing street
system. All traffic impact studies should include traffic generated by other
developments within the study area that have received preliminary subdivision or
development site plan approval. Saturday peak hour conditions should be
36
included for retail projects. Any adjustment factors or growth rates used should
be cited.
(4) Future Conditions – Future conditions capacity analysis (five-year horizon) shall
be computed for the no-build and build alternatives, with and without mitigation
measures. This analysis shall include projected delays at all intersections,
projected queues, and projected levels of service. All new intersections shall be
reviewed relative to AASHTO standards, including sight distances for entering
and merging traffic within the project area. A list should be provided of all other
study area projects which could be completed within five years of the submittal
date of the proponent’s project and which could have impacts that would be
relevant to the proponent’s traffic impact study. Public as well as private projects
should be included; projects awaiting approval should be included, as well as
those which are already approved or do not require approval. Signal warrant
analysis should be performed using the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices (FHWA, latest edition), if applicable.
(5) Roadway Mitigation Measures – Describe all proposed mitigation measures for
the adverse impacts identified in the traffic impact study. Identify specific and
expected benefits to be derived by these proposed mitigation measures. The
individual costs of the proposed mitigation measures should be given, and the
party responsible for the implementation of each measure clearly identified. A
schedule of when, in relation to any project phasing, particular measures need to
be implemented should be outlined. In addition to a schedule of construction, a
description should be provided of any capacity constraints on the existing network
that will occur, and of measures that will be taken to mitigate noise and dust
pollution.
If a connection of two or more existing roads is being proposed, the traffic report shall
contain a detailed assessment of the traffic impacts on roadways in adjacent
neighborhoods. Traffic impacts including projected splits in traffic, changes in levels of
service, increases in daily and peak hour traffic conflicts with pedestrian and bicycles.
When the scope of a traffic study includes County, State, and/or Federal roads, the
applicant shall be responsible for contacting the appropriate agencies before undertaking
the study in order to obtain any input such agencies may have. The applicant shall also
be responsible for forwarding a copy of the completed study to these same agencies at the
time it is submitted to the Town.
(f) All streets and alleys shall be continuous in alignment and grade with existing, recorded, and
planned streets.
(g) Streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the proposed subdivision so that a
connection can be made to all adjacent properties unless such extension is not feasible because of
topography or other physical conditions, or unless, in the opinion of the Commission, such
extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination with existing streets or the most
37
advantageous development of adjacent tracts. In any event, no subdivision shall be designed so
as to create or perpetuate the land locking of adjacent
land.
(h) Dead end streets are prohibited except to permit future extensions to adjoining tracts. Such
streets shall include a temporary turnaround until the street is extended.
(i) Street names shall be approved by the Commission. Such names shall not duplicate those
elsewhere in the Town of Easton or within one mile of the corporate boundary. Streets that are in
alignment with existing streets shall bear the names of existing streets.
(j) In subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not conform to widths
established in these Regulations, the subdivider shall dedicate additional width along either one
or both sides of such streets so as to bring them up to standards, provided the area to be used for
widening is owned by the subdivider or under his control.
(k) Streets shall be laid out to intersect as close to right angles as possible. A proposed
intersection of two streets at an angle of less than seventy (70) degrees will not be approved. Any
change in street alignment to meet this requirements shall occur at least one hundred (100) feet
from the intersection.
(l) Multiple intersections involving junctions of more than two (2) streets shall be avoided.
(m) Roadways entering opposite sides of another roadway shall be laid out either directly
opposite one another or with a minimum offset of two hundred (200) feet between their
centerlines.
(n) All streets shall have a total minimum width of not less than that prescribed for the street
according to its classification in Section 702.
SECTION 704 STREET IMPROVEMENTS
(a) Street Construction: The developer shall provide for the complete construction of streets and
curb and gutter, in accordance with the standards and specifications of the Town of Easton.
(b) Sidewalks: All subdivisions shall be required to provide sidewalks unless it is determined by
the Planning and Zoning Commission that sidewalks are not necessary due to lot size, location of
subdivision or anticipated usage. Sidewalks shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
the standards and requirements established by the
Town Engineer.
(c) Storm water management and sediment control: All storm water drainage systems shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the Storm Water Management Ordinance. A storm
38
water management plan and sediment control plan approved by the appropriate State and Local
Agencies must be provided. Natural shaped ponds are preferred.
(d) Street Lighting: Street lighting shall be designed and installed by the Town of Easton at the
expense of the developer.
(e) Street trees: New trees which are indigenous to the area or other approved species shall be
required to be planted as per requirements of Section 707 LANDSCAPING herein.
(f) Signs: Street name and traffic control signs shall be constructed by the Town of Easton at the
expense of the subdivider or developer.
SECTION 705 SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEM AND WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM
All subdivisions shall be served by public sewer and water systems designed and
constructed in accordance with the standards and service tariffs of the Easton Utilities
Commission.
SECTION 706 GAS, ELECTRIC, CABLE AND TELEPHONE SERVICE
Provisions for gas, electric, cable and telephone service shall be made in accordance with
the standards and service tariffs of the Easton Utilities Commission, the Telephone
Company, and any other utilities company serving the subdivision.
SECTION 707 LANDSCAPING
(a) “Sketch” or “Concept” landscaping plan in accordance to Section 615 of the Zoning
Ordinance shall be submitted with the Sketch Plat submittal.
(b) Complete Landscaping Plans shall be submitted with the Preliminary Plat.
(c) Plans and designs shall be in accordance with Section 615 of the Zoning Ordinance of the
Town of Easton.
SECTION 708 COMMUNITY PARKS
(a) All residential subdivisions shall provide a minimum of 1,200 square feet per dwelling unit
for parks. Environmental protections areas (i.e. not-tidal wetlands, Forest Conservation
Protection areas, etc…) and storm water management areas may not be used to satisfy the
minimum park requirements. The land to be dedicated for parks shall be of suitable size and
shape, topography and geology, and offer proper location and adequate road access, as
determined by the Planning & Zoning Commission.
(b) If the Planning & Zoning Commission determines that due to the size of proposed
subdivision or other factors, suitable sites for parks cannot be dedicated, payment of a fee in lieu
39
of land dedication shall be required. The fee shall be in the amount of the value of the land to be
dedicated, as determined by the Commission on the average market value of the undeveloped
land based on the entire tract.
(c) Fees collected in lieu of land under the provisions of this section shall be paid to the Town
prior to final plat recordation. Fees collected under these provisions shall be used for the purpose
of acquiring developable land for parks.
(d) Where private open space for parks and recreational purposes is provided in a proposed
subdivision, and such open space is to be privately owned and maintained by the future residents
of the subdivision, the acreage of such areas may be credited against the requirement for
dedication of land or payment of fees in lieu of if the Commission concludes that it is in the
interest of the public to do so.
(e) Any lands conveyed hereunder shall be used only for the purposes stated herein.
(f) Where the subdivision contains park areas, or other physical facilities necessary or desirable
for the welfare of the area and which are of common use or benefit and are of such character that
the Town or other public agency does not desire to maintain them, then provisions shall be made
by trust agreements for the proper and continuous maintenance and supervision of such facilities
by the lot owners in the subdivision. Such trust agreements shall be approved by the Planning
Commission prior to the recording of the Final Plat and shall be a part of the deed covenants.
(g) An executed Deed conveying parks, streets, or open space must be submitted along with
final plat.
SECTION 709 PARK DEVELOPMENT FEES
(a) With respect to all residential development, a park development fee of $148.76 per
residential unit1, as adjusted per subsection (c) below, shall be assessed, which fee
shall be due and payable at the time of the approval of the final plat, or final site plan
as the case may be, containing such dwelling units.
(b) Residential park development fees for developments for which applications have been
filed and application fees paid prior to April 20, 2006, may, at the option of the
1 This figure was established at $133.33 per unit with the adoption of these Regulations. It was adjusted as per
subsection 709 (c) to $136.77 in 2007 (reflecting 2.6% inflation as determined by averaging the three indices cited),
to $141.47 in 2008 (3.2% average inflation), to $146.56 in 2009 (3.6% average inflation) and to $148.76 in 2010
(1.5% average inflation).
40
developer, be paid prior to the issuance of each building permit for the development,
if not otherwise paid earlier.
(c) On January 2 of each year, the park development fee shall be automatically adjusted
in accordance with any percentage change in the cost of park development. The park
development fee shall be adjusted by the average percentage change, if any, in the
Consumer Price Index, the Construction Cost Index, and the Building Cost Index,
taken together and as established for the State of Maryland.
(d) Such park development fee shall be used solely for the development and
improvement of parks, trails, and recreation facilities within or reasonably proximate
to the applicable residential development.
Subject to the express approval of the Town of Easton, the owner/developer of land involving
applicable residential development may elect, in lieu of payment of park development fees, to
develop and construct neighborhood park improvements on land within the development
dedicated for such purposes or upon existing park land reasonably proximate to the development.
Such development and construction shall comply with all applicable provisions of these
Subdivision Regulations and any rules or regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
SECTION 710 SURVEY MONUMENTS AND MARKERS
Monuments or markers, not less than five inches square at each end and thirty inches long, made
from hard durable stone or good concrete, shall be placed in not less than four convenient places
on the outside boundaries of the entire subdivision, at each change in direction of said boundary
lines, at each change in direction of street and alley lines, and at all street and alley intersections.
Not less than twenty-six (26) inches of the monuments or markers shall be placed in the ground
with not more than four (4) inches extending above the surface of the ground. The corners of all
lots not marked by stone or concrete monuments required above shall be marked by iron pins or
iron pipes at least eighteen (18) inches long and not less than 5/8" in diameter.
SECTION 711 ENGINEERING AND SURVEYING
(a) All surveys, maps, plans, and designs shall be made by a Professional Engineer, Professional
Surveyor, or other design professional who is licensed by the State of Maryland and is practicing
within the scope of his license with respect to the services provided.
(b) All maps or plats shall be compiled from actual accurate field surveys made by the surveyor
whose name appears thereon.
(c) All figures, lettering and symbols on the plan or map must be neatly and legibly drafted
thereon and the Commission may refuse to receive for examination and approval a plan or map
on which such details are blurred, unreasonably indistinct or difficult to read.
41
(d) On all subdivisions at least one (1) of the principal corners of the outline boundary of the
whole tract shall be referred to the nearest officially established street intersection monument or
marker.
(e) SURVEY CONTROL
(1) The meridian line upon which the bearings or azimuth of the survey is based shall be
referenced to the Maryland State Plane Coordinate System (NAD83(1991)).
(2) All plats shall show the position by coordinates of not less than four markers set in
convenient places within the subdivision in a manner so that the position of one marker is
visible from the position of one other marker.
(3) The U.S. survey foot (1 meter = 39.3 7/12 inches) shall be used in all conversions of
Maryland State Plane Coordinates from meters to feet or feet to meters.
(4) Vertical datum shall be NAVD88.
(f) All surveys of subdivisions shall be carefully and accurately executed. The boundaries of the
entire tract shall be surveyed on the ground and all corners thereof established by the accurate
measurement of linear distances and precise observation of angles to the nearest twenty(20)
seconds of circumference.
(g) All surveys shall be made with an accuracy of no less than one to fifteen thousand (1:15,000).
(h) The developer shall, upon request, furnish a certified copy of the surveyor's computation of
the unbalanced traverse of the outside boundary of the entire tract.
(i) The outline boundary of a subdivision must meet the minimum surveying standards per
COMAR Title 9, Subtitle 13.
(j) Monuments and markers required by these regulations must be set by the surveyor responsible
for the plat
42
ARTICLE VIII - IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEES
SECTION 800 CONTRACTS
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall not allow recording of any subdivision plat until:
(a) Required improvements have been completed, inspected and accepted by the Town Planner,
or other proper authorities; or
(b) The developer has entered into a written public works agreement with the Town in the
manner and form set forth by the Town Attorney where the developer shall agree:
(1) to construct or cause to be constructed, at his own expense, all required improvements
in strict accordance with the standards and specifications of the Town of Easton and the
Easton Utilities Commission;
(2) to maintain, at his own cost, the improvements until the same are accepted by the
Town of Easton and the Easton Utilities Commission;
(3) to obtain, at his own cost, any easement or release required for the construction or
extension of any required improvement.
SECTION 801 GUARANTY
In order to assure the Town that the required improvements shall be constructed and installed at
his own expense, in strict accordance with the standards, regulations, and specifications of the
Town, and will be maintained until accepted by the Town, the developer shall furnish the Town,
cash, bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or other such surety as the Town shall approve in an
amount sufficient to cover cost, as estimated by the Town Engineer, of the construction and
installation of the aforesaid improvements.
The improvement guaranty shall be conditioned upon:
(a) the developer constructing and installing, or causing to be constructed or installed, in strict
accordance with the standards, regulations, and specifications of the Town, as finally approved,
the required improvements;
(b) the developer in maintaining at his own cost the said improvements, until the same are
accepted by the Town for community use;
(c) the faithful performance by the developer of the Public Works Agreement.
SECTION 802 ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS
43
(a) Development Inspection
(1) The applicant shall notify the Town of Easton and the Easton Utilities Commission of
the completion of the required improvements.
(2) The appropriate agency shall inspect the completed required improvements and notify
the developer of approval or specify those items of construction, material, and
workmanship which do not comply with the specifications or the approved construction
plans.
(3) The applicant, upon notification from the appropriate agency of items not approved
shall:
a. proceed, at his own cost, to make such corrections as shall be required to
comply with the specifications and approved construction plans; and
b. notify the appropriate agency upon completion, requesting final inspection.
(b) Final Inspection: The appropriate agencies shall make a final inspection with the applicant of
all required improvements.
(c) Acceptance: At such time as the Town Engineer is satisfied that the applicant has complied
with all standards, regulations, service tariffs and specifications of the Town of Easton and the
Easton Utilities Commission an indenture prepared by the applicant in a form approved by the
Town of Easton, conveying all streets, parks, and other public lands to the Town of Easton shall
be recorded in the Land Records of Talbot County.
44
ARTICLE IX - CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
SECTION 900 CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
The Town Council may, from time to time amend, supplement or change, by ordinance, the
regulations herein established. Any such amendment or change shall be accomplished in
accordance with the provisions of the Town Charter and the laws of the State of Maryland.
45
ARTICLE X – ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 1000 HARDSHIP
Where the Planning and Zoning Commission finds that extraordinary hardships may result from
strict compliance with these Regulations, it may modify the Regulations so that substantial
justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that such modification will not
have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these Regulations or of modifying any
provision of any other ordinance of the Town of Easton.
SECTION 1001 CONDITIONS
In granting modifications, the Planning and Zoning Commission may require such conditions as
will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so
modified.
SECTION 1002 FEES
A plat review fee shall be collected upon the submittal and each subsequent submittal of a sketch
plan. A subdivision application fee shall be collected at the time of filing of a Preliminary Plat.
This fee shall be based on the number of lots in the subdivision and is a one time fee as long as
the Preliminary Plat is based on the approved sketch plat. When a Preliminary Plat is submitted
which is based on a revised sketch plat, a new subdivision application fee shall be collected.
There shall be no fee for the initial review of a final plat. When a plat has to be reviewed more
than once, a plat review fee shall be collected for each submittal of the final plat.
A plat review fee shall be collected for a boundary line amendment or a minor subdivision. All
fees shall be in accordance with the fee schedule of charges adopted by resolution of the Town
Council.
SECTION 1003 SEVERABILITY
It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that:
(a) If the court declares any provisions of these Regulations to be invalid or ineffective in whole
or in part, the effect of such decision shall be limited to those provisions which are expressly
stated in the decision to be invalid or ineffective, and all other provisions of these Regulations
shall continue to be separately and fully effective.
(b) If the court finds the application of any provision or provisions of these Regulations to any
lot, building, or other structure, or tract of land, to be invalid or ineffective, in whole or in part,
the effect of such decision shall be limited to the person, property, or situation immediately
involved in the controversy, and the application of any such provision to other persons, property,
or situations shall not be affected.
SECTION 1004 PUBLIC HEARING
46
The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing for all Sketch Plat at which parties in
interest and citizens shall have the opportunity to be heard. The time, place of said hearing along
with the general location and a brief description of the subdivision shall be published in a paper
of general circulation in Talbot County. Notice shall be published and property posted at least
seven (7) days preceding the date on which the Planning Commission is scheduled to review said
subdivision. No notice shall be required for those subdivisions which do not require sketch plat
review.
SECTION 1005 ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
The Town Engineer of Easton shall be the enforcement officer for these Regulations. If he shall
find that any of the provisions of these Regulations are being violated, he shall notify in writing
the person responsible for such violation and take such action as may be necessary to prevent the
violation of these Regulations, including obtaining a court injunction to discontinue the transfer,
sale, or negotiations for sale of illegal lots or parcels; or any action authorized herein.
SECTION 1006 APPEALS
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Town
Engineer in approving or denying a subdivision under the terms of these Regulations shall have
the right to appeal said decision to the Easton Board of Zoning Appeals under the terms and
provisions set forth in Chapter 28 (Zoning) of the Code of the Town of Easton.
47
ARTICLE XI - SUBDIVISION ACTIVITY IN THE
CHESAPEAKE BAY CRITICAL AREA
SECTION 1100
(a) All subdivisions of land located in whole or in part in that area of the Town of Easton which
is part of the Chesapeake Bay Critical Area shall be subject to the provisions of the Easton
Zoning Ordinance relating to the Critical Area Overlay Zone as well as to the provisions of these
regulations. Where the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance relating to the Critical Area Overlay
Zone conflict with the provisions of these subdivisions regulations, the provision of the Critical
Area Overlay Zone shall apply.
(b) No subdivision of any land located in whole or in part in that area of the Town of Easton
which is part of the Chesapeake Bay Critical Area shall be permitted unless and until the
Planning and Zoning Commission makes the following written findings with regard to the
subdivision:
(1) The development or development activities have been designed in such a manner as to
minimize adverse impacts on water quality that result from pollutants that are discharged
from structures or conveyances or that have runoff from surrounding lands; and
(2) That the development or development activities have been planned in such a fashion
as to conserve fish, wildlife and plant habitat.
48
Appendix:
TOWN OF EASTON
CAD Standards
For New Construction and Renovation Projects
July 2009
2
Table of Contents
Section 1 – General Requirements
1.1 Overview page 3
1.2 Drawing Format page 3
1.3 Drawing Composition page 3
1.4 Title Block Information page 3
1.5 Layering Standards page 4
1.6 Entity Properties page 4
1.7 Model and Paper Space Usage page 4
1.8 External References – Xref’s page 5
1.9 AutoCAD Drawing Support Files page 5
1.10 File Transmittal page 5
1.11 Submittal Requirements page 5
Section 2 – Standard Layers
page 6
Section 3 – Town Created Linetypes
page 11
Section 4 – Town Plot Styles
page 12
Section 5 – As-Built Procedure
5.1 Purpose page 13
5.2 As-built versus Revision page 13
5.3 Steps in As-builting page 13
5.4 Submittals page 14
3
Section 1 - General Requirements
1.1 Overview: These standards are issued for the development of AutoCAD drawings suitable for use in
The Town of Easton CAD environment. Consistency and compatibility with the existing Town of
Easton AutoCAD documents can only be achieved when these standards are strictly adhered to.
Electronic drawings produced and submitted in accordance with these standards have significantly
greater value to the Town, Architects, Engineers, Surveyors and Contractors delivering AutoCAD
documentation to the Town. Town Of Easton and Easton Utilities Contracts and Design Guidelines
may reference this document.
1.2 Drawing Format: Shall be the current AutoCAD Version or its immediate previous version. For
A/E firms or developers using CAD software other than AutoCAD, a file export which is AutoCAD
compatible maybe substituted upon review and approval by Easton Utilities Engineering Department
Manager.
1.3 Drawing Composition: AutoCAD drawing files submitted to The Town of Easton shall adhere to
the following to minimize potential problems:
49
All AutoCAD drawings shall be purged of empty, unused, or non-essential drawing data prior to
submittal to Town. This includes all unused layers, linetypes, blocks, fonts and entities.
AutoCAD drawings shall not contain any frozen layers. All unused frozen layers should be
erased and empty layers purged.
AutoCAD drawings shall not contain multiple overlaid lines or lines with multiple segments unless the
overlaid lines or adjacent line segments are assigned to different layers.
Survey data shall be included in the AutoCAD drawings and placed on the appropriate layers
(see section 1.5).
Survey data collected and used in designing the project shall be submitted as a text file(s) (e.g.
ASCII files). This applies only to projects under direct contract with The Town of Easton.
1.4 Title Block Information: All title blocks used in AutoCAD drawings submitted to the Town shall
contain the following information:
Original issue date – this date should not change once the drawing has been issued.
Sheet number.
Title – description of drawing and location information. Location information should include all
building, floor and room numbers as applicable
Revision history – as applicable.
Drawing phase – drawings submitted as As-Builts should clearly be marked as such.
Town Of Easton Project Number – if applicable.
A/E/C – consultant responsible for producing the drawings should be clearly identified.
Contractor – As-builts should clearly indicate the general contractor.
1.5 Layering Standards: The intent of the layering standard is to promote consistency between CAD
drawings, and maximize the reusability of drawing data. The effective use of CAD layering
standards also facilitates the grouping of shared graphical information for display, editing and
plotting purposes. For utility, street, and subdivision construction The Town of Easton uses its own
standard and is listed in Section 2 – Standard Layers.
4
All AutoCAD drawings submitted to the Town shall follow the applicable CAD layering standards
outlined in this document. CAD layer standards, including layer descriptions, line types, and line
colors, are provided in this document. These layering standards must always be followed:
For building projects use only AIA layer names
For civil projects use only the Town layer standard
Use the minimum number of layers necessary to adequately separate entities in each drawing.
The number of layers contained in each drawing will vary depending on the scope and
complexity of the drawing, however drawings should not contain extraneous, redundant, or
overly detailed layer names.
Purge each drawing of unused layers prior to submittal. The drawing file should contain only
those layers necessary for displaying and plotting the information and drawing entities
contained in each drawing. To ensure that subsequent prints made from each AutoCAD drawing
match the original, unused or unnecessary layers must be purged from the drawing prior to
delivery.
The effective use of CAD layering standards should:
Allow users to isolate systems and drawing elements by controlling the visibility of objectsimproving
system performance and eliminating visual clutter.
Facilitate the sharing of information between drawings and disciplines.
Allow users to control display and printing characteristics such as color, line type, line weight
etc.
1.6 Entity Properties: To ensure the integrity of the original drawing when viewing or printing, it’s
essential that AutoCAD entities are created following these standards:
Entity colors shall be defined by layer, not by entity.
Blocks shall be defined (created) on layer 0 (zero).
1.7 Model and Paper Space Usage: These guidelines are suggested for using model and paper space
effectively:
Place title blocks, schedules and general notes at full-scale in paper space whenever possible.
50
Label scaled viewports with appropriate scale in model space.
Do not place or draw model-related blocks, tags and objects in paper space.
Draw all model space objects at full scale.
Scale objects using paper space viewports – zoom viewports to the appropriate scale.
1.8External References – Xref’s: External References (Xref’s) contained in AutoCAD drawings created
outside of The Town Of Easton can result in content discrepancies in the drawing set. To ensure the
integrity of the drawing set, and minimize potential problems:
AutoCAD drawings to The Town Of Easton shall not contain any Xref’s.
Xref’s shall not be “bound” to drawings prior to delivery.
1.9 AutoCAD Drawing Support Files: Drawings created using non-standard AutoCAD fonts,
linetypes, and hatch patterns can result in content discrepancies in the delivered drawings set. To
ensure the integrity of the drawing set, and minimize potential problems:
Only native AutoCAD fonts, linetypes and hatch patterns or CAD symbology provided by the
National CAD Standards is acceptable.
Custom fonts, linetypes, and hatch patterns, including those provided by 3rd party software, are
not acceptable.
Only these TrueType fonts are acceptable Arial, Courier New, Times New Roman.
5
Postscript fonts shall not be used.
1.10 File Transmittal: The content of electronic drawings provided by the A/E must match the delivered
original hard copy set as closely as possible, if not exactly. To ensure the integrity of the electronic
drawing set upon delivery to the Town Of Easton:
Ensure the drawings adhere to the guidelines presented in this document. Review the procedures
for preparing drawings for submittal as detailed in the preceding paragraphs.
Include a hard copy index containing filenames and sheet numbers for each submittal. This
ensures the completeness of the drawing set and assists in archival procedures.
Include a transmittal sheet with all submittals indicating Project name and complete listing of all
materials submitted.
Include hard copy prints of all drawing submittals.
Include AutoCAD .PC2, .PCP or .CTB plot configuration.
Electronic files can be on CD-Rom or Flash (Thumb) Drive.
1.11 Submittal Requirements: All AutoCAD drawings forwarded to the Town shall be submitted in
accordance with the Zoning Regulations and these standards. The delivery of AutoCAD
documentation during various project stages (Improvement Plans and Record Plans) shall be
submitted in the appropriate formats to ensure that the Town ultimately receives the most accurate
information available for review. The receipt of electronic AutoCAD drawings alone does not
alleviate the responsibility of the Architect, Engineer, Surveyor or Contractor for providing hard
copy documentation to The Town of Easton.
When final measurements and data are available for a completed project, the associated drawings
may be “as-builted” to achieve the final record drawing. The as-built procedure for projects
involving wastewater, water, storm drain or improvements is outlined in Section 5. These as-built
modifications are to be made using AutoCAD and shall produce “As-built” drawings. All line work
representing items that are not built or that is replaced by as-built line work in a new location, is to
be DELETED. Only line work representing what was actually constructed is to remain on the
drawings.
The following documentation shall be delivered to The Town of Easton at the following project
milestones:
Design – Preliminary Improvement Plans
The Town requires hard copies of the Improvement Plans for review and comment for approval.
An AutoCAD drawing file of the project model space shall be furnished at this time for design
of additional utilities. It shall be the A/E responsibility to forward revised AutoCAD drawing
files to the utility company of any project revisions that would impact other utility designs.
Final Approved Improvement Plans
2 complete sets of plans and specifications shall be submitted along with a complete set of PDF
files of plans including A/E seal and signature and approval signature by authorized agent of
51
The Town Of Easton.
Record Improvement Plans
A/E shall submit, on CD-Rom and hard copy format, final/approved As-Built Documents to the
Town of Easton. The CD-Rom shall contain the as-built information on the project and is to
include DWG, and PDF formats of the CAD drawings in accordance with Section 5 – As-built
Procedure and these standards. All Record Drawings require a professional seal (signed and
dated) on hard copy sheets. PDF files shall be of these sealed As-Built plans.
Refer to Section 1.10 for specific transmittal requirements.
Section 2 – Standard Layers
Layer Name Description Linetype Color
0 General Continuous 7
ADDRESS Address Continuous 4
AIRPORT Airport related accessories Continuous 1
AIRPORT-RUNWAY Airport runway and taxiways Continuous 1
AIRPORT-TXT Airport text Continuous 2
BDR Drawing border Continuous 8
BLDG Building Continuous 3
BLDG-APPROX Building approximate Continuous 2
BLDG-CONC Building concrete Continuous 4
BLDG-DECK Building decks Continuous 2
BLDG-Q Building Questionable Continuous 1
BLDG-STRUC Building associated structure Continuous 3
BLDG-TXT Building text Continuous 2
BRIDGE Bridges and overpasses Continuous 3
CATV-OH CATV overhead cable OH-CATV-P 30-39
CATV-OH-FIBER CATV overhead fiber optic cable OH-CATV-P 30-39
CATV-SCH CATV system schematic Continuous 30-39
CATV-SCH-SYM CATV system schematic symbols Continuous 30-39
CATV-SCH-TXT CATV system schematic text Continuous 2
CATV-SYM CATV symbols Continuous 30-39
CATV-TXT CATV text Continuous 2
CATV-UG CATV underground cable UG-CATV-P 30-39
CATV-UG-FIBER CATV underground fiber optic cable UG-CATV-P 30-39
CEMETERY Cemetery outline and text Dashed2 2
CL Centerline Center 1
CONC Concrete feature Continuous 4
CONT-HGH Index contours Dashed 254
CONT-HGH-DEP Index contours high depression Dashed 254
CONT-HGH-DEP-Q Index contours high depress. Quest. Dashed2 254
CONT-HGH-Q Index contours questionable Dashed2 254
CONT-INDEX-TXT Index contours labels Continuous 254
CONT-NML Intermediate contours Hidden2 254
CONT-NML-DEP Intermediate contours depression Hidden2 254
CONT-NML-DEP-Q Interm. contours depress. questionable Dot2 254
CONT-NML-Q Intermediate contours questionable Dot2 254
CONT-NML-TXT Intermediate contours labels Continuous 254
CONTROL Horizontal and vertical control Continuous 254
CONTROL-TXT Horizontal and vertical control text Continuous 4
CURB Curb Continuous 4
D Drainage, storm drains Dashed2 2
DENSE-VEG Dense vegetation Continuous 3
DENSE-VEG-OL Dense vegetation outline Continuous 7
DENSE-VEG-TXT Dense vegetation text Continuous 2
DESC Point description Continuous 3
DIMENSION Dimensions Continuous 1
DITCH Ditches, swales, canals etc. Divided2 2
52
DITCH-OL Ditch outline or path Continuous 7
D-SYM Drainage symbols Continuous 2
D-TXT Drainage text Continuous 2
DRIVE Driveways, lanes etc. Dashed2 2
EASEMENT Easements Dashed 2
7
EASEMENT-TXT Easement text Continuous 2
ELEV Point elevations Continuous 1
EOP Edge of pavement bituminous, conc. etc. Dashed 3
E-69-OH 69kv overhead OH-ELEC-P 12 (10-19)
E-69-UG 69kv underground UG-ELEC-P 12 (10-19)
E-69-SYM 69kv symbols Continuous 12 (10-19)
E-69-TXT 69kv text Continuous 12 (10-19)
E-25-600-OH 25kv 600 amp overhead OH-ELEC-P 12 (10-19)
E-25-600-UG 25kv 600 amp underground UG-ELEC-P 12 (10-19)
E-25-200-OH 25kv 200 amp overhead OH-ELEC-P 12 (10-19)
E-25-200-UG 25kv 200 amp underground UG-ELEC-P 12 (10-19)
E-25-MISC-OH 25kv misc overhead OH-ELEC-P 12 (10-19)
E-25-MISC-UG 25kv misc underground UG-ELEC-P 12 (10-19)
E-25-SYM 25kv symbols Continuous 12 (10-19)
E-25-TXT 25kv text Continuous 12 (10-19)
E-P-600-OH Primary 600 amp overhead OH-ELEC-P 12 (10-19)
E-P-600-UG Primary 600 amp underground UG-ELEC-P 12 (10-19)
E-P-200-OH Primary 200 amp overhead OH-ELEC-P 12 (10-19)
E-P-200-UG Primary 200 amp underground UG-ELEC-P 12 (10-19)
E-P-MISC-OH Primary misc. overhead OH-ELEC-P 12 (10-19)
E-P-MISC-UG Primary misc. underground UG-ELEC-P 12 (10-19)
E-P-SYM Primary symbols Continuous 12 (10-19)
E-P-TXT Primary text Continuous 12 (10-19)
E-S-OH Secondary overhead OH-ELEC-S 12 (10-19)
E-S-UG Secondary underground UG-ELEC-S 12 (10-19)
E-S-SYM Secondary symbols Continuous 12 (10-19)
E-S-TXT Secondary text Continuous 12 (10-19)
FENCE Fence all types Varies with fence type 2
FENCE-OL Fence outline Continuous 7
FENCE-TXT Fence text Continuous 2
FUEL Fuel facilities Continuous 1
FUEL-SYM Fuel facilities symbols Continuous 1
FUEL-TXT Fuel facilities text Continuous 1
GAS-ANODE-NODES Gas anode node points Continuous 140
GAS-DRIPPITS-NODES Gas drip pit node points Continuous 10
GAS-MAINS Gas mains GASMAIN 200
GAS-NODES Gas node points Continuous 31
GAS-SERV Gas service lines GASSERV 201
GAS-SYM Gas symbols Continuous 201
GAS-TESTPTS-NODES Gas test point nodes Continuous 7
GAS-TXT Gas text Continuous 2
GAS-VALVE-NODES Gas valve nodes Continuous 1
GAS-VALVE-SERVICE Gas valve service lines Continuous 2
GRID Grid aerial maps Continuous 254
GRID-NUMBER Grid aerial map number Continuous 254
GUARDRAIL Guard rail Continuous 3
GUARDRAIL-OL: Guard rail outline Continuous 7
GUARDRAIL-TXT Guard rail text Continuous 3
HIDDEN Hidden features Continuous 7
MAIL Mail boxes, drop boxes etc. Continuous 2
53
MANHOLES Manholes owner unknown Continuous 7
MARSH Marsh, swamp or wetland Continuous 2
MARSH-OL Marsh outline Continuous 7
MISC Miscellaneous features Continuous 1
MISC-SYM Miscellaneous features symbols Continuous 1
MISC-TXT Miscellaneous features text Continuous 1
8
PARCEL-NUMBER Tax parcel number Continuous 4
PARKING Parking Hidden 7
PARKING-G Parking gravel Hidden 7
PARKING-M Parking meters Continuous 2
PARKING-P Parking paved Hidden 7
PARKING-TXT Parking text Continuous 2
PATH Path, trial etc. Dashed2 3
PIPE-MISC Pipe miscellaneous Continuous 1
PL Property line Continuous 5
PL-SYM Property line symbol Continuous 2
PL-TXT Property line text Continuous 2
PNTS Points Continuous 2
POLES Poles owner unknown Continuous 7
POND Pond Shore 170
POND-OL Pond outline Continuous 7
R Right of way street line Continuous 6
REC Recreation Continuous 2
REC-BLEACH Recreation bleachers Continuous 2
REC-FIELD Recreation field Continuous 2
REC-POOL Recreation pool Continuous 2
REC-TXT Recreation text Continuous 2
REC-GOALPOST Recreation goal post Continuous 2
REC-GOLFBUNKER Recreation golf bunker Hidden2 60
REC-GOLFTEE Recreation golf tee box Dashed2 2
REC-GOLFCART Recreation golf cart path Dashed2 74
REC-GOLFFAIR Recreation golf fairway Hidden 52
REC-GOLFGREEN Recreation golf green Hidden2 3
REC-PLAYGROUND Recreation playground type equipment Continuous 2
RIPRAP Riprap, stone revetments etc. Continuous 3
RIPRAP-OL Riprap outline Continuous 7
RIPRAP-TXT Riprap text Continuous 2
RR Railroad features Continuous 3
RR-TXT Railroad features text Continuous 2
RUINS Ruins and text Continuous 2
S Sanitary sewer Dashed 90-99
S-FM Sewer force main Hidden 90-99
S-FM-SYM Sewer force main symbols Continuous 90-99
S-FM-TXT Sewer force mains text Continuous 2
S-S Sewer service (lateral) Dashed2 90-99
S-S-SYM Sewer service symbols Continuous 90-99
S-S-TXT Sewer service text Continuous 2
S-SYM Sewer symbols Continuous 90-99
S-TXT Sewer text Continuous 2
SETBACK Setback from property line Dashed 4
SHORE Shore line Shore 170
SHORE-OL Shore line outline Continuous 7
SHOULDER Shoulder of road etc. paved or gravel Continuous 2
SHRUB Shrubbery, bushes, etc. Tree line 3
(scale set at 0.03, 0.01, 0.00)
54
SIDEWALK Sidewalk Continuous 4
SIGNS Assorted signs Continuous 2
SIGNS-ST Street signs Continuous 2
SIGNS-ST-TXT Street signs text Continuous 2
SIGNS-TXT Assorted signs text Continuous 2
SL Survey line Dashed 254
SL-SYM Survey line symbols Continuous 4
9
SL-TXT Survey line text Continuous 4
SPOT Spot elevation Continuous 2
SPOT-Q Spot elevation questionable Continuous 2
SRF-FLT Surface fault lines Continuous 7
SRF-VIEW Surface tin view Continuous 7
STOCKPILE Stockpile Hidden2 1
STREAM Stream continuous flow USGS Blue line Shore 170
STREAM-OL Stream outline or path Continuous 7
T Telephone Continuous 32
T-SYM Telephone symbols Continuous 32
T-TXT Telephone text Continuous 2
T-UG Telephone underground Hidden3 31
TANK Miscellaneous tank Continuous 1
TB Town Boundary Phantom2 9
TEXT-LOT Lot number Continuous 5
TEXT-STREET Street name text Continuous 6
TEXT-WATERWAY Waterway name text Continuous 6
TXT-S Text small notation of existing Continuous 2
features or labels
TXT-M Text medium for proposed work or titles Continuous 3
TXT-L Text large Continuous 5
TXT-VL Text very large for view titles etc. Continuous 6
TOWER Tower Continuous 2
TRACT Development tract Continuous 3
TRAF-CHAN Traffic channelization lane markings etc. Continuous 2
TRAF-CONTR Traffic control cabinet wiring runs etc. Hide 13
TRAF-HORZ-LOCAT-REQUIRE-(STREET NAME) MUTCD Requirements for signal placement
Continuous 200
TRAF-LOOP Traffic signal loop detectors, Hide2 1
leads, and runs
TRAF-PED- Traffic pedestrian signal head Continuous 11
SIGNAL-HEAD
TRAF-SIGNAL Traffic signal Continuous 11
TRAF-SIGNALIZATION Signal arrangement and signage Continuous 2
TRANS Transportation features Continuous 2
TRANS-TXT Transportation features text Continuous 2
TREE Tree or group of <6 trees Continuous 3
UNIDENT Unidentified Continuous 2
VALVE Valve owner unknown Continuous 2
W-FH Fire hydrant Continuous 170-179
W-FH-NUMBER Fire hydrant number and/or text Continuous 170-179
W-FIRELINE Fire line Continuous 170-179
W-FIRELINE-SYM Fire line symbols Continuous 170-179
W-FIRELINE-TXT Fire line text Continuous 2
W-IRRIGATION Irrigation Hidden2 170-179
W-IRRIGATION-SYM Irrigation symbols Continuous 170-179
W-IRRIGATION-TXT Irrigation text Continuous 2
W-MAINS Water mains Dashdot 170-179
55
W-NODES Water main nodes Continuous 170-179
W-S Water service line Dashdot2 170-179
W-S-SYM Water service line symbol Continuous 170-179
W-S-TXT Water service line text Continuous 2
W-SYM Water main symbols Continuous 170-179
W-TANK Water tank, tower etc. Hidden 170-179
W-TXT Water main text Continuous 2
W-VALVE NUMBER Water main valve numbers Continuous 2
10
WALL Wall includes retaining walls,. Continuous 2
jersey walls etc
WALL-TXT Wall text Continuous 2
WATER-LEVEL Pond water level 170
WOODS Woods line or trees groups >6 Tree line 3
(scale set at 0.09, 0.04, 0.00)
WOODS-OL Wooded area outline Continuous 7
The layers listed above are just a general list of existing features and maybe revised from time to time by
Easton Utilities Engineering Department. Any A/E wishing an updated list should contact the Engineering
Department Manager.
For Proposed work feature shall be named according to the above except it shall be preceded by P-.
These are a basic list of layer names there will be additional layers created and named by AutoCAD.
Section 3 – Town Created Linetypes
The following are linetypes developed by Easton Utilities Engineering Department for use on project plans
and aerial mapping. The following are the line definitions and should be copied as they are and inserted
into your own linetype file.
;; Linetypes developed by H. LeCates 3/18/92
;;
*CENTER4,__ _ __ _ __ _ __ _ __ _ __ _ __ _ __ _ __ _ __ _ __ _ __
A,.375,-.07,.07,-.07
*CENTER8,__ _ __ _ __ _ __ _ __ _ __ _ __
A,.1875,-.04,.04,-.04
*DIVIDED2,___ ... ___ ... ___ ... ___ ... ___ ... ___ ... ___ ...
A,.25,-.0625,0,-.0625,0,-.0625,0,-.0625
*HIDDEN3,_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
A,.09375,-.046875
*HIDE,____ ____ ____ ____ _____ ____ ____ ____ ____ ____ ____ ____
A,0.05,-0.02
*HIDE2,__ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __
A,0.02,-0.01
*OH-ELEC-P,______ ______ _______ _______ _______ ______ ______ ______
A,0.3,-0.05
*UG-ELEC-P,__ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __
A,0.07,-0.03
*OH-ELEC-S,___ . ___ . ___ . ___ . ___ . ___ . ___ . ___ . ___ . ___ .
A,0.25,-0.03,0.0,-0.03
*UG-ELEC-S,_ . _ . _ . _ . _ . _ . _ . _ . _ . _ . _ . _ . _ . _ . _ .
A,0.07,-0.03,0.0,-0.03
*OH-CATV-P,______ ______ _______ _______ _______ ______ ______ ______
A,0.3,-0.05
*UG-CATV-P,__ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __
A,0.07,-0.03
*OH-CATV-S,___ . ___ . ___ . ___ . ___ . ___ . ___ . ___ . ___ . ___ .
A,0.25,-0.03,0.0,-0.03
*UG-CATV-S,_ . _ . _ . _ . _ . _ . _ . _ . _ . _ . _ . _ . _ . _ . _ .
A,0.07,-0.03,0.0,-0.03
;; Linetypes developed by H. LeCates 8/18/06
56
;;
*GASMAIN, Gas main with symbol
A,1.0,-0.05,[DOT,"aline.shx",s=0.02],-0.05
*GASSERV, Gas service with symbol
A,0.3,-0.025,[DOT,"aline.shx",s=0.01],-0.025
;; Linetype developed by H. LeCates 7/19/07
;;
*Shore, shoreline or stream
A,0.3,-0.05,[DOT,"aline.shx",s=0.01],-0.05,[DOT,"aline.shx",s=0.01],-0.05,[DOT,"aline.shx",s=0.01],-
0.05
The aline.shx file is available from Easton Utilities Engineering Department and needs to be placed in the
AutoCAD search path support directory.
Section 4 – Town Plot Styles
The Town generally has two Plot Styles. One for color plots on paper and one for black plots on vellum or
mylar, they are as listed below.
PLOT STYLE CONFIGURATION
MONITOR COLOR COLOR PLOT FILM PLOT
COLOR/SIZE SIZE
1 RED RED 0.25mm BLACK 0.25mm
2 YELLOW BLACK 0.25mm BLACK 0.25mm
3 GREEN BLACK 0.35mm BLACK 0.35mm
4 CYAN BLACK 0.25mm BLACK 0.25mm
5 BLUE BLACK 0.50mm BLACK 0.50mm
6 MAGENTA BLACK 0.70mm BLACK 0.70mm
7 WHITE ORANGE 0.35mm BLACK 0.35mm
8 DK. GREY BLACK 1.40mm BLACK 1.40mm
9 LT. GREY RED 0.35mm BLACK 0.35mm
10-19 RED 10-19 0.35mm BLACK 0.35mm
20-29 BLACK 2.0mm BLACK 2.0mm
30-39 ORANGE 30-39 0.35mm BLACK 0.35mm
40-49 40-49 0.35mm BLACK 0.35mm
50-59 YELLOW 50-59 0.35mm BLACK 0.35mm
60-69 60-69 0.35mm BLACK 0.35mm
70-79 70-79 0.35mm BLACK 0.35mm
80-89 80-89 0.35mm BLACK 0.35mm
90-99 GREEN 90-99 0.35mm BLACK 0.35mm
100-109 100-109 0.35mm BLACK 0.35mm
110-119 110-119 0.35mm BLACK 0.35mm
120-129 120-129 0.35mm BLACK 0.35mm
130-139 130-139 0.35mm BLACK 0.35mm
140-149 140-149 0.35mm BLACK 0.35mm
150-159 150-159 0.35mm BLACK 0.35mm
160-169 160-169 0.35mm BLACK 0.35mm
170-179 BLUE 170-179 0.35mm BLACK 0.35mm
180-189 180-189 0.35mm BLACK 0.35mm
190-199 190-199 0.35mm BLACK 0.35mm
200-209 200-209 0.35mm BLACK 0.35mm
210-219 MAGENTA 210-219 0.35mm BLACK 0.35mm
220-229 220-229 0.35mm BLACK 0.35mm
230-239 DK. MAGENTA 230-239 0.35mm BLACK 0.35mm
240-249 240-249 0.35mm BLACK 0.35mm
250-255 GRAY 250-255 0.35mm 250-255 0.35mm
Anyone wanting copies of these configurations should contact Easton Utilities Engineering Department
Manager.
Section 5 – As-Built Procedures
5.1 - Purpose
57
The As-built process is a method of recording precise construction information on engineering
permanent record drawings. The information is gathered during construction by field inspectors to
reflect differences from original design drawings. The “corrected” record drawings therefore become
an accurate representation of site conditions for future reference.
5.2 - As-built versus Revision
As-built information is intended to reflect adjustments to the proposed design that are a result of
actual field construction imperfections. Other changes involving unforeseen issues or obstacles (i.e.
field modifications) may sometimes be handled as simple as-built issues as long as the following
statements are true.
The change does not affect the intended function of the utility.
The change does not affect the intended function of any other utility.
The change does not affect the location of other related items such as easements.
All related Town specifications and requirements have been met.
Approval has been received from the associated Town departments.
All other modifications, necessitated by a variety of reasons (e.g. extensions, grade changes, and
alignment changes) must be handled as revisions in accordance with the current Town engineering
design revision procedures.
5.3 - Steps in As-builting
Please follow the steps below when “As-builting” a project drawing set.
1. For As-built notes added to sheet drawings, all related notes (e.g. pipe lengths) and blow-up
details shall be placed on the P-MISC-AS-BUILT layer, in Paper Space. All line work (e.g.
adjusted location of a water main moved during construction) is to be placed on the related
proposed utility layer (e.g. P-W-MAINS), in Model Space (in proposed utility base drawing). In
addition, any proposed utility items or sections not placed are to be removed from the drawing.
No X’s are to be shown on drawings.
2. For wastewater drawings, the guidelines below should be followed.
a) Note As-built length between manholes (center to center) in the plan view. Place an oval
around each as-built length recorded and include a leader (no arrowhead) to the associated
section of pipe in the plan view. In profile, delete the proposed length noted for each section
of pipe (between manholes) and place actual As-built length. Place an oval around each asbuilt
length recorded. Also delete any modified proposed elevations and pipe slope (%) in
the profile and place as-built elevations and slopes. Place oval around all new As-built
information recorded.
b) Redraw all proposed wastewater laterals in their as-built locations in Model Space. The
relocated laterals should remain on the P-S-S lateral layer. Make sure to delete the laterals
shown in the original locations.
c) If any existing wastewater laterals were identified as being improperly located on the
original survey, you should relocate them as noted. The relocated laterals should remain on
the S-S layer and the originally located laterals should be deleted.
d) Show “Y”, “E” and “L” distances near all proposed wastewater laterals on the plan view,
where:
Y = Distance from low manhole to wastewater lateral “wye” or “tee”.
14
E = Distance from low manhole to the point on the trunk sewer perpendicular to the
end of the lateral
L = Length of wastewater lateral
3. For water main drawings, the guidelines below should be followed.
a) Note As-built lengths between all major connections (i.e. tees, crosses, bends, sleeves, etc.)
in plan view. Include the connections referenced with each length recorded (e.g. “Tee to
Sleeve”). Place an oval around each As-built length recorded and include a leader to the
associated section of pipe in the plan view. If necessary, note any As-built lengths in profile
that cannot be shown in the plan view (e.g. water main offset). Place an oval around each
As-built length recorded and include a leader to the associated section of pipe in profile.
Delete modified proposed dimensions and place As-built dimensions in their place.
b) Redraw all proposed water services in their as-built locations. The relocated services should
58
remain on the P-W-S layer. Make sure to delete the services shown in the original locations.
c) If any existing water services were identified as being improperly located on the original
survey, you should relocate them as noted. The relocated services should remain on the WS
layer and the originally located services should be deleted.
d) For 1”, 11/2” and 2” water services, show all dimensions on taps (distance along water
main from nearest valve box or hydrant), curb boxes and tails. 4” and larger water services
should be dimensioned as described in section a) above.
e) Show in a detail drawing any hydrant, bend, water main offset or other crowded water main
arrangements that cannot be clearly dimensioned in the plan or profile views (locate the
detail in reference to the plan view by listing the approximate station, as opposed to using
leader). In this case, note As-built measurements as previously explained for plan view.
4. For public improvement, including Town storm drain drawings, the guidelines below should be
followed.
a) Note As-built length between manholes in the plan view. Place an oval around each Asbuilt
length recorded and include a leader to the associated section of pipe in the plan view.
In the profile, delete the proposed length noted for each section of pipe (between manholes
and/or inlets) and place as-built length. Place an oval around each section as-built length
recorded. Also delete any modified proposed elevations in the profile and place As-built
elevations. Place an oval around all new As-built elevations recorded.
5. Show new As-built locations (with new symbol) of wastewater items, water items, wastewater
pipes, water mains and service lines if moved 3 feet or ore from proposed locations. In this case,
delete the original proposed item or pipe when a new location is shown.
6. If not already done, insert any soil boring data on sheets where soil-boring locations are shown.
7. Check all item placement notes. For each note, verify the item lengths and quantities actually
placed during construction. For items eliminated, delete the item in the plan view (and profile, if
applicable) and as listed in the “PLACE” note. For changed items, modify the item in the plan
view (and profile, if applicable) and delete the original length or quantity in the note and add the
actual value. Place an oval around all new As-built lengths or quantities recorded.
5.4 - Submittals
After completing the As-built process on a project drawing set, please submit the following to the
Easton Utilities Engineering Department for review and approval.
One set of As-built plans in hard copy format for review.
Upon approval A/E shall submit, on CD-Rom and hard copy format, final/approved As-Built
Documents to the Town of Easton. The CD-Rom shall contain the as-built information on the
project and is to include DWG, and PDF formats of the CAD drawing. All Record Drawings
require a professional seal (signed and dated) on hard copy sheets. PDF files shall be of these
sealed As-Built plans.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
TOWN OF EASTON, MARYLAND
May 2010
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
i
TOWN OF EASTON, MARYLAND
Table of Contents
Page
1.0 Purpose and Authority ............................................…………………….. 1
1.1 Incorporation by Reference
1.2 Governing Criteria
1.3 Grandfathering
2.0 Definitions .......................................................…………………….... 3
3.0 Applicability ........................................................…………………....... 7
3.1 Scope
3.2 Exemptions
3.3 Waivers/Watershed Management Plans
3.4 Redevelopment
3.5 Variance
4.0 Stormwater Management Criteria……............................................................. 11
4.1 Minimum Control Requirements
4.2 Stormwater Management Measures
4.3 Specific Design Criteria
5.0 Stormwater Management Plans ………………………………………........ 15
5.1 Review and Approval of Stormwater Management Plans
5.2 Contents and Submission of Stormwater Management Plans
5.3 Preparation of Stormwater Management Plans
6.0 Permits …………........ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...............……………….....……………... 19
6.1 Permit Requirement
6.2 Permit Fee
6.3 Permit Suspension and Revocation
6.4 Permit Conditions
7.0 Performance Bond ..................................................……………….....…… 20
8.0 Inspection ....................................................……………….....….. 21
8.1 Inspection Schedule and Reports
8.2 Inspection Requirements During Construction
9.0 Maintenance ............................................................………………….…… 24
9.1 Maintenance Inspection
9.2 Maintenance Agreement
9.3 Maintenance Responsibility
10.0 Appeals ..................................................……………………………… 26
11.0 Severability ...........................................................................……….…….. 26
12.0 Penalties ...........................................................................………………….. 27
13.0 Effective Date ………………………………………………………………. 27
1
EXHIBIT A
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
1.0 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY
The purpose of this Ordinance is to protect, maintain, and enhance the public health, safety, and
general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures that control the adverse
impacts associated with increased stormwater runoff. The goal is to manage stormwater by
using environmental site design (ESD) to the maximum extent practicable (MEP) to maintain
after development as nearly as possible, the predevelopment runoff characteristics, and to reduce
stream channel erosion, pollution, siltation and sedimentation, and local flooding, and use
appropriate structural best management practices (BMPs) only when necessary. This will
restore, enhance, and maintain the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of streams,
minimize damage to public and private property, and reduce the impacts of land development.
The provisions of this Ordinance, pursuant to the Environment Article, Title 4, Subtitle 2,
Annotated Code of Maryland, 2009 replacement volume, are adopted under the authority of the
Town of Easton Code and shall apply to all development occurring within the incorporated area
of the Town of Easton. The application of this Ordinance and provisions expressed herein shall
be the minimum stormwater management requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation or
repeal of any other powers granted by State statute. The Town of Easton shall be responsible
for the coordination and enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance. This Ordinance applies
to all new and redevelopment projects that have not received final approval for erosion and
sediment control and stormwater management plans by May 4, 2010.
1.1 INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following documents are incorporated by reference:
A. The 2000 Maryland Stormwater Design Manual, Volumes I & II (Maryland Department
of the Environment, April 2000), and all subsequent revisions, is incorporated by
reference by the Town of Easton and shall serve as the official guide for stormwater
management principles, methods, and practices.
B. USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service Maryland Conservation Practice
Standard Pond Code 378 (January 2000).
1.2 GOVERNING CRITERIA
In case of a conflict between the control requirements of this Ordinance and the 2000 Maryland
Stormwater Design Manual, the more stringent requirement shall govern.
1.3 GRANDFATHERING
A. In this section, the following terms have the meanings indicated:
(1) Administrative waiver.
2
(a) "Administrative waiver" means a decision by the Town of Easton pursuant
to this Ordinance to allow the construction of a development to be
governed by the stormwater management ordinance in effect prior to
May 4, 2010 in the local jurisdiction where the project will be located.
(b) "Administrative waiver" is distinct from a waiver granted pursuant to
section 3.3 of this Ordinance.
(2) Approval.
(a) "Approval" means a documented action by the Town of Easton following
a review to determine and acknowledge the sufficiency of submitted
material to meet the requirements of a specified stage in a local
development review process.
(b) "Approval" does not mean an acknowledgement by the Town of Easton
that submitted material is automatically approved.
(3) Final project approval.
(a) "Final project approval" means approval of the final stormwater
management plan and erosion and sediment control plan required to
construct a project's stormwater management facilities.
(b) "Final project approval" also includes securing bonding or financing for
final development plans if either is required as a prerequisite for approval.
(4) "Preliminary project approval" means an approval as part of a local preliminary
development or planning review process that includes, at a minimum:
(a) An approved final stormwater management plan under the 2001
ordinance;
(b) An approved sketch plan in accordance with Ordinance #528 and/or
sketch subdivision plat per Ordinance #549 or amendments thereto. Such
plans in conjunction with 4(a), shall include at a minimum:
(i) The number of planned dwelling units or lots;
(ii) The proposed project density;
(iii) The proposed size and location of all land uses for the project;
(iv) A plan that identifies:
1. The proposed drainage patterns;
3
2. The location of all points of discharge from the site; and
3. The type, location, and size of all stormwater management
measures based on site-specific stormwater management
requirement computations; and
(v) Any other information required by the Town of Easton including,
but not limited to:
1. The proposed alignment, location, and construction type and
standard for all roads, access ways, and areas of vehicular
traffic;
2. A demonstration that the methods by which the development
will be supplied with water and wastewater service are
adequate; and
3. The size, type, and general location of all proposed wastewater
and water system infrastructure.
B. The Town of Easton may grant an administrative waiver to a development that received a
preliminary project approval prior to May 4, 2010. Administrative waivers expire
according to 1.3 C. of this Ordinance and may be extended according to 1.3 D. of this
Ordinance.
C. Expiration of Administrative Waivers.
(1) Except as provided for in 1.3 D. of this Ordinance, an administrative waiver shall
expire on:
(a) May 4, 2013, if the development does not receive final project approval
prior to that date; or
(b) May 4, 2017, if the development receives final project approval prior to
May 4, 2013.
(2) All construction authorized pursuant to an administrative waiver must be
completed by May 4, 2017 or, if the waiver is extended as provided in 1.3 D. of
this Ordinance, by the expiration date of the waiver extension.
D. Extension of Administrative Waivers.
(1) Except as provided in 1.3 D. (2) of this Ordinance, an administrative waiver shall
not be extended.
4
(2) An administrative waiver may only be extended if, by May 4, 2010 the
development:
(a) Has received a preliminary project approval; and
(b) Was subject to a Public Works Agreement, a Tax Increment Financing
approval, or an Annexation Agreement.
(3) Administrative waivers extended according to 1.3 D. (2) of this Ordinance shall
expire when the Public Works Agreement, the Tax Increment Financing approval,
or the Annexation Agreement expires.
2.0 DEFINITIONS
A. The following definitions are provided for the terms used in this Ordinance:
(1) "Administration" means the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE)
Water Management Administration (WMA).
(2) "Adverse impact" means any deleterious effect on waters or wetlands, including
their quality, quantity, surface area, species composition, aesthetics or usefulness
for human or natural uses which are or may potentially be harmful or injurious to
human health, welfare, safety or property, to biological productivity, diversity, or
stability or which unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property,
including outdoor recreation.
(3) "Agricultural land management practices" means those methods and procedures
used in the cultivation of land in order to further crop and livestock production
and conservation of related soil and water resources.
(4) "Applicant" means any person, firm, or governmental agency who executes the
necessary forms to procure official approval of a project or a permit to carry out
construction of a project.
(5) "Approving Agency" means the entity responsible for the review and approval of
stormwater management plans.
(6) "Aquifer" means a porous water bearing geologic formation generally restricted to
materials capable of yielding an appreciable supply of water.
(7) "Best management practice (BMP)" means a structural device or nonstructural
practice designed to temporarily store or treat stormwater runoff in order to
mitigate flooding, reduce pollution, and provide other amenities.
(8) "Channel protection storage volume (Cpv)" means the volume used to design
5
structural management practices to control stream channel erosion. Methods for
calculating the channel protection storage volume are specified in the 2000
Maryland Stormwater Design Manual.
(9) "Clearing" means the removal of trees and brush from the land but shall not
include the ordinary mowing of grass.
(10) "Design Manual" means the 2000 Maryland Stormwater Design Manual, and all
subsequent revisions, that serve as the official guide for stormwater management
principles, methods, and practices.
(11) "Detention structure" means a permanent structure for the temporary storage of
runoff which is designed so as not to create a permanent pool of water.
(12) “Developer” means an individual, partnership or corporation (or agent therefore)
that undertakes the responsibility for the development of a parcel of land.
(13) "Develop land" means to change the runoff characteristics of a parcel of land in
conjunction with residential, commercial, industrial, or institutional construction
or alteration.
(14) "Direct discharge" means the concentrated release of stormwater to tidal waters or
vegetated tidal wetlands from new development or redevelopment projects in the
Critical Area.
(15) "Drainage area" means that area contributing runoff to a single point measured in
a horizontal plane, which is enclosed by a ridge line.
(16) "Easement" means a grant or reservation by the owner of land for the use of such
land by others for a specific purpose or purposes, and which must be included in
the conveyance of land affected by such easement.
(17) "Environmental site design (ESD)" means using small-scale stormwater
management practices, nonstructural techniques, and better site planning to mimic
natural hydrologic runoff characteristics and minimize the impact of land
development on water resources. Methods for designing ESD practices are
specified in the Design Manual.
(18) "Exemption" means those land development activities that are not subject to the
stormwater management requirements contained in this Ordinance.
(19) "Extended detention" means a stormwater design feature that provides gradual
release of a volume of water in order to increase settling of pollutants and protect
downstream channels from frequent storm events. Methods for designing
extended detention BMPs are specified in the Design Manual.
6
(20) "Extreme flood volume (Qf)" means the storage volume required to control those
infrequent but large storm events in which overbank flows reach or exceed the
boundaries of the 100-year floodplain.
(21) "Final development site plan” means the last of three required plan approvals (and
sketch, preliminary development and final development site plan) that includes
the information necessary to allow all approvals and permits to be issued by the
approving agency.
(22) "Flow attenuation" means prolonging the flow time of runoff to reduce the peak
discharge.
(23) "Grading" means any act by which soil is cleared, stripped, stockpiled, excavated,
scarified, filled, or any combination thereof.
(24) "Impervious area" means any surface that does not allow stormwater to infiltrate
into the ground.
(25) "Infiltration" means the passage or movement of water into the soil surface.
(26) "Maximum extent practicable (MEP)" means designing stormwater management
systems so that all reasonable opportunities for using ESD planning techniques
and treatment practices are exhausted and only where absolutely necessary, a
structural BMP is implemented.
(27) "Off-site stormwater management" means the design and construction of a facility
necessary to control stormwater from more than one development.
(28) "On-site stormwater management" means the design and construction of systems
necessary to control stormwater within an immediate development.
(29) "Overbank flood protection volume (Qp)" means the volume controlled by
structural practices to prevent an increase in the frequency of out-of-bank
flooding generated by development. Methods for calculating the overbank flood
protection volume are specified in the Design Manual. In the Town of Easton, the
overbank flood control criteria is defined as preventing the post-development 2-
year and 10-year, 24 hour storm peak discharge rates from exceeding the predevelopment
2-year and 10-year, 24 hour storm peak discharge rates.
(30) "Person" means the federal government, the State, any county, municipal
corporation, or other political subdivision of the State, or any of their units, or an
individual receiver, trustee, guardian, executor, administrator, fiduciary, or
representative of any kind, or any partnership, firm, association, public or private
corporation, or any other entity.
(31) "Planning techniques" means a combination of strategies employed early in
7
project design to reduce the impact from development and to incorporate natural
features into a stormwater management plan.
(32) "Preliminary development site plan" means the second of three required plan
approvals that includes the information necessary to allow a detailed evaluation of
a proposed project.
(33) "Recharge volume (Rev)" means that portion of the water quality volume used to
maintain groundwater recharge rates at development sites. Methods for
calculating the recharge volume are specified in the Design Manual.
(34) "Redevelopment" means any construction, alteration, or improvement performed
on sites where existing land use is commercial, industrial, institutional, or
multifamily residential and existing site impervious area exceeds 40 percent.
(35) “Regional stormwater management facility” means a system of vegetative and/or
structural measures designed and constructed for quantitative and qualitative
control of surface runoff from more than one lot or parcel.
(36) "Retention structure" means a permanent structure that provides for the storage of
runoff by means of a permanent pool of water.
(37) "Retrofitting" means the implementation of ESD practices, the construction of a
structural BMP, or the modification of an existing structural BMP in a previously
developed area to improve water quality over current conditions.
(38) "Sediment" means soils or other surficial materials transported or deposited by the
action of wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion.
(39) "Site" means any tract, lot, or parcel of land, or combination of tracts, lots, parcels
of land that are in one ownership, or are contiguous and in diverse ownership,
where development is to be performed as part of a unit, subdivision, or project.
(40) “Sketch Site Plan” means the first of three required plan approvals that includes
the information necessary to allow an initial evaluation of a proposed project.
(41) "Stabilization" means the prevention of soil movement by any of various
vegetative and/or structural means.
(42) "Stormwater" means water that originates from a precipitation event.
(43) "Stormwater management system" means natural areas, ESD practices,
stormwater management measures, and any other structure through which
stormwater flows, infiltrates, or discharges from a site.
8
(44) "Stripping" means any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover
including tree removal, clearing, grubbing, and storage or removal of topsoil.
(45) “Town Engineer” means the Easton Town Engineer or his/her duly authorized
representative. The Town Engineer is empowered to review, coordinate,
interpret, and enforce the provisions of this ordinance, and to grant waivers and
variances where appropriate.
(46) "Variance" means the modification of the minimum stormwater management
requirements for specific circumstances such that strict adherence to the
requirements would result in unnecessary hardship and not fulfill the intent of this
Ordinance.
(47) "Waiver" means the reduction of stormwater management requirements by the
Town of Easton for a specific development on a case-by-case review basis.
(48) "Watercourse" means any natural or artificial stream, river, creek, ditch, channel,
canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine or wash, in and including
any adjacent area that is subject to inundation from overflow or flood water.
(49) "Water quality volume (WQv)" means the volume needed to capture and treat 90
percent of the average annual rainfall events at a development site. Methods for
calculating the water quality volume are specified in the Design Manual.
(50) "Watershed" means the total drainage area contributing runoff to a single point.
3.0 APPLICABILITY
3.1 Scope
No person shall develop any land for residential, commercial, industrial, or institutional uses
without providing stormwater management measures that control or manage runoff from such
developments, except as provided within this section. Stormwater management measures must
be designed consistent with the Design Manual and constructed according to an approved plan
for new development or the policies stated in section 3.4 of this Ordinance for redevelopment.
3.2 Exemptions
The following development activities are exempt from the provisions of this Ordinance and the
requirements of providing stormwater management:
A. Agricultural land management practices;
B. Additions or modifications to existing single family detached residential structures if they
comply with section 3.2 C. of this Ordinance;
9
C. Any developments that do not disturb over 5,000 square feet of land area;
D. Land development activities that the Administration determines will be regulated under
specific State laws, which provide for managing stormwater runoff.
E. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the Town of Easton from requiring stormwater
management controls upon evaluation of accumulative effects of previous exemptions.
3.3 Waivers/Watershed Management Plans
A. Except as provided in 3.3 B. of this ordinance, the Town of Easton shall grant stormwater
management quantitative control waivers only to those projects within areas where
watershed management plans have been developed consistent with section 3.3 F. of this
Ordinance. Written requests for quantitative stormwater management waivers shall be
submitted that contain sufficient descriptions, drawings, and any other information that is
necessary to demonstrate that ESD has been implemented to the MEP. A separate
written waiver request shall be required in accordance with the provisions of this section
if there are subsequent additions, extensions, or modifications to a development receiving
a waiver.
B. If watershed management plans consistent with section 3.3 F. of this Ordinance have not
been developed, stormwater management quantitative control waivers may be granted to
the following projects provided that it has been demonstrated that ESD has been
implemented to the MEP:
(1) That have direct discharges to tidally influenced receiving waters; or
(2) When the Town of Easton determines that circumstances exist that prevent the
reasonable implementation of quantity control practices.
C. Stormwater management qualitative control waivers apply only to:
(1) In-fill development projects where ESD has been implemented to the MEP and it
has been demonstrated that other BMPs are not feasible;
(2) Redevelopment projects if the requirements of section 3.4 of this Ordinance are
satisfied; or
(3) Sites where the Town of Easton determines that circumstances exist that prevent
the reasonable implementation of ESD to the MEP.
D. Waivers shall only be granted when it has been demonstrated that ESD has been
implemented to the MEP and must:
(1) Be on a case-by-case basis;
10
(2) Consider the cumulative effects of the Town of Easton waiver policy; and
(3) Reasonably ensure the development will not adversely impact stream quality.
E. If the Town of Easton has established an overall watershed management plan for a
specific watershed, then the Town of Easton may develop quantitative waiver and
redevelopment provisions that differ from sections 3.3B. and 3.4 of this Ordinance.
F. A watershed management plan developed for the purpose of implementing different
stormwater management policies for waivers and redevelopment shall:
(1) Include detailed hydrologic and hydraulic analyses to determine hydrograph
timing;
(2) Evaluate both quantity and quality management and opportunities for ESD
implementation;
(3) Include a cumulative impact assessment of current and proposed watershed
development;
(4) Identify existing flooding and receiving stream channel conditions;
(5) Be conducted at a reasonable scale;
(6) Specify where on-site or off-site quantitative and qualitative stormwater
management practices are to be implemented;
(7) Be consistent with the General Performance Standards for Stormwater
Management in Maryland found in the Design Manual; and
(8) Be approved by the Administration.
3.4 Redevelopment
A. Stormwater management plans are required by the Town of Easton for all redevelopment,
unless otherwise specified by watershed management plans developed according to
section 3.3 E. of this Ordinance. Stormwater management measures must be consistent
with the Design Manual.
B. All redevelopment designs shall:
(1) Reduce impervious area within the limit of disturbance (LOD) by at least 50
percent according to the Design Manual; or
11
(2) Implement ESD to the MEP to provide water quality treatment for at least 50
percent of the existing impervious area within the LOD; or
(3) Use a combination of section 3.4 B. (1) and (2) of this Ordinance for at least 50
percent of the existing site impervious area.
C. Alternative stormwater management measures may be used to meet the requirements in
section 3.4 B. of this Ordinance if the owner/developer satisfactorily demonstrates to the
Town of Easton that impervious area reduction has been maximized and ESD has been
implemented to the MEP. Alternative stormwater management measures include, but are
not limited to:
(1) An on-site structural BMP;
(2) An off-site structural BMP to provide water quality treatment for an area equal to
or greater than 50 percent of the existing impervious area; or
(3) A combination of impervious area reduction, ESD implementation, and an on-site
or off-site structural BMP for an area equal to or greater than 50 percent of the
existing site impervious area within the LOD.
D. The Town of Easton may develop separate policies for providing water quality treatment
for redevelopment projects if the requirements of sections 3.4 B and 3.4 C of this
Ordinance cannot be met. Any separate redevelopment policy shall be reviewed and
approved by the Administration and may include, but not be limited to:
(1) Retrofitting – Existing functioning stormwater best management practices (BMP)
and facilities may be used to handle runoff from existing treated lot coverage that
will not be disturbed. Plans that propose retrofitting shall demonstrate that the
existing practice or facility meets current standards and includes any
improvements necessary for the practice or facility to meet current standards;
(2) Stream restoration in the same 12-digit watershed as the proposed development
and an area restored equivalent to the area required for treatment;
(3) Pollution trading using the guidelines and criteria developed by the Maryland
Department of Agriculture;
(4) Design criteria based on watershed management plans developed according to
Section 3.3 E. of this Ordinance; or
(5) Fees paid that are dedicated exclusively to provide stormwater management.
E. The determination of what alternatives will be available may be made by the Town of
Easton at the appropriate point in the development review process. The Town of Easton
shall consider the prioritization of alternatives in 3.4 D. of this ordinance after it has been
12
determined that it is not practicable to meet the 2010 regulatory requirements using ESD.
In deciding what alternatives may be required, the Town Engineer may consider factors
including, but not limited to:
(1) Whether the project is in an area targeted for development incentives such as a
Priority Funding Area;
(2) Whether the project is necessary to accommodate growth consistent with
comprehensive plans; or
(3) Whether bonding and financing have already been secured based on an approved
development plan.
F. Stormwater management shall be addressed according to the new development
requirements in the Design Manual for any net increase in impervious area.
3.5 Variance
The Town of Easton may grant a written variance from any requirement of Section 4.0,
Stormwater Management Criteria, of this Ordinance if there are exceptional circumstances
applicable to the site such that strict adherence will result in unnecessary hardship and not fulfill
the intent of the Ordinance. A written request for variance shall be provided to the Town of
Easton and shall state the specific variances sought and reasons for their granting. The Town of
Easton shall not grant a variance unless and until sufficient justification is provided by the
person developing the land that that the implementation of ESD to the MEP has been
investigated thoroughly.
4.0 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CRITERIA
4.1 Minimum Control Requirements
A. The minimum control requirements established in this section and the Design Manual are
as follows:
(1) The Town of Easton shall require that the planning techniques, nonstructural
practices, and design methods specified in the Design Manual be used to
implement ESD to the MEP. The use of ESD planning techniques and treatment
practices must be exhausted before any structural BMP is implemented.
Stormwater management plans for development projects subject to this Ordinance
shall be designed using ESD sizing criteria, recharge volume, water quality
volume, and channel protection storage volume criteria according to the Design
Manual. The MEP standard is met when channel stability is maintained,
predevelopment groundwater recharge is replicated, nonpoint source pollution is
minimized, and structural stormwater management practices are used only if
determined to be absolutely necessary; and
13
(2) The Town of Easton shall require that the overbank flood protection volume for
the 2-year and 10-year frequency storm events be used to design BMP’s
according to the Design Manual; and
(3) Where conditions in a downstream conveyance system prohibit the proper
discharge of the 10 year pre-developed flow, the Town Engineer may require
additional onsite stormwater measures to reduce the allowable 10 year postdeveloped
flow in order to improve the function of the conveyance system; or
require the improvement of an off-site conveyance system; and
(4) For sites within the Tanyard Branch sub-watershed, the 10 year post-developed
site discharge at each study point shall not exceed the 2 year pre-developed site
discharge for each respective study point; and
(5) Onsite storm drain conveyance systems for public streets shall be designed to
convey the 10 year post developed flows. The allowable gutter spread for
roadways shall be 8 feet or half the lane width adjacent to the curb, whichever is
smaller.
B. Alternate minimum control requirements may be adopted subject to Administration
approval. The Administration shall require a demonstration that alternative requirements
will implement ESD to the MEP and control flood damages, accelerated stream erosion,
water quality, and sedimentation. Comprehensive watershed studies may also be
required.
C. Stormwater management and development plans where applicable, shall be consistent
with adopted and approved watershed management plans or flood management plans as
approved by the Maryland Department of the Environment in accordance with the Flood
Hazard Management Act of 1976.
4.2 Stormwater Management Measures
The ESD planning techniques and practices and structural stormwater management measures
established in this Ordinance and the Design Manual shall be used, either alone or in
combination in a stormwater management plan. A developer shall demonstrate that ESD has
been implemented to the MEP before the use of a structural BMP is considered in developing the
stormwater management plan.
A. ESD Planning Techniques and Practices.
(1) The following planning techniques shall be applied according to the Design
Manual to satisfy the applicable minimum control requirements established in
section 4.1 of this Ordinance:
(a) Preserving and protecting natural resources;
14
(b) Conserving natural drainage patterns;
(c) Minimizing impervious area;
(d) Reducing runoff volume;
(e) Using ESD practices to maintain 100 percent of the annual
predevelopment groundwater recharge volume;
(f) Using green roofs, permeable pavement, reinforced turf, and other
alternative surfaces;
(g) Limiting soil disturbance, mass grading, and compaction;
(h) Clustering development; and
(i) Any practices approved by the Administration.
(2) The following ESD treatment practices shall be designed according to the Design
Manual to satisfy the applicable minimum control requirements established in
section 4.1 of this Ordinance:
(a) Disconnection of rooftop runoff;
(b) Disconnection of non-rooftop runoff;
(c) Sheetflow to conservation areas;
(d) Rainwater harvesting;
(e) Submerged gravel wetlands;
(f) Landscape infiltration;
(g) Infiltration berms;
(h) Dry wells;
(i) Micro-bioretention;
(j) Rain gardens;
(k) Swales;
(l) Enhanced filters; and
15
(m) Any practices approved by the Administration.
(3) The use of ESD planning techniques and treatment practices specified in this
section shall not conflict with existing State law or local ordinances, regulations,
or policies. The Town of Easton shall modify planning and zoning ordinances
and public works codes to eliminate any impediments to implementing ESD to the
MEP according to the Design Manual.
B. Structural Stormwater Management Measures.
(1) The following structural stormwater management practices shall be designed
according to the Design Manual to satisfy the applicable minimum control
requirements established in section 4.1 of this Ordinance:
(a) Stormwater management ponds;
(b) Stormwater management wetlands;
(c) Stormwater management infiltration;
(d) Stormwater management filtering systems; and
(e) Stormwater management open channel systems.
(2) The performance criteria specified in the Design Manual with regard to general
feasibility, conveyance, pretreatment, treatment and geometry, environment and
landscaping, and maintenance shall be considered when selecting structural
stormwater management practices.
(3) Structural stormwater management practices shall be selected to accommodate the
unique hydrologic or geologic regions of the Town of Easton.
(4) Proprietary stormwater structures utilized for underground stormwater
management, i.e. Stormtech® or RainTank,™ shall be on the Administration’s
approved list and installed per the manufacturer’s specifications. All performance
criteria specified in the Stormwater Design Manual shall be met by such devices.
C. ESD planning techniques and treatment practices and structural stormwater management
measures used to satisfy the minimum requirements in section 4.1 of this Ordinance must
be recorded in the land records of Talbot County and remain unaltered by subsequent
property owners. Prior approval from the Town of Easton shall be obtained before any
stormwater management practice is altered.
D. Alternative ESD planning techniques and treatment practices and structural stormwater
measures may be used for new development runoff control if they meet the performance
16
criteria established in the Design Manual and all subsequent revisions and are approved
by the Administration. Practices used for redevelopment projects shall be approved by
the Town of Easton.
E. For the purposes of modifying the minimum control requirements or design criteria, the
owner/developer shall submit to the Town of Easton an analysis of the impacts of
stormwater flows downstream in the watershed. The analysis shall include hydrologic
and hydraulic calculations necessary to determine the impact of hydrograph timing
modifications of the proposed development upon an existing development, dam,
highway, structure, or natural point of restricted streamflow. The point of investigation is
to be established with the concurrence of the Town of Easton, downstream of the first
downstream tributary whose drainage area equals or exceeds the contributing area to the
project or stormwater management facility.
4.3 Specific Design Criteria
The basic design criteria, methodologies, and construction specifications, subject to the approval
of the Town of Easton and the Administration, shall be those of the Design Manual.
5.0 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLANS
5.1 Review and Approval of Stormwater Management Plans
A. For any proposed development, the owner/developer shall submit phased stormwater
management plans to the Town of Easton for review and approval. At a minimum, plans
shall be submitted for the sketch, preliminary development and final development site
plan, phases of project design. Each plan submittal shall include the minimum content
specified in section 5.2 of this Ordinance and meet the requirements of the Design
Manual and section 4.0 of this Ordinance.
B. The Town of Easton shall perform a comprehensive review of the stormwater
management plans for each phase of site design. Coordinated comments will be provided
for each plan phase that reflects input from all appropriate agencies including, but not
limited to the Talbot Soil Conservation District (SCD) and the Departments of Planning,
Zoning, and Public Works. All comments from the Town Engineer and other appropriate
agencies shall be addressed and approval received at each phase of project design before
subsequent submissions.
C. For sites with minimal improvements such as small redevelopment projects, the Town
Engineer has the discretion to combine the preliminary development phase and move
directly to the final development phase. This determination will be made at the sketch
site plan review phase.
5.2 Contents and Submission of Stormwater Management Plans
A. The owner/developer shall submit a sketch site plan that provides sufficient information
17
for an initial assessment of the proposed project and whether stormwater management
can be provided according to section 4.2 of this Ordinance and the Design Manual. Plans
submitted for concept approval shall include, but are not limited to:
(1) A map at a scale specified by the Town of Easton showing site location, existing
natural features, water and other sensitive resources, topography, and natural
drainage patterns;
(2) The anticipated location of all proposed impervious areas, buildings, roadways,
parking, sidewalks, utilities, and other site improvements;
(3) The location of the proposed limit of disturbance, erodible soils, steep slopes, and
areas to be protected during construction;
(4) Preliminary estimates of stormwater management requirements, the selection and
location of ESD practices to be used, and the location of all points of discharge
from the site;
(5) A narrative that supports the concept design and describes how ESD will be
implemented to the MEP; and
(6) Any other information required by the approving agency.
B. Following sketch site plan approval by Planning and Zoning, the owner/developer shall
submit preliminary development site plans that reflect comments received during the
previous review phase. Plans submitted for preliminary development site plan approval
shall be of sufficient detail to allow site development to be reviewed and include but not
be limited to:
(1) All information provided during the concept plan review phase;
(2) Final site layout, exact impervious area locations and acreages, proposed
topography, delineated drainage areas at all points of discharge from the site, and
stormwater volume computations for ESD practices and quantity control
structures;
(3) A proposed erosion and sediment control plan that contains the construction
sequence, any phasing necessary to limit earth disturbances and impacts to natural
resources and an overlay plan showing the types and locations of ESD and
erosion and sediment control practices to be used;
(4) A narrative that supports the site development design, describes how ESD will be
used to meet the minimum control requirements, and justifies any proposed
structural stormwater management measure; and
(5) The Town of Easton Stormwater Management Check List.
18
(6) Any other information required by the Town of Easton.
C. Following preliminary development site plan approval by Planning and Zoning, the
owner/developer shall submit final development site plans that reflect the comments
received during the previous review phase. Plans submitted for final development site
plan approval shall be of sufficient detail to allow all approvals and permits to be issued
according to the following:
(1) Final erosion and sediment control plans shall be submitted according to COMAR
26.17.01.05; and
(2) Final stormwater management plans shall be submitted for approval in the form of
construction drawings and be accompanied by a report that includes sufficient
information to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed runoff control design.
D. Reports submitted for final stormwater management plan approval shall include, but are
not limited to:
(1) Geotechnical investigations including soil maps, borings, site specific
recommendations, and any additional information necessary for the final
stormwater management design;
(2) Drainage area maps depicting predevelopment and post development runoff flow
path segmentation and land use;
(3) Hydrologic computations of the applicable ESD and unified sizing criteria
according to the Design Manual for all points of discharge from the site;
(4) Hydraulic and structural computations for all ESD practices and structural
stormwater management measures to be used;
(5) A narrative that supports the final stormwater management design; and
(6) Any other information required by the Town of Easton.
E. Construction drawings submitted for final stormwater management plan approval shall
include, but are not limited to:
(1) A vicinity map;
(2) Existing and proposed topography and proposed drainage areas, including areas
necessary to determine downstream analysis for proposed stormwater
management facilities;
(3) Any proposed improvements including location of buildings or other structures,
19
impervious surfaces, storm drainage facilities, and all grading;
(4) The Town of Easton Stormwater Management Checklist;
(5) The location of existing and proposed structures and utilities;
(6) An easement plat, rights-of-way plat and ESD components, structural BMP
facilities with applicable description. Maintenance responsibilities shall be
defined;
(7) The delineation, if applicable, of the 100-year floodplain and any on-site
wetlands;
(8) Structural and construction details including representative cross sections for all
components of the proposed drainage system or systems, and stormwater
management facilities;
(9) All necessary construction specifications;
(10) A sequence of construction;
(11) Data for total site area, disturbed area, new impervious area, and total impervious
area;
(12) A table showing the ESD and unified sizing criteria volumes required in the
Design Manual;
(13) A table of materials to be used for stormwater management facility planting;
(14) All soil boring logs and locations;
(15) An inspection and maintenance schedule;
(16) Certification by the owner/developer that all stormwater management
construction will be done according to this plan;
(17) An as-built certification signature block to be executed after project completion;
and
(18) Copy of Maintenance Agreement;
(19) Any other information required by the Town of Easton.
F. If a stormwater management plan involves direction of some or all runoff off of the site,
it is the responsibility of the developer to obtain from adjacent property owners any
easements or other necessary property interests concerning flowage of water. Approval
20
of a stormwater management plan does not create or affect any right to direct runoff onto
adjacent property without that property owner's permission.
5.3 Preparation of Stormwater Management Plans
A. The design of stormwater management plans shall be prepared by any individual whose
qualifications are acceptable to the Town of Easton. The Town of Easton requires that
the design be prepared and sealed by a professional engineer. All plats to be recorded
shall be prepared by a professional land surveyor. All landscaping plans for ESD shall be
prepared by a licensed landscape architect. All professionals shall be licensed in the
State, as necessary to protect the public or the environment.
B. If a stormwater BMP requires either a dam safety permit from the Administration
or small pond approval from the Talbot Conservation District, the Town of Easton
shall require that the design be prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the
State.
6.0 PERMITS
6.1 Permit Requirement
A grading or building permit may not be issued for any parcel or lot unless final erosion and
sediment control and stormwater management plans have been approved by the Town of Easton
as meeting all the requirements of the Design Manual and this Ordinance. Where appropriate, a
building permit may not be issued without:
A. Recorded easements for the stormwater management facility and easements to provide
adequate access for inspection and maintenance from a public right-of-way;
B. A recorded stormwater management maintenance agreement as described in section 9.2
of this Ordinance; and
C. A performance bond as described in section 7.0 of this Ordinance.
6.2 Permit Fee
Non-refundable permit fees will be collected at each phase of stormwater management plan
submittal. Permit fees will provide for the cost of plan review, administration, and management
of the permitting process, and inspection of all projects subject to this Ordinance. A permit fee
schedule shall be established by the Town of Easton based upon the relative complexity of the
project and may be amended from time to time.
6.3 Permit Suspension and Revocation
Any grading or building permit issued by the Town of Easton may be suspended or revoked
after written notice is given to the permittee for any of the following reasons:
21
A. Any violation(s) of the conditions of the stormwater management plan approval;
B. Changes in site runoff characteristics upon which an approval or waiver was granted;
C. Construction is not in accordance with the approved plan;
D. Noncompliance with correction notice(s) or stop work order(s) issued for the
construction of any stormwater management practice; and
E. An immediate danger exists in a downstream area in the opinion of the Town of Easton.
6.4 Permit Conditions
In granting an approval for any phase of site development, the Town of Easton may impose
such conditions that may be deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this
Ordinance and the preservation of public health and safety.
7.0 PERFORMANCE BOND
The Town of Easton shall require from the developer a surety or cash bond, irrevocable letter of
credit, or other means of security acceptable to the Town of Easton prior to the issuance of any
building and/or grading permit for the construction of a development requiring stormwater
management. The amount of the security shall not be less than the total estimated construction
cost of all stormwater management facilities and other facilities to be dedicated to the Town of
Easton. The bond required in this section shall include provisions relative to forfeiture for failure
to complete work specified in the approved stormwater management plan, compliance with all of
the provisions of this Ordinance, and other applicable laws and regulations, and any time
limitations. The bond shall not be fully released without a final inspection of the completed
work by the Town of Easton, submission of "as-built" plans, and certification of completion by
the Town of Easton that all stormwater management facilities comply with the approved plan
and the provisions of this Ordinance. A procedure may be used to release parts of the bond held
by the Town of Easton after various stages of construction have been completed and accepted by
the Town of Easton. The procedures used for partially releasing performance bonds must be
specified by the Town of Easton in writing prior to stormwater management plan approval.
8.0 INSPECTION
8.1 Inspection Schedule and Reports
A. The developer shall notify the Town Engineer at least 48 hours before commencing any
work in conjunction with site development, the stormwater management plan, and upon
completion of the project.
B. Regular inspections shall be made and documented for each ESD planning technique and
practice at the stages of construction specified in the Design Manual by the Town
Engineer, its authorized representative, or certified by a professional engineer licensed in
22
the State of Maryland. At a minimum, all ESD and other nonstructural practices shall be
inspected upon completion of final grading, the establishment of permanent stabilization,
and before issuance of use and occupancy approval.
C. Written inspection reports shall include:
(1) The date and location of the inspection;
(2) Whether construction was in compliance with the approved stormwater
management plan;
(3) Any variations from the approved construction specifications; and
(4) Any violations that exist.
D. The owner/developer and on-site personnel shall be notified in writing when violations
are observed. Written notification shall describe the nature of the violation and the
required corrective action.
E. No work shall proceed on the next phase of development until the Town of Easton
inspects and approves the work previously completed and furnishes the developer with
the results of the inspection reports as soon as possible after completion of each required
inspection.
8.2 Inspection Requirements During Construction
A. At a minimum, regular inspections shall be made and documented at the following
specified stages of construction:
(1) For surface ponds and sub-surface chambers:
(a) Upon completion of excavation to sub-foundation and when required,
installation of structural supports or reinforcement for structures, including
but not limited to:
(i) Core trenches for structural embankments;
(ii) Inlet and outlet structures, anti-seep collars or diaphragms, and
watertight connectors on pipes; and
(iii) Trenches for enclosed storm drainage facilities;
(b) During placement of structural fill, concrete, and installation of piping and
catch basins;
(c) During backfill of foundations and trenches;
23
(d) During embankment construction; and
(e) Upon completion of final grading and establishment of permanent
stabilization;
(f) For sub-surface stormwater chambers or rain tanks, surveyed elevations of
the stone foundation shall be taken at each corner and a minimum of two
within the perimeter.
(2) Wetlands – at the stages specified for pond construction in section 8.2 A (1) of
this Ordinance, during and after wetland reservoir area planting, and during the
second growing season to verify a vegetation survival rate of at least 50 percent.
(3) For infiltration trenches:
(a) During excavation to subgrade;
(b) During placement and backfill of under drain systems and observation
wells;
(c) During placement of geotextiles and all filter media;
(d) During construction of appurtenant conveyance systems such as diversion
structures, pre-filters and filters, inlets, outlets, and flow distribution
structures; and
(e) Upon completion of final grading and establishment of permanent
stabilization.
(4) For infiltration basins – at the stages specified for pond construction in section
8.2A. (1) of this Ordinance and during placement and backfill of under drain
systems.
(5) For filtering systems:
(a) During excavation to subgrade;
(b) During placement and backfill of under drain systems;
(c) During placement of geotextiles and all filter media;
(d) During construction of appurtenant conveyance systems such as flow
diversion structures, pre-filters and filters, inlets, outlets, orifices, and flow
24
distribution structures; and
(e) Upon completion of final grading and establishment of permanent
stabilization.
(6) For open channel systems:
(a) During excavation to subgrade;
(b) During placement and backfill of under drain systems for dry swales;
(c) During installation of diaphragms, check dams, or weirs; and
(d) Upon completion of final grading and establishment of permanent
stabilization.
B. The Town of Easton may, for enforcement purposes, use any one or a combination of the
following actions:
(1) A notice of violation shall be issued specifying the need for corrective action if
stormwater management plan noncompliance is identified;
(2) A stop work order shall be issued for the site by the Town of Easton if a violation
persists;
(3) Bonds or securities shall be withheld or the case may be referred for legal action
if reasonable efforts to correct the violation have not been undertaken; or
(4) In addition to any other sanctions, a civil action or criminal prosecution may be
brought against any person in violation of the Stormwater Management Subtitle,
the Design Manual, or this Ordinance.
C. Any step in the enforcement process may be taken at any time, depending on the severity
of the violation.
D. Once construction is complete, "as-built" plan certification shall be submitted by either a
professional engineer or professional land surveyor licensed in the State of Maryland to
ensure that ESD planning techniques, treatment practices, and structural stormwater
management measures and conveyance systems comply with the specifications contained
in the approved plans. At a minimum, "as-built" certification shall include a set of
drawings comparing the approved stormwater management plan with what was
constructed. The Town of Easton may require additional information.
E. The Town of Easton shall submit notice of construction completion to the Administration
on a form supplied by the Administration for each structural stormwater management
practice within 45 days of construction completion. The type, number, total drainage
area, and total impervious area treated by all ESD techniques and practices shall be
25
reported to the Administration on a site by site basis. If BMPs requiring SCD approval
are constructed, notice of construction completion shall also be submitted to the
appropriate SCD.
9.0 MAINTENANCE
9.1 Maintenance Inspection
A. The Town of Easton shall ensure that preventative maintenance is performed by
inspecting all ESD treatment systems and structural stormwater management measures.
Inspection shall occur during the first year of operation and at least once every 3 years
thereafter. In addition, a maintenance agreement between the owner and the Town of
Easton shall be executed for privately-owned ESD treatment practices and structural
stormwater management measures as described in section 9.2 of this Ordinance.
B. Inspection reports shall be maintained by the Town of Easton for all ESD treatment
systems and structural stormwater management measures.
C. Inspection reports for ESD treatment systems and structural stormwater management
measures shall include the following:
(1) The date of inspection;
(2) Name of inspector;
(3) An assessment of the quality of the stormwater management system related to
ESD treatment system efficiency and the control of runoff to the MEP;
(4) The condition of:
(a) Vegetation or filter media;
(b) Fences or other safety devices;
(c) Spillways, valves, or other control structures;
(d) Embankments, slopes, and safety benches;
(e) Reservoir or treatment areas;
(f) Inlet and outlet channels or structures;
(g) Underground drainage;
(h) Sediment and debris accumulation in storage and forebay areas;
26
(i) Any nonstructural practices to the extent practicable; and
(j) Any other item that could affect the proper function of the stormwater
management system.
(5) Description of needed maintenance.
D. Upon notifying an owner of the inspection results, the owner shall have 30 days, or other
time frame mutually agreed to between the Town of Easton and the owner, to correct the
deficiencies discovered. The Town of Easton shall conduct a subsequent inspection to
ensure completion of the repairs.
E. If repairs are not properly undertaken and completed, enforcement procedures following
section 9.2 C. of this Ordinance shall be followed by the Town of Easton.
F. If, after an inspection by the Town of Easton, the condition of a stormwater management
facility is determined to present an immediate danger to public health or safety because of
an unsafe condition, improper construction, or poor maintenance, the Town of Easton
shall take such action as may be necessary to protect the public and make the facility
safe. Any cost incurred by the County/Municipality shall be assessed against the
owner(s), as provided in section 9.2 C. of this Ordinance.
9.2 Maintenance Agreement
A. Prior to the issuance of any building permit for which stormwater management is
required, the Town of Easton shall require the applicant or owner to execute an
inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served
by a private stormwater management facility. Such agreement shall provide for access to
the facility at reasonable times for regular inspections by the Town of Easton or its
authorized representative to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper working
condition to meet design standards.
B. The agreement shall be in a form approved by the Town Attorney and shall be
recorded by the applicant or owner in the land records of the County/Municipality.
C. The agreement shall also provide that, if after notice by the Town of Easton to correct a
violation requiring maintenance work, satisfactory corrections are not made by the
owner(s) within a reasonable period of time (30 days maximum), the Town of Easton
may perform all necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition. The
owner(s) of the facility shall be assessed the cost of the work and any penalties. This
may be accomplished by placing a lien on the property, which may be placed on the tax
bill and collected as ordinary taxes. The Town may collect it by such other action at law
as it deems appropriate.
9.3 Maintenance Responsibility
27
A. The owner of a property that contains private stormwater management facilities installed
pursuant to this Ordinance, or any other person or agent in control of such property, shall
maintain in good condition and promptly repair and restore all ESD practices, grade
surfaces, walls, drains, dams and structures, vegetation, erosion and sediment control
measures, and other protective devices in perpetuity. Such repairs or restoration and
maintenance shall be in accordance with previously approved or newly submitted plans.
B. A maintenance schedule shall be developed for the life of any structural stormwater
management facility or system of ESD practices and shall state the maintenance to be
completed, the time period for completion, and the responsible party what will perform
the maintenance. This maintenance schedule shall be printed on the approved stormwater
management plan.
10.0 APPEALS
Any person aggrieved by the action of any official charged with the enforcement of this
Ordinance, as the result of the disapproval of a properly filed application for a permit, issuance
of a written notice of violation, or an alleged failure to properly enforce the Ordinance in
regard to a specific application, shall have the right to appeal the action to the Easton Board of
Zoning Appeals. The appeal shall be filed in writing within 30 days of the date of official
transmittal of the final decision or determination to the applicant, state clearly the grounds on
which the appeal is based, and be processed in the manner prescribed for hearing
administrative appeals under the Town of Easton Zoning Ordinance. For the purposes of this
Ordinance, the Board of Appeals shall be the Board of Appeals established in the Town of
Easton Zoning Ordinance. All provisions governing the Board of Zoning Appeals with respect
to members, provisions for alternates, quorum, procedure, chairman, terms of office, etc., shall
be applicable to appeals from this Ordinance.
11.0 SEVERABILITY
If any portion of this Ordinance is held invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance.
It is the intent of the Town of Easton that this Ordinance shall stand, even if a section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion may be found invalid.
12.0 PENALTIES
Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not more than Five
Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) or imprisonment not exceeding 1 year or both for each violation
with costs imposed in the discretion of the court and not to exceed Fifty Thousand Dollars
($50,000.00). Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense. In addition, the
Town of Easton may institute injunctive, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceedings
of law to correct violations of this Ordinance. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall have
the right to issue temporary or permanent restraining orders, injunctions or mandamus, or other
appropriate forms of relief.
28
13.0 EFFECTIVE DATE
An be it further enacted, that this Ordinance shall take effect twenty (20) days from the date it
becomes adopted.
Article I
Purpose and General Provisions
§31–1 Purpose
The Town Council has determined that to meet the requirements of Natural Resources Article, §§5-1601—
5-1612, Annotated Code of Maryland, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be enacted.
Article II
Forest and Tree Conservation Definitions
§31– 2 Definitions
In this Ordinance the following terms have the meanings indicated.
"Afforestation" means:
A. Establishment of a forest on an area from which forest cover has been absent for a long period of time;
or
“Agriculture” means the planting of open areas which are not presently in forest cover and includes all methods of
production and management of livestock, crops, vegetation and soil.
A. This includes, but is not limited to, the related activities of tillage, fertilization, pest control, harvesting
and marketing. It also includes, but is not limited to, the activities of feeding, housing and maintaining
of animals such as cattle, dairy cows, sheep, goats, hogs, horses and poultry and handling their byproducts.
"Agricultural activity" means farming activities including plowing, tillage, cropping, installation of best
management practices, seeding, cultivating, and harvesting for production of food and fiber products (except
commercial logging and timber harvesting operations), the grazing and raising of livestock, aquaculture, sod
production, orchards, nursery and other products cultivated as part of a recognized commercial enterprise.
"Agricultural and resource areas" means undeveloped areas zoned for densities of less than or equal to one
dwelling unit per 5 acres. There is no current zoning classification which corresponds to this definition.
"Applicant" means a person who is applying for subdivision, project plan approval or for a grading and or sediment
and erosion control permit or who has received approval of a Forest Stand Delineation or Forest Conservation
Plan.
"Approved forest management plan" means a document:
A. Approved by the Department of Natural Resources forester assigned to the Town of Easton in Talbot
County; and
B. Which operates as a protective agreement for forest conservation as described in the Natural Resources
Article, §§5-1607(e)—(f), Annotated Code of Maryland.
"Caliper" means the diameter measured at 2 inches above the root collar.
“Canopy tree” means a tree that when mature commonly reaches a height of at least 24 feet.
"Champion tree" means the largest tree of its species within the United States, the State of Maryland, Talbot
County, or the Town of Easton.
"Commercial and industrial uses" means manufacturing operations, office complexes, shopping centers, and
other similar uses and their associated storage areas, yarding and parking areas, and corresponds to the
following Classifications within the Town of Easton’s Zoning code: Central Business (CR), General
Commercial (CG), Select Industrial (I-1) and General Industrial (I-2).
"Commercial logging or timber harvesting operations" means the cutting and removing of tree stems from a site
for commercial purposes, leaving the root mass intact.
"Critical habitat area" means a critical habitat for an endangered species and its surrounding protection area. A
critical habitat area shall:
A. Be likely to contribute to the long-term survival of the species;
B. Be likely to be occupied by the species for the foreseeable future; and
C. Constitute habitat of the species which is considered critical under Natural Resources Article, §§4-2A-
04 and 10-2A-06, Annotated Code of Maryland.
"Critical habitat for endangered species" means a habitat occupied by an endangered species as determined or
listed under Natural Resources Article, §§4-2A-04 and 10-2A-04, Annotated Code of Maryland.
"Declaration of intent" means:
A. A signed and notarized statement by a landowner or the landowner's agent certifying that the activity on
the landowner's property:
(1) Is for certain activities exempted under this Ordinance or Natural Resources Article, §§5-103
and 5-1601—5-1612, Annotated Code of Maryland,
(2) Does not circumvent the requirements of this Ordinance or Natural Resources Article, §§5-103
and 5-1601—5-1612, Annotated Code of Maryland, and
(3) Does not conflict with the purposes of any other declaration of intent; or
B. The document required under COMAR 08.19.01.05 or this Ordinance.
"Department" means the Department charged with implementing the local forest conservation program. The
Town of Easton Department of Planning and Zoning is charged with the implementing the local forest
conservation program.
“Development” means any activity, other than normal agricultural activities, which materially affects the existing
condition or use of any land, or any structure.
“Development project” means the subdivision, grading, sediment and erosion control or construction project
activities occurring on a specific tract that is 40,000 square feet or greater.
A. "Development project" includes redevelopment.
"Development project completion" means for the purposes of afforestation, reforestation, or payment into a fund:
A. The release of the development bond, if required;
B. Acceptance of the project's streets, utilities, and public services by the Department; or
C. Designation by the Department or State that a:
(1) Development project has been completed, or
(2) Particular stage of a staged development project, including a planned unit development, has
been completed.
"Forest" means a biological community dominated by trees and other woody plants covering a land area of 10,000
square feet or greater.
B. "Forest" includes:
(1) Areas that have at least 100 live trees per acre with at least 50 percent of those trees having a
2-inch or greater diameter at 4.5 feet above the ground and larger; and
(2) Areas that have been cut but not cleared.
C. "Forest" does not include orchards.
"Forest Conservancy District Board" means the forestry board created for each State forest conservancy district
under Natural Resources Article, §§5-601—5-610, Annotated Code of Maryland.
"Forest conservation" means the retention of existing forest or the creation of new forest at the levels set by the
State or Department.
“Forest Conservation Account” means an account established by the Town of Easton for the retention of
payments made in lieu of afforestation or reforestation.
"Forest Conservation and Management Agreement" means an agreement as stated in Tax-Property Article, §8-
211, Annotated Code of Maryland.
"Forest Conservation Technical Manual" means the State of Maryland Department of Natural Resources
Technical Manual incorporated by reference, used to establish standards of performance required in preparing
Forest Stand Delineations and Forest Conservation Plans.
"Forest Conservation Plan" means a plan approved pursuant to Natural Resources Article, §§5-1606 and 5-1607,
Annotated Code of Maryland.
"Forest cover" means the area of a site meeting the definition of forest.
"Forest management plan" means a plan establishing best conservation and management practices for a
landowner in assessment of the resource values of forested property.
"Forest Stand Delineation" means the methodology for evaluating the existing vegetation on a site proposed for
development, as provided in the State of Maryland Department of Natural Resources Technical Manual.
"Growing season" means the period of consecutive frost-free days as stated in the current soil survey for Talbot
County as published by the National Cooperative Soil Survey Program, 16 U.S.C. §590 (a)—(f).
"High density residential areas" means areas zoned for densities greater than 1 dwelling unit per acre, including
both existing and planned development and their associated infrastructure, such as roads, utilities and water
and sewer service and corresponds to the following Zoning Classifications in the Town of Easton Zoning code;
Residential District R-7A, Residential District R-10A and Residential District R-10M.
"Institutional development area" means schools, colleges and universities, military installations, transportation
facilities, utility and sewer projects, government offices and facilities, golf courses, recreation areas, parks, and
cemeteries and corresponds to any use listed within the Institutional Uses classification of the Table of
Permissible Uses of the Town of Easton Zoning Code.
"Intermittent stream" means a stream in which surface water is absent during a part of the year as shown on the
most recent 7.5-minute topographic quadrangle published by the United States Geologic Survey as confirmed
by field verification.
"Landscaping plan" means a plan:
A. Drawn to scale showing dimensions and details for reforesting an area at least 35 feet wide and covering
2,500 square feet or greater in size;
B. Using native or indigenous plants when appropriate; and
C. Which is made part of an approved Forest Conservation Plan.
"Linear project" means a project which:
A. Is elongated with nearly parallel sides;
B. Is used to transport a utility product or public service not otherwise contained in an application for
subdivision such as electricity, gas, water, sewer, communications, trains and vehicles; and
C. May traverse fee simple properties through defined boundaries or established easement rights.
"Local agency" means each unit in the executive, legislative or judicial branch of the Town of Easton government,
including an office or department of public works.
"Lot" means a unit of land, the boundaries of which have been established by subdivision of a larger parcel, and
which will not be the subject of further subdivision, as defined by Natural Resources Article, §5-1601,
Annotated Code of Maryland, and this Ordinance without an approved Forest Stand Delineation and Forest
Conservation Plan.
"Maintenance agreement" means the short-term management agreement associated with afforestation or
reforestation plans required under Natural Resources Article, §5-1605, Annotated Code of Maryland, and this
Ordinance.
"Medium density residential areas" means areas zoned for densities greater than 1 dwelling unit per 5 acres and
less than or equal to 1 dwelling unit per acre, including both existing and planned development and their
associated infrastructure, such as roads, utilities and water and sewer service, and corresponds to the Zoning
Classification Agricultural District A-1.
"Minor development project" means a project:
A. On less than 5 acres of land containing not more than four lots per acre; or
B. Substantively similar as defined by the Department and approved by the State.
"Mixed use development" means a single, relatively high-density development project, usually commercial in
nature, which includes two or more types of uses and has no current corresponding zoning districts within the
Town of Easton.
"Natural regeneration" means the natural establishment of trees and other vegetation with at least 400 woody,
free-to-grow seedlings per acre, which are capable of reaching a height of at least 20 feet at maturity.
"Net tract area" means:
A. Except in agriculture and resource areas, the total area of a site, including both forested and non-forested
areas, to the nearest 1/10 acre, reduced by that area found to be within the boundaries of the 100-
yearyear floodplain; and
B. In agriculture and resource areas, the part of the total tract for which land use will be changed or will no
longer be used for primarily agricultural activities, reduced by that area found to be within the
boundaries of the 100-yearyear floodplain; and
C. For a linear project:
(1) The area of a right-of-way width, new access roads, and storage; or
(2) The limits of disturbance as shown on an application for sediment and erosion control approval
or in a capital improvements program project description.
"Non-tidal wetlands" means an area that is:
(1) Inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and under normal conditions does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically
adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation; and
(2) Considered a non-tidal wetland in accordance with the publication known as the "Federal
Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands," published in 1989 and as
may be amended and interpreted by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
A. "Non-tidal wetlands" does not include tidal wetlands regulated under Natural Resources Article, Title 9,
of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
"Offsite" means outside of the limits of the area encompassed by the tract including the areas classified as a one
hundred (100) year floodplain.
"Onsite" means within the limits of the area encompassed by the tract including the areas classified as a one
hundred (100) year floodplain.
"100-year flood" means a flood which has a 1 percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Except for Class III waters (natural trout streams), a body of water with watershed less than 400 acres is
excluded.
"100-year floodplain" means an area along or adjacent to a stream or body of water, except tidal waters, that is
capable of storing or conveying floodwaters during a 100-year frequency storm event, or a 100-year flood.
"Perennial stream" means a stream containing surface water throughout an average rainfall year, as shown on the
most recent 7.5-minute topographic quadrangle published by the United States Geologic Survey, as confirmed
by field verification.
"Person" means the federal government, the State, a county, municipal corporation, or other political subdivision of
the State, or any of their units, or an individual, contractor, receiver, trustee, guardian, executor, administrator,
fiduciary, or representative of any kind, or any partnership, firm, association, public or private corporation, or
any of their affiliates, or any other entity.
"Planned unit development" means a development comprised of a combination of land uses or varying intensities
of the same land use in accordance with an integrated plan that provides flexibility in land use design approved
by the Town of Easton with at least 20 percent of the land permanently dedicated to open space and
corresponds to the following Zoning Classifications in the Easton Zoning code: PUD, C-M, and any project
developed in accordance with the provisions of the PR Overlay District.
“Priority funding area” means an area designated as a priority funding area under State Finance and Procurement
Article, §5-7b-02, Annotated Code of Maryland.
"Project plan" means a construction, grading, or sediment and erosion control activity on an area of 40,000 square
feet or greater by a local agency.
"Public utility" means any:
A. Transmission line or electric generating station; or
B. Water, sewer, electric, gas, telephone, television cable service line, communications including access to
the internet.
"Reforestation" or "reforested" means the:
(1) Creation of a biological community dominated by trees and other woody plants containing at
least 100 live trees per acre with at least 50 percent of those trees having the potential of
attaining a 2-inch or greater diameter measured at 4.5 feet above the ground, within 7 years; or
(2) Establishment of a forest according to procedures set forth in State of Maryland Department of
Natural Resource’s Forest Conservation Technical Manual.
A. "Reforestation" or "reforested" includes landscaping of areas under an approved landscaping plan
establishing a forest at least 35 feet wide and covering 2,500 square feet or more of area.
B. "Reforestation" for a linear project involving overhead transmission lines may consist of a biological
community dominated by trees and woody shrubs with no minimum height or diameter criteria.
"Regulated activity" means any of the following activities, when that activity occurs on a unit of land which is
40,000 square feet or greater:
A. Subdivision;
B. Grading;
C. An activity that requires a sediment and erosion control permit; or
D. Project plan of the Town of Easton.
"Retention" means the deliberate holding and protecting of existing trees, shrubs, or plants on the site according to
established standards as provided in State of Maryland Department of Natural Resource’s Forest Conservation
Technical Manual.
"Sediment and erosion control permit" means the authorization of an activity regulated under a sediment and
erosion control plan as provided in Environment Article, Title 4, Annotated Code of Maryland.
"Seedling" means an unbranched woody plant, less than 24 inches in height and having a diameter of less than 1/2
inch measured at 2 inches above the root collar.
"Selective clearing" means the careful and planned removal of trees, shrubs, and plants using specific standards
and protection measures under an approved Forest Conservation Plan.
"Sketch Plan " means the initial point in the development review process when the applicant prepares and submits
a sketch plan in accordance with the definitions and standards of the Town of Easton's Zoning Ordinance or
Subdivision Regulations.
"Stream buffer" means all lands lying within 50 feet, measured from the top of each normal bank of a perennial or
intermittent stream.
“Stream restoration project” means an activity that:
A. Is designed to stabilize stream banks or enhance stream function or habitat located within an existing
stream, waterway or floodplain;
B. Avoids and minimizes impacts to forests and provides for replanting on-site an equivalent number of
trees to the number removed by the project;
C. Maybe performed under a municipal separate storm sewer system permit, a watershed implementation
plan growth offset, or another plan administered by the State or local government to achieve or maintain
water quality standards; and
D. Is not performed to satisfy storm water management, wetlands mitigation or any other regulatory
requirement associated with proposed development activity.
"Subdivision" means any division of a unit of land into 2 or more lots or parcels for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of transfer of ownership, sale, lease or development.
"Timber harvesting" means a tree-cutting operation affecting 1 or more acres of forest or developed woodland
within a 1-year interval that disturbs 5,000 square feet or more of forest floor.
A. "Timber harvesting" does not include grubbing and clearing of root mass.
"Tract" means property or unit of land subject to an application for a grading or sediment and erosion control
permit, subdivision approval, project plan approval, or areas subject to this Ordinance.
"Tract for a planned unit development" means the entire property subject to a planned unit development.
"Tree" means a large, branched woody plant having one or several self-supporting stems or trunks that reach a
height of at least 20 feet at maturity.
"Variance" means relief from Natural Resources Article, §§5-1601—5-1612, Annotated Code of Maryland, or this
Ordinance.
A. "Variance" does not mean a zoning variance.
"Watershed" means all land lying within an area described as a sub-basin in water quality regulations adopted by
the Department of the Environment under COMAR 26.08.02.08.
"Whip" means an unbranched woody plant greater than 24 inches in height and having a diameter of less than 1
inch measured at 2 inches above the root collar.
Article III
Application
§31–3.1 Relevance
Except as provided in §31-3.2 of this article, this Ordinance applies to:
A. A person making application for a subdivision, project plan, grading, or sediment and erosion control
approval on units of land 40,000 square feet or greater after the effective date of this Ordinance;
B. A public utility not exempt under §31-3.2 E and F of this article;
C. A unit of county or municipal government, including a public utility or public works project, making
application for a subdivision, project plan, grading, or sediment and erosion control approval on areas
40,000 square feet or greater.
§31–3.2 Exemptions
This Ordinance does not apply to:
A. Highway construction activities under Natural Resources Article, §5-103, Annotated Code of Maryland;
B. Areas governed by the Chesapeake Bay Critical Area Protection Law, Natural Resources Article, §§8-
1801—8-1817, Annotated Code of Maryland, including those areas into which Critical Area forest
protection measures have been extended under Natural Resources Article, §5-1602(c), Annotated Code
of Maryland;
C. Commercial logging and timber harvesting operations, including harvesting conducted subject to the
forest conservation and management program under Tax-Property Article, §8-211, Annotated Code of
Maryland, that are completed:
(1) Before July 1, 1991; or
(2) After July 1, 1991, on property which:
(a) Has not been the subject of application for a grading permit for development within 5
years after the logging or harvesting operation, and
(b) Is the subject of a declaration of intent as provided for in §3.3 of this article, approved
by the Department;
D. Agricultural activities not resulting in a change in land use category, including agricultural support
buildings and other related structures built using accepted best management practices, except that a
person engaging in an agricultural activity clearing 40,000 square feet or greater of forest within a 1-
year period, may not receive an agricultural exemption, unless the person files a declaration of intent as
provided for in §31-3.3 of this article which includes:
(1) A statement that the landowner or landowner's agent will practice agriculture on that portion of
the property for 5 years from the date of the declaration; and
(2) A sketch map of the property which shows the area to be cleared;
E. The cutting or clearing of public utility rights-of-way licensed under Public Utility Companies, §§7-207
and 7-208 or 7-205, Annotated Code of Maryland, or land for electric generating stations licensed under
Public Utility Companies, §§7-207 and 7-208 or 7-205, Annotated Code of Maryland, if:
(1) Required certificates of public convenience and necessity have been issued in accordance with
Natural Resources Article, §5-1603(f), Annotated Code of Maryland; and
(2) Cutting or clearing of the forest is conducted to minimize the loss of forest;
F. Routine maintenance or emergency repairs of public utility rights-of-way licensed under Public Utility
Companies, §§7-207 and 7-208 or 7-205, Annotated Code of Maryland;
G. Except for a public utility subject to §31-3.2F of this article, routine maintenance or emergency repairs
of a public utility right-of-way if:
(1) The right-of-way existed before the effective date of this Ordinance; or
(2) The right-of-way's initial construction was approved under this Ordinance;
H. A residential construction activity conducted on an existing single lot of any size of record at the time of
application, or a linear project not otherwise exempted under this Ordinance, if the activity:
(1) Does not result in the cumulative cutting, clearing, or grading of more than 20,000 square feet
of forest;
(2) Does not result in the cutting, clearing, or grading of a forest that is subject to the requirements
of a previous Forest Conservation Plan approved under this Ordinance; and
(3) Is the subject of a declaration of intent filed with the Department, as provided for in §31-3.3 of
this article, stating that the lot will not be the subject of a regulated activity within 5 years of
the cutting, clearing, or grading of forest.
I. Strip or deep mining of coal regulated under Environment Article, Title 15, Subtitle 5 or 6, Annotated
Code of Maryland;
J. Non-coal surface mining regulated under Environment Article, Title 15, Subtitle 8, Annotated Code of
Maryland;
K. An activity required for the purpose of constructing a dwelling house intended for the use of the owner,
or a child of the owner, if the activity:
(1) Does not result in the cutting, clearing, or grading of more than 20,000 square feet of forest;
and
(2) Is the subject of a declaration of intent filed with the Department, as provided for in §31-3.3 of
this article, which states that transfer of ownership may result in a loss of exemption;
L. A preliminary plan of subdivision or a grading or sediment and erosion control plan approved before
July 1, 1991;
M. A planned unit development that, by December 31, 1991, has:
(1) Met all requirements for planned unit development approval; and
(2) Obtained initial development plan approval by the Department;
N. A real estate transfer to provide a security, leasehold, or other legal or equitable interest, including a
transfer of title, of a portion of a lot or parcel, if:
(1) The transfer does not involve a change in land use, or new development or redevelopment,
with associated land-disturbing activities; and
(2) Both the grantor and grantee file a declaration of intent as provided for in §31-3.3 of this
article;
O. An activity on a previously developed area covered by impervious surface and located in the priority
funding area;
P. Maintenance or retrofitting of a storm water management structure that may include clearing of
vegetation or removal and trimming of trees, if the maintenance or retrofitting is within the original
limits of disturbance for construction of the existing structure, or within any maintenance easement for
access to the structure; or
Q. A stream restoration project, as defined in Article II §31-2.57 of this Ordinance, for which the applicant
for a grading or sediment and erosion control permit has executed a binding maintenance agreement of
at least 5 years with the affected property owner or owners.
R. The cutting or clearing of trees at the airport property to comply with the requirements of 14 CFR S
77.25 relating to objects affecting navigable airspace, provided that the Federal Aviation Administration
has determined that the trees are a hazard to aviation.
§31–3.3 Declaration of Intent.
A. The purpose of the declaration of intent is to verify that the proposed activity is exempt under Natural
Resources Article, §§5-103 and 5-1601—5-1612, Annotated Code of Maryland, and this Ordinance.
B. A person seeking an exemption under §31-3.2C, D, H, K and N of this article shall file a declaration of
intent with the Department.
C. The declaration of intent is effective for 5 years.
D. The existence of a declaration of intent does not preclude another exempted activity on the property
subject to a declaration of intent, if the activity:
(1) Does not conflict with the purpose of any existing declaration of intent; and
(2) Complies with the applicable requirements for an exempted activity.
E. If a regulated activity on the area covered by the declaration of intent occurs within 5 years of the
effective date of the declaration of intent:
(1) There shall be an immediate loss of exemption; or
(2) There may be a noncompliance action taken by the Department, as appropriate, under this
Ordinance.
F. An applicant may apply for a regulated activity on that area of the property not covered under the
declaration of intent if the requirements of this Ordinance are satisfied.
G. The Department may require a person failing to file a declaration of intent or found in noncompliance
with a declaration of intent to:
(1) Meet the retention, afforestation, and reforestation requirements established in Articles III—
XIII of this Ordinance;
(2) Pay a noncompliance fee of 30 cents ($.30) per square foot of forest cut or cleared under the
declaration of intent;
(3) Be subject to other enforcement actions appropriate under Natural Resources Article, §§5-
1601—5-1612, Annotated Code of Maryland, and this Ordinance; or
(4) File a declaration of intent with the Department.
H. In its determination of appropriate enforcement action, the Department may consider whether failure to
file a declaration of intent by a person required to file is a knowing violation of this Ordinance.
I. Commercial Logging and Timber Harvesting - The requirements for a declaration of intent may be
satisfied by a forest management plan for the entire tract, prepared by a forester, licensed in Maryland,
according to Business Occupations and Professions Article, Title 7, Annotated Code of Maryland, which
outlines management practices needed to meet the stated objectives for a minimum of 5 years.
J. Agricultural Activities or Commercial Logging and Timber Harvesting - A declaration of intent may be
part of an amended sediment and erosion control plan which ensures that the activity meets the
conditions for an exemption as stated in Article III, §31-3.2 C and D of this Ordinance.
Article IV
General Requirements
§31–4.1 Application Threshold
A person making application after the effective date of January 1st 1993, for subdivision, local agency
development project plan approval, grading, sediment and erosion control or construction project occurring
on a specific tract that is 40,000 square feet or greater shall:
A. Submit to the Department a Forest Stand Delineation and a Forest Conservation Plan for the lot or parcel
on which the activity is located; and
B. Use methods approved by the Department, as provided in the State of Maryland Department of Natural
Resource’s Forest Conservation Technical Manual, to protect retained forests and trees during
construction.
§31–4.2 Funds for Regulated Activities
If a local agency or person using state funds makes application to conduct a regulated activity, the
provisions of COMAR 08.19.04.01D—G shall apply.
Article V
Forest Stand Delineation
§31–5.1 Criteria
A. A Forest Stand Delineation shall be submitted at the sketch plan stage for a subdivision or project plan
approval, as the sketch plan processes are defined in the Town of Easton's Zoning Code and before a
grading permit application or before a sediment and erosion control application is submitted for the tract
being developed.
B. The delineation shall be prepared by a licensed forester, licensed landscape architect, or a qualified
professional who meets the requirements stated in COMAR 08.19.06.01A.
C. The delineation shall be used during the sketch review process to determine the most suitable and
practical areas for forest conservation and shall contain the following components:
(1) A topographic map delineating intermittent and perennial streams, and steep slopes over 25
percent;
(2) A soils map delineating soils with structural limitations, hydric soils, or soils with a soil K
value greater than 0.35 on slopes of 15 percent or more;
(3) Forest stand maps indicating species, location and size of trees and showing dominant and
codominant forest types;
(4) Location of 100-year floodplains;
(5) Information required by the State of Maryland Department of Natural Resource’s Forest
Conservation Technical Manual; and
(6) Other information the Department determines is necessary to implement this Ordinance.
D. If approved by the Department, a simplified delineation, a concept plan or plat, preliminary plat or plan,
sediment and erosion control plan or other appropriate document, verified by a site visit, if appropriate,
may substitute for the Forest Stand Delineation:
(1) When no forest cover is disturbed during a construction activity; and
(2) If designated to be under a long term protective agreement.
E. The Department shall consider a simplified Forest Stand Delineation, or other substitute plan described
in §31-5.1D, complete if it includes:
(1) All requirements under §31-5.1C (1), (2), (4), (5) and (6) of this article;
(2) A map showing existing forest cover as verified by field inspection; and
(3) Other information required by this Ordinance.
F. An approved Forest Stand Delineation may remain in effect for a period not longer than 5 years.
G. Time for Submittal.
(1) Within 30 calendar days after receipt of the Forest Stand Delineation, the Department shall
notify the applicant whether the Forest Stand Delineation is complete and correct.
(2) If the Department fails to notify the applicant within 30 days, the delineation shall be treated as
complete and correct.
(3) The Department may require further information or provide for an additional 15 calendar days
under extenuating circumstances.
Article VI
Forest Conservation Plan
§31–6.1 General Provisions
A. In developing a Forest Conservation Plan, the applicant shall give priority to techniques for retaining
existing forest on the site.
B. If existing forest on the site subject to a Forest Conservation Plan cannot be retained, the applicant shall
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Department:
(1) How techniques for forest retention have been exhausted;
(2) Why the priority forests and priority areas specified in Natural Resources Article, §5-1604(c)
(1), Annotated Code of Maryland, cannot be left in an undisturbed condition:
(3) If priority forests and priority areas cannot be left undisturbed, how the sequence for
afforestation or reforestation will be followed in compliance with Natural Resources Article,
§5-1607, Annotated Code of Maryland;
(4) Where on the site in priority areas afforestation or reforestation will occur in compliance with
Natural Resources Article, §5-1607, Annotated Code of Maryland; and
(5) How the disturbance to the priority forests and priority areas specified in Natural Resources
Article, §5-1607(c) (2), Annotated Code of Maryland, qualifies for a variance.
C. If the applicant proposes to make a payment into the local Forest Conservation Account instead of
providing afforestation or reforestation, the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Department that the requirements for afforestation or reforestation onsite or offsite cannot be reasonably
accomplished.
D. Non-tidal Wetlands. A regulated activity within the net tract area that occurs wholly or partly in areas
regulated as non-tidal wetlands under Environment Article, Title 9, Annotated Code of Maryland, is
subject to both the non-tidal wetlands regulatory requirements and the requirements of this Ordinance,
subject to the following:
(1) Any area of forest in the net tract area, including forest in non-tidal wetlands that is retained,
shall be counted towards forest conservation requirements under this law;
(2) For the purpose of calculating reforestation mitigation under this Ordinance, a forested nontidal
wetland permitted to be cut or cleared and required to be mitigated under Environment
Article, Title 9, Annotated Code of Maryland, shall be shown on the Forest Conservation Plan
and subtracted on an acre-for-acre basis from the total amount of forest to be cut or cleared as
part of a regulated activity;
(3) Non-tidal wetlands shall be considered to be priority areas for retention and replacement;
(4) Forested non-tidal wetland identification and delineation should be included at the earliest
stage of planning to assist the applicant in avoidance and reduction of impacts to the non-tidal
wetlands and to avoid delay in the approval process.
§31–6.2 Preliminary Forest Conservation Plan
A. A preliminary Forest Conservation Plan shall be prepared by a licensed forester, a licensed landscape
architect, or a qualified professional who meets the requirements stated in COMAR 08.19.06.01A.
B. A preliminary Forest Conservation Plan shall:
(1) Be submitted with the preliminary plan of subdivision or proposed project plan;
(2) Include the approved Forest Stand Delineation for the site;
(3) Include a table that lists the proposed values of the following, in square feet:
(a) Net tract area,
(b) Area of forest conservation required, and
(c) Area of forest conservation that the applicant proposes to provide, including both
onsite and offsite areas;
(4) Include a clear graphic indication of the forest conservation provided on the site drawn to
scale, showing areas where retention of existing forest or afforestation or reforestation is
proposed;
(5) Include an explanation of how the provisions of §31-6.1 of this article have been met;
(6) In the case of afforestation or reforestation, include a proposed afforestation or reforestation
plan;
(7) Include a proposed construction timetable showing the sequence of forest conservation
procedures;
(8) Show the proposed limits of disturbance;
(9) Show proposed stockpile areas;
(10) Incorporate a proposed 2-year maintenance agreement that shows how areas designated for
afforestation or reforestation will be maintained to ensure protection and satisfactory
establishment;
(11) Information required by the Forest Conservation Technical Manual; and
(12) Other information the Department determines is necessary to implement this Ordinance.
C. The review of the preliminary Forest Conservation Plan shall be concurrent with the review of the
preliminary subdivision or site plan.
D. During the different stages of the review process, the preliminary Forest Conservation Plan may be
modified provided the Department approves of the changes.
§31–6.3 The Final Forest Conservation Plan
A. A final Forest Conservation Plan shall be prepared by a licensed forester, a licensed landscape architect,
or a qualified professional who meets the requirements stated in COMAR 08.19.06.01A.
B. A final Forest Conservation Plan shall:
(1) Be submitted with the following:
(a) A final subdivision plan,
(b) A final project plan,
(c) An application for a grading permit and;
(d) An application for a sediment and erosion control permit;
(2) Show proposed locations and types of protective devices to be used during construction
activities to protect trees and forests designated for conservation;
(3) In the case of afforestation or reforestation, include an afforestation or reforestation plan, with
a timetable and description of needed site and soil preparation, species, size, and spacing to be
used;
(4) Incorporate a binding 2-year maintenance agreement specified in COMAR 08.19.05.01 that
details how the areas designated for afforestation or reforestation will be maintained to ensure
protection and satisfactory establishment, including:
(a) Watering, and
(b) A reinforcement planting provision if survival rates fall below required standards, as
provided in the State of Maryland Department of Natural Resource’s Forest
Conservation Technical Manual;
(5) Incorporate a long-term binding protective agreement as specified in COMAR 08.19.05.02
that:
(a) Provides protection for areas of forest conservation, including areas of afforestation,
reforestation, retention and
(b) Limits uses in areas of forest conservation to those uses that are designated and
consistent with forest conservation, including recreational activities and forest
management practices that are used to preserve forest(s);
(6) Include the substantive elements required under §31-6.2B (2)— (5), (7)— (9) and (11) of this
article, as finalized elements of the Forest Conservation Plan; and
(7) Other information the Department determines is necessary to implement this Ordinance.
C. Time for Submittal.
(1) Within 45 calendar days after receipt of the final Forest Conservation Plan, the Department
shall notify the applicant whether the Forest Conservation Plan is complete and approved.
(2) If the Department fails to notify the applicant within 45 calendar days, the plan shall be treated
as complete and approved.
(3) The Department may require further information or extend the deadline for an additional 15
calendar days under extenuating circumstances.
(4) At the request of the applicant, the Department may extend the deadline under extenuating
circumstances.
D. The Department's review of a final Forest Conservation Plan shall be concurrent with the review of the
final subdivision or project plan, grading permit application, or sediment and erosion control application
associated with the project.
E. The Department may revoke an approved Forest Conservation Plan if it finds that:
(1) A provision of the plan has been violated;
(2) Approval of the plan was obtained through fraud, misrepresentation, a false or misleading
statement or omission of relevant or material fact(s); or
(3) Changes in the development or in the condition of the site necessitate preparation of a new or
amended Plan.
F. The Department may issue a stop work order against a person who violates a provision of this Ordinance
or a regulation, order, approved Forest Conservation Plan or maintenance agreement.
G. Before revoking approval of a Forest Conservation Plan, the Department shall notify the violator in writing and
provide an opportunity for a hearing.
Article VII
Afforestation and Retention
§31–7.1 Afforestation Requirement
A person making application after the effective date of this Ordinance for subdivision, local agency
development project plan approval, grading, sediment and erosion control or construction project occurring
on a specific tract that is 40,000 square feet or greater shall:
A. Conduct afforestation on the lot or parcel in accordance with the following:
(1) A tract having less than 20 percent of the net tract area in forest cover shall be afforested up to
at least 20 percent of the net tract area for the following land use categories:
(a) Agriculture and resource areas, and
(b) Medium density residential areas;
(2) A tract with less than 15 percent of its net tract area in forest cover shall be afforested up to at
least 15 percent of the net tract area for the following land use categories:
(a) Institutional development areas,
(b) High density residential areas,
(c) Mixed use and planned unit development areas, and
(d) Commercial and industrial use areas;
B. Comply with the following when cutting into forest cover that is currently below the afforestation
percentages described in §31-7.1A (1) and (2) of this article:
(1) The required afforestation level shall be determined by the amount of forest existing before
cutting or clearing begins; and
(2) Forest cut or cleared below the required afforestation level shall be reforested or afforested at a
2 to 1 ratio (2:1) and added to the amount of afforestation necessary to reach the minimum
required afforestation level, as determined by the amount of forest existing before cutting or
clearing began.
§31–7.2 Retention
The following trees, shrubs, plants, and specific areas are considered priority for retention and protection
and shall be left in an undisturbed condition unless the applicant has demonstrated, to the satisfaction of the
Department that reasonable efforts have been made to protect them and the plan cannot reasonably be
altered:
A. Trees, shrubs and plants located in sensitive areas including the 100-year floodplain, intermittent and
perennial streams and their buffers, coastal bays and their buffers, steep slopes, non-tidal wetlands and
critical habitats; and
B. Contiguous forest that connects the largest undeveloped or most vegetated tracts of land within and
adjacent to the site.
§31–7.3 Retention Excepting a Variance
The following trees, shrubs, plants and specific areas are considered priority for retention and protection
and shall be left in an undisturbed condition unless the applicant has demonstrated, to the satisfaction of the
Department that the applicant qualifies for a variance in accordance with §31-14.1 of this article:
A. Trees, shrubs, or plants determined to be rare, threatened, or endangered under:
(1) The federal Endangered Species Act of 1973 in 16 U.S.C. §§1531—1544 and in 50 CFR 17,
(2) The Maryland Nongame and Endangered Species Conservation Act, Natural Resources
Article, §§10-2A-01—10-2A-09, Annotated Code of Maryland, and
(3) COMAR 08.03.08;
B. Trees that:
(1) Are part of an historic site,
(2) Are associated with an historic structure; or
(3) Have been designated by the State or the Department as a National, State or County champion
tree; and
C. Any tree having a diameter measured at 4.5 feet above the ground of:
(1) 30 inches or more; or
(2) 75 percent or more of the diameter, measured at 4.5 feet above the ground, of the current State
champion tree of that species as designated by the Department of Natural Resources.
Article VIII
Reforestation
§31–8.1 Forest Conservation Threshold
A. There is a forest conservation threshold established for all land use categories, as provided in Subsection
B of this article. The forest conservation threshold means the percentage of the net tract area at which
the reforestation requirement changes from a ratio of 1/4 acre planted for each acre removed above the
threshold to a ratio of 2 acres planted for each acre removed below the threshold.
B. After reasonable efforts to minimize the cutting or clearing of trees and other woody plants have been
exhausted in the development of a subdivision or project plan, grading and sediment and erosion control
activities, and implementation of the Forest Conservation Plan, the Forest Conservation Plan shall
provide for reforestation, purchase of credits from a forest mitigation bank, or payment into the Forest
Conservation Account, according to the formula set forth in Subsections B and C of this article and
consistent with §31-8.1 of this article, and the following forest conservation thresholds for the
applicable land use category:
Category of Use Threshold Percentage
(1) Agricultural and resource areas 50 percent;
(2) Medium density residential areas 25 percent;
(3) Institutional development areas 20 percent;
(4) High density residential areas 20 percent;
(5) Mixed use and planned unit development areas 15 percent;
(6) Commercial and industrial use areas 15 percent.
C. Calculations.
(1) For all existing forest cover measured to the nearest 1/10th acre cleared on the net tract area
above the applicable forest conservation threshold, the area of forest removed shall be
reforested at a ratio of 1/4 acre planted for each acre removed.
(2) Each acre of forest retained on the net tract area above the applicable forest conservation
threshold shall be credited against the total number of acres required to be reforested under
paragraph (1) of this subsection. The calculation of the credit shall be according to the criteria
provided in the Department’s Forest Conservation Technical Manual.
(3) For all existing forest cover measured to the nearest 1/10th acre cleared on the net tract area
below the applicable forest conservation threshold, the area of forest removed shall be
reforested at a ratio of 2 acres planted for each acre removed below the threshold.
Article IX
Priorities and Time Requirements for Afforestation and Reforestation
§31–9.1 Sequences for Afforestation and Reforestation
A. After techniques for retaining existing forest on the site have been exhausted, the preferred sequence for
afforestation and reforestation, as determined by the Department, is as follows:
(1) Forest creation in accordance with a Forest Conservation Plan using one or more of the
following:
(a) Transplanted or nursery stock,
(b) Whip and seedling stock; or
(c) Natural regeneration where it can be adequately shown to meet the objective of the
Department’s Forest Conservation Technical Manual;
(2) Tree management plan within the Town of Easton’s population center in conformance with
Economic Growth, Resource Protection and Planning Act of 1992, or in any other designated
area approved by the Department, the use of:
(a) Street trees as a permissible step in the priority sequence for afforestation or
reforestation. Mature canopy coverage may be granted full credit as a mitigation
technique, and
(b) Acquisition of an off-site protection easement on existing forested areas not currently
protected in perpetuity as a mitigation technique, in which case the afforestation or
reforestation credit granted may not exceed 50 percent of the area of forest cover
protected;
(3) When all other options, both on-site and off-site have been exhausted, landscaping may be
provided as a mitigation technique conducted under an approved landscaping plan that
establishes a forest at least 35 feet wide and covering at least 2,500 square feet of area.
B. A sequence other than the one described in Subsection A of this article may be used for a specific
project, if necessary, to achieve the objectives of the Town of Easton land use policies, or to take
advantage of opportunities to consolidate forest conservation efforts upon approval by the Town of
Easton.
C. The following are considered a priority for afforestation and reforestation:
(1) Those techniques that enhance existing forest and involve selective clearing or supplemental
planting on-site;
(2) On-site afforestation or reforestation where the retention options have been exhausted, using
methods selected in accordance with Subsection E of this section, and the location being
selected in accordance with this subsection;
(3) Off-site afforestation or reforestation in the same watershed or in accordance with an approved
master plan where the applicant has demonstrated that no reasonable alternative on-site exists,
or where:
(a) Any on-site priority areas for afforestation or reforestation have been planted in
accordance with this subsection; and
(b) The applicant has justified to the Department's satisfaction that environmental
benefits associated with off-site afforestation or reforestation exceeds those derived
from on-site planting.
D. In the cases cited in Subsection C of this section, the method shall be selected in accordance with
Subsection E of this section and the location shall be selected in accordance with Subsection C of this
section.
E. Standards for meeting afforestation or reforestation requirements shall be established using one or more
of the following methods:
(1) Establish or enhance forest buffers adjacent to intermittent and perennial streams, and coastal
bays and their buffers, to widths of at least 50 feet;
(2) Establish or increase existing forested corridors to connect existing forests within or adjacent
to the site and, where practical, forested corridors should be a minimum of 300 feet in width
to facilitate wildlife movement;
(3) Establish or enhance forest buffers adjacent to critical habitats where appropriate;
(4) Establish or enhance forested areas in the 100-year floodplains;
(5) Establish plantings to stabilize slopes of 25 percent or greater and slopes of 15 percent or
greater with a soil K value greater than 0.35 including the slopes of ravines or other natural
depressions;
(6) Establish buffers adjacent to areas of differing land use when appropriate, or adjacent to
highways or utility rights-of-way;
(7) Establish forest areas adjacent to existing forests to increase the overall area of contiguous
forest cover, when appropriate; and
(8) Use native plant materials for afforestation or reforestation, when appropriate.
F. Upon development project completion, the person required to provide afforestation or reforestation under this
article shall accomplish it within one year or two growing seasons, whichever is greater.
Article X
Payment In Lieu of Afforestation and Reforestation
§31–10.1 Forest Conservation Account
A. There is established a Forest Conservation Account in the local program.
B. If a person subject to this Ordinance demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Department that
requirements for reforestation or afforestation onsite or offsite cannot be reasonably accomplished; the
person shall contribute money into the Town of Easton Forest Conservation Account:
(1) For a project inside a priority funding area, as defined in Natural Resources Article, §5-1610,
Annotated Code of Maryland, at a rate of thirty and one-half ($30.5) cents per square foot of
the area of required planting with the amount adjusted by the Department based on the
previous year’s inflation rate; and
(2) For a project outside a priority funding area, at a rate of thirty-six and six-tenths ($36.6) cents
per square foot of the area of required planting.
C. Money contributed in lieu of afforestation or reforestation under this article shall be paid prior to
development and or project plan approval.
D. The Town shall accomplish the reforestation or afforestation efforts for which the money was deposited
within 2 years or 3 growing seasons, whichever is a greater, upon receipt of the payment.
E. Money deposited into the Town of Easton’s Forest Conservation Account:
(1) May be spent on the costs directly related to reforestation and afforestation, including site
identification, acquisition, preparation, maintenance of existing forests and achieving urban
canopy goals;
(2) Shall be identified according to individual development project activities; and
(3) May not revert to the general fund.
F. Sites for Afforestation or Reforestation Using Account Money.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection G of this section, the reforestation or afforestation
requirement under this article shall occur within the corporate limits of the Town of Easton.
(2) If the reforestation or afforestation cannot be reasonably accomplished within the Town, then
the reforestation or afforestation shall occur within Talbot County or the watershed of the State
of Maryland.
Article XI
Recommended Tree Species
§31–11.1 Recommended Tree Species List
A. Tree species used for afforestation or reforestation shall be native to the Maryland’s Eastern Shore,
when appropriate, and selected from a list of approved species established by the Department.
B. The Department shall adopt a list of tree species to be used for any required afforestation or reforestation
and incorporate it into the Department’s Forest Conservation Technical Manual. The Town of Easton’s
Zoning Code provides a list of tree species to be used for any required afforestation or reforestation.
Article XII
Financial Security for Afforestation and Reforestation
§31–12.1 Bonding
A. A person required to conduct afforestation or reforestation under this article shall furnish financial
security in the form of a bond, an irrevocable letter of credit or other security approved by the
Department. The surety shall:
(1) Assure that the afforestation, reforestation, and the associated maintenance agreement are
conducted and maintained in accordance with the approved Forest Conservation Plan;
(2) Be in an amount equal to the estimated cost, as determined by the Department, of afforestation
and reforestation efforts; and
(3) Be in a form and of a content approved by the Department.
B. After one growing season, the person required to file a bond under §31-12.1A of this article may request
reduction of the amount of the bond or other financial security by submitting a written request to the
Department with a justification for reducing the bond or other financial security amount, including
estimated or actual costs to ensure afforestation or reforestation requirements are met.
C. The Department shall determine whether a lesser amount is sufficient to cover the cost of afforestation
or reforestation, taking into account the following:
(1) The number of acres;
(2) The proposed method of afforestation or reforestation;
(3) The cost of planting materials or replacement materials;
(4) The cost of maintenance of the afforestation or reforestation project; and
(5) Other relevant factors.
D. If, after two growing seasons, the plantings associated with the afforestation or reforestation meet or
exceed the standards of the Town’s Forest Conservation Technical Manual, the amount of the cash
bond, letter of credit, surety bond, or other security shall be returned or released.
E. The Forest Conservation Program may incorporate the financial security set forth in §31-12.1A—D of this article
or in COMAR 08.19.05.01B.
Article XIII
Standards for Protecting Trees from Construction Activities
§31–13.1 Protection Devices
A. The Town of Easton hereby adopts those standards for the protection of trees from construction activity.
B. Before cutting, clearing, grading or construction begins on a site for which a Forest Conservation Plan is required
by this article, the applicant shall demonstrate to the Department that protective devices have been established.
Article XIV
Variances
§31–14.1 Procedure
A. A person may request a variance from this Ordinance or the requirements of Natural Resources Article,
§§5-1601—5-1612, Annotated Code of Maryland, if the person demonstrates that enforcement would
result in unwarranted hardship to the person.
B. An applicant for a variance shall:
(1) Describe the special conditions peculiar to the property which would cause the unwarranted
hardship;
(2) Describe how enforcement of these rules will deprive the applicant of rights commonly
enjoyed by others in similar areas;
(3) Verify that the granting of the variance will not confer on the applicant a special privilege that
would otherwise be denied to other applicants;
(4) Verify that the variance request is not based on conditions or circumstances which are the
result of actions by the applicant;
(5) Verify that the request does not arise from a condition relating to land or building use, either
permitted or nonconforming, on a neighboring property; and
(6) Verify that the granting of a variance will not adversely affect water quality.
C. The Department shall make findings that the applicant has met the requirements in Subsections A and B
of this article before the Department may grant a variance.
D. Notice of a request for a variance shall be given to the Department of Natural Resources within 15 days
of receipt of a request for a variance.
E. There is established by this Ordinance the right and authority of the Department of Natural Resources to initiate
or intervene in an administrative, judicial or other original proceeding or appeal in the State concerning an approval
of a variance under Natural Resources Article, §§5-1601—5-1612, Annotated Code of Maryland, or this Ordinance.
Article XV
Penalties
§31–15.1 Enforcement
A. Noncompliance Fees.
(1) A person found to be in noncompliance with this Ordinance, regulations adopted under this
Ordinance, the Forest Conservation Plan or the associated 2-year maintenance agreement shall
be assessed by the Department the penalty of thirty cents ($.30) per square foot of the area
found to be in noncompliance with required forest conservation effort.
(2) Money collected under Subsection A (1) of this article shall be deposited in the Forest
Conservation Account as required by Article X of this Ordinance, and may be used by the
Department for purposes related to implementing this Ordinance including afforestation and
reforestation efforts.
B. Violation.
(1) In addition to the provisions under Subsection A of this article, a person who violates a
provision of this Ordinance or a regulation or order adopted or issued under this Ordinance is
liable for a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000), which may be recovered in a
civil action brought by the Department.
(2) Each day a violation continues, it shall be considered a separate violation.
C. The Department may seek an injunction requiring the person to cease violation of this Ordinance and
take corrective action to restore or reforest an area.
D. The Town may adopt the enforcement provisions under COMAR 08.19.06.03.
Article XVI
Annual Report
§31–16.1 Deadline and Contents
On or before March 1st of each year, the Department shall submit to the Department of Natural Resources a
report which contains the:
A. Number, location and type of projects subject to the provisions of this Ordinance;
B. Amount and location of acres cleared, conserved, and planted, including any areas located within the
one hundred (100) year floodplain, in connection with a development project;
C. Amount of reforestation and afforestation fees and noncompliance penalties collected and expended;
D. Costs of administering and implementing the Forest Conservation Program;
E. Number, location and types of violations and types of enforcement activities conducted.
Article XVII
Biennial Review by the Department of Natural Resources
§31–17.1 Deadline and Contents
The Department shall submit the necessary documentation to comply with COMAR 08.19.02.04.
Article XVIII
Effective Date and Subsequent Amendments
§31-18.1 Enacted
This Ordinance is hereby enacted and becomes effective April 8, 2018. This Ordinance may be amended as
required. All amendments to this Ordinance are subject to the approval of the Department of Natural Resources.