Perryville Code – Chapter 1 General Provisions
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
§ 1-1. Reenactment of Charter.
§ 1-2. Adoption of Code.
§ 1-3. Code to supersede prior ordinances.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code to be on file.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
§ 1-6. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
§ 1-7. Sale of Code books.
§ 1-8. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
§ 1-9. Severability of Code provisions.
§ 1-10. Repealer.
§ 1-11. Ordinances saved from repeal.
§ 1-12. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
§ 1-13. Effective date.
§ 1-14. Posting and publication requirements.
§ 1-15. Mailing of copies of Code and Charter.
ARTICLE II
Legislation Adopted During Codification
ARTICLE III
Charter Amendments
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Commissioners of the Town of Perryville: Art. I,
12-6-83 as Res. No. 83-1. Amendments noted where applicable.]
101 1 - 25 - 84
Perryville Code – Chapter 1 General Provisions
ARTICLE I
ADOPTION OF CODE
[Adopted 12-6-83 as Res. No. 83-1]
§ 1-1. Reenactment of Charter.
Be it resolved by the commissioners of Perryville, Maryland, that the existing Charter
of the Town of Perryville is hereby repealed, and a new Charter is hereby enacted, which
consists of the section of the attached Code of the Town of Perryville entitled the
“Charter”, being §§ C1-1 through C12-6 of said code, with § C13-1 through C13-8 added
4-7-1992 by Res. No. 92-1.
§ 1-2. Adoption of Code.
The Charter, the ordinances and certain resolutions of the Town of Perryville of a
general and permanent nature, adopted by the Town Commissioners of the Town of
Perryville, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and sections by General
Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of the Charter and Chapters 1 through 85, together
with an Appendix, all as attached hereto and designated the “Code of the Town of
Perryville”, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the Code of the Town
of Perryville, hereinafter known and referred to as the “Code”.
§ 1-3. Code to supersede prior ordinances.
This resolution and the code shall supersede all other general and permanent
ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this code, except such ordinances as are
hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or continued in force. Upon adoption, this
resolution will be included in the code as Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article 1,
Adoption of Code.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code to be on file.
A copy of the code in loose-leaf form, serially numbered No. 1, has been filed in the
office of the Town Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this resolution; and, if this resolution shall be adopted, such
copy shall be certified by the Clerk of the Town of Perryville by impressing thereon the
seal of the Town, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of
the Town, to be made available to persons desiring to examine same during all times
while the code is in effect.
102 1 - 25 - 84
Perryville Code – Chapter 1 General Provisions
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when passed and
adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing body to make them a part
thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code
of the Town of Perryville shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the looseleaf
book containing said code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-6. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk, or someone authorized and directed by him, to
keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the Code required to be filed in
his office for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted
subsequent to the effective date of this codification, which shall be adopted specifically
as part of the Code, shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said code book, at which
time, such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-7. Sale of Code books.
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from the Clerk upon
the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Town Commissioners, who may also
arrange, by resolution, for procedures for the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-8. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions or
deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such Code in any
manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Town of Perryville to be
misrepresented thereby. Any violation of this section shall be punishable by
misdemeanor, the penalty for which shall be a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.) or imprisonment for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
§ 1-9. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent section or
part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof to be unconstitutional,
void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or
constitutionality of any other section or parts thereof.
103 1 - 25 - 84
Perryville Code – Chapter 1 General Provisions
§ 1-10. Repealer.
All ordinances or part of ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted and in
force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not contained in the Code are
hereby repealed as of the effective date of this Adopting Ordinance, except as hereinafter
provided.
§ 1-11. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in § 1-10 of this
ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and obligations.
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any legislative
provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any action or proceeding
brought for the enforcement of such right or liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this ordinance
or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending or any
judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance brought pursuant
to any legislative provision.
D. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted or
conferred.
E. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name, improvement,
acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway,
park or other public place, or any portion thereof.
F. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance
and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of the city’s
indebtedness.
G. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property or any
lawful contract or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
I. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final subdivision plats.
104 1 - 25 - 84
Perryville Code – Chapter 1 General Provisions
J. Ordinances establishing the amount and manner of payment of salaries or
compensation of officers and employees, establishing workdays and working
hours of certain employees, providing personnel policies generally and
providing for holidays and vacations for employees and keeping of employment
records.
K. Any legislation establishing regulations or maps pertaining to zoning or
subdivision regulations.
L. All legislation relating to taxation.
§ 1-12. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as part of the
code, certain grammatical changes and other minor changes were made in one (1) or
more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Town Commissioner that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed had been
previously formally amended to read as such.
§ 1-13. Effective date.
The aforesaid proposed Charter and Code of the Town of Perryville shall become and
be considered effective according to the terms thereof on January 25, 1984, unless on or
before January 15, 1984, there shall be presented to the Board of Commissioners or
mailed to it by registered mail, a proper petition for referendum as permitted by law.
§ 1-14. Posting and publication requirements.
A complete and exact copy of this resolution shall be posted at the Town Hall for a
period of at least forty (40) days following its adoption, and a fair summary of the Code,
including the Charter therein, shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in
the Town of Perryville not less than four (4) times, at weekly intervals, within a period of
at least forty (40) days after the adoption of this resolution.
§ 1-15. Mailing of copies of Code and Charter.
The Code, including the Charter therein, shall be mailed, by registered mail, return
receipt requested, to the Department of Legislative Reference and the Clerk of the Circuit
Court for Cecil County.
105 1 - 25 - 84
Perryville Code – Chapter 1 General Provisions
ARTICLE II
Legislation Adopted During Codification
[During the process of codification, certain complete new ordinances and resolutions
were approved by the Town Commissioner for inclusion in the Code of the Town of
Perryville. Such new legislation is noted in the histories of individual chapters as
“Adopted….during codification; see CH. 1, General Provisions, Art. 11.” In
accordance with recognized codification procedures, this new legislation will be
adopted separately and is presently proposed before the Town Commissioners for
that purpose. Upon final adoption of such legislation, a complete enumeration of all
chapters and Articles in the Code included in such legislation will be printed in this
Article along with specific dated of adoption. The enumeration appearing below
lists each chapter affected by any such legislation adopted during codification.]
Legislation Adoption
Chapter No. Date
Chapter 8,Financial Disclosure and Ethics Res. No. 83-1 12-6-83
Chapter 30, Brush, Grass and Weeds Res. No. 83-1 12-6-83
Chapter 36, Curfew Ord. No. 83-1 3-1-83
Chapter 40, Dogs and Other Animals Res. No. 83-1 12-6-83
Chapter 50, Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse Res. No. 83-1 12-6-83
Chapter 59, Parades Res. No. 83-1 12-6-83
Chapter 69, Snow and Ice Removal Res. No. 83-1 12-6-83
ARTICLE III
CHARTER AMENDMENTS
[During the process of codification, certain changes were made to the Charter of the
Town of Perryville. The substantive changes are noted in the history of the Charter
as “amended during codification; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III.” Certain
other no substantive changes, such as in numbering, grammar and punctuation,
have also been made throughout the Charter. These substantive and no substantive
changes have been accounted for in accordance with the requirements of Article
23A of the Annotated Code of Maryland by the adoption of Resolution No. 83-1 on
12-6-83. During the course of normal supplementation, specific dates of adoption
will be inserted into the Charter where pertinent. The following section are those
affected by said Resolution No. 83-1: §§ C1-1, C3-1 through C3-9, C4-1, C4-2, C4-4,
C4-5, C5-2, C5-3, C5-6, C5-7, C5-9, C5-10C, C5-12, C5-14, C6-2 through C6-5, C6-
106 1 - 25 - 84
Perryville Code – Chapter 1 General Provisions
10 7 1 - 25 - 84
8, C6-11, C6-15, C6-16, C6-18, C6-20, C7-1 through C7-3, C7-5, C9-6, C10-1, C10-
2A and C, C11-2, C12-1, C12-2 and C12-3B.]
Perryville Code – Chapter 2 Elections & Election Districts
201 1-22-2020
Chapter 2
ELECTIONS & ELECTION DISTRICTS
§ 2-1. Write-in ballots; approved forms.
§ 2-2. Construal.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Commissioners of the Town of Perryville 3-7-
1989 as Ord. No. 89-4, Ord. 2019-19, 12-17-19. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Charter provisions – See § C13-1 and Article V.
§ 2-1. Write-in ballots prohibited; approved forms.
In all Town elections, ballots, other than those printed at the direction of the Board of
Supervisors of Elections and/or the Board of Commissioners shall not be cast or counted
in any election. A voter may not write on his ballot the name of any person other than
those already printed for whom he or she may desire to vote for any office. Write-in
votes are expressly prohibited and shall not be counted.
§ 2-2. Construal.
The Commissioners declare this chapter to be an exercise of the power granted to
them in § C5-14 of the Charter of the Town of Perryville to provide for the conduct of
registration, nomination and elections.






Perryville Code – Chapter 8 Financial Disclosure and Ethics
801
Chapter 8
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE AND ETHICS
§ 8-1. Short Title.
§ 8-2. Applicability.
§ 8-3. Ethics Commission.
§ 8-4. Conflicts of Interest.
§ 8-5. Financial Disclosure- Elected Officials and Candidates to be Town Elected
Officials.
§ 8-6. Financial Disclosure- Employees and Appointed Officials.
§ 8-7. Lobbying
§ 8-8. Exemptions and Modifications.
§ 8-9. Enforcement
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Commissioners of the Town of Perryville during
codification 12-6-83 by Res. No. 83-1; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
Repealed and replaced by Chapter 8 Financial Disclosure and Ethics, Code of the
Town of Perryville, Sections 8-1 through 8-9, by Ordinance 2011-1 adopted 9-6-11,
approved by the State Ethics Commission 5-17-12, and effective 5-17-12. Sections 8-
4(j)(4) and 8-7(d) repealed and reenacted, with amendments, by Ordinance 2012-2
adopted on 5-1-12, approved by the State Ethics Commission 5-17-12, and effective
5-21-12. Repealing and reenacting, with amendments Chapter 8 Financial
Disclosure and Ethics, Section 8-4 (j)(4) Code of Perryville by Ord. 2014-01, adopted
02-12-14, approved 02-27-14 by the State Ethics Commission, effective 03-04-14.
Added Section 8-5A, adopted 04-05-16 by Ord. 2016-04, effective 04-25-16.
Repealing and reenacting, with amendments Chapter 8, Sections 8-4 and 8-5 by
Ord. 2018-02, which did not pass the State Ethics Commission so did not become
effective. Repealing and reenacting with amendments Chapter 8, Sections 8-4 and 8-
5 by Ord. 2018-16, adopted 11-6-18, approved by State Ethics Commission 02-14-
2019]
Chapter 8 – FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE AND ETHICS
§ 8-1 Short Title.
This Chapter May Be Cited As The Town Of Perryville Public Ethics Ordinance.
Perryville Code – Chapter 8 Financial Disclosure and Ethics
802
§ 8-2 Applicability.
The Provisions of this Chapter apply, as noted, to all Elected Officials, Employees, and
Appointees to Boards and Commissions of The Town of Perryville and to Candidates for
Elective Office in the Town.
§ 8-3 Ethics Commission.
(A) There is a Town of Perryville Ethics Commission that consists of three regular
members appointed by the Mayor and Commissioners. The Mayor and Commissioners
may appoint an alternate member of the Commission to act at any time that a regular
member is unable or unavailable to act. All members of the commission shall be
residents of the Town when they are appointed and during their term of office.
(B) Commission members serve terms of three years. The Mayor and Commissioners
shall appoint an individual to fill a vacancy on the commission to serve for the remainder
of the term for which the vacancy was filled.
(C) The commission shall:
(1) Devise, receive and maintain all forms required by this chapter;
(2) Develop procedures and policies for advisory opinion requests and provide
published advisory opinions to persons subject to this chapter regarding the applicability
of the provisions of this chapter to them;
(3) Develop procedures and policies for the processing of complaints to make
appropriate determinations regarding complaints filed by any person alleging violations
of this chapter; and
(4) Conduct a public information program regarding the purposes and application of
this chapter.
(D) The Town Attorney or another Attorney designated by the Town Council shall
advise the Commission.
(E) The Commission shall certify to the State Ethics Commission on or before October
1 of each year that the Town is in compliance with the requirements of State Government
Article, Title § 8, Subtitle 8, Annotated Code of Maryland for elected local officials.
(F) The Commission shall determine if changes to this chapter are required to be in
compliance with the requirements of State Government Article, Title § 8, Subtitle 8,
Annotated Code of Maryland, and shall forward any recommended changes and
amendments to the Town Council for enactment.
(G) The Commission may adopt other policies and procedures to assist in the
implementation of the Commission’s programs established in this chapter.
Perryville Code – Chapter 8 Financial Disclosure and Ethics
803
§ 8-4 Conflicts of Interest.
(A) In this section, “qualified relative” means a spouse, parent, child, or sibling.
(B) All Town elected officials, officials appointed to Town boards and commissions
subject to this chapter, and employees are subject to this section.
(C) Participation prohibitions. Except as permitted by commission regulation or
opinion, an official or employee may not participate in:
(1) Except in the exercise of an Administrative or Ministerial duty that does not
affect the disposition or decision of the matter, any matter in which, to the knowledge of
the official or employee, the official or employee, or a qualified relative of the official or
employee, has an interest.
(2) Except in the exercise of an Administrative or Ministerial duty that does not
affect the disposition or decision with respect to the matter, any matter, in which any of
the following is a party:
(i) A business entity in which the official or employee has a direct financial
interest of which the official or employee may reasonably be expected to know;
(ii) A business entity for which the official, employee, or a qualified relative of the
official or employee is an officer, director, trustee, partner, member or employee;
(iii) A business entity with which the official or employee or, to the knowledge of
the official or employee, a qualified relative is negotiating or has any arrangement
concerning prospective employment.
(iv) If the contract reasonably could be expected to result in a conflict between the
private interests of the official or employee and the official duties of the official or
employee, a business entity that is a party to an existing contract with the official or
employee, or which, to the knowledge of the official or employee, is a party to a contract
with a qualified relative;
(v) An entity, doing business with the town, in which a direct financial interest is
owned by another entity in which the official or employee has a direct financial interest,
if the official or employee may be reasonably expected to know of both direct financial
interests; or
(vi) A business entity that:
(a) The official or employee knows is a creditor or obligee of the official or
employee or a qualified relative of the official or employee with respect to a thing of
economic value; and
Perryville Code – Chapter 8 Financial Disclosure and Ethics
804
(b) As a creditor or obligee, is in a position to directly and substantially affect
the interest of the official or employee or a qualified relative of the official or employee.
(3) A person who is disqualified from participating under paragraphs 1 or 2 of this
subsection shall disclose the nature and circumstances of the conflict and may participate
or act if:
(i) The disqualification leaves a body with less than a quorum capable of acting;
(ii) The disqualified official or employee is required by law to act; or
(iii) The disqualified official or employee is the only person authorized to act.
(4) A former regulated lobbyist who is or becomes subject to this chapter as an
employee or an official, other than as an elected official or an appointed official, may not
participate in a case, contract or other specific matter as an employee or official, other
than an elected official or appointed official, for one calendar year after the termination
of the registration of the former regulated lobbyist if the former regulated lobbyist
previously assisted or represented another party for compensation in the matter.
(D) Employment and financial interest restrictions.
(1) Except as permitted by regulation of the commission when the interest is
disclosed or when the employment does not create a conflict of interest or appearance of
conflict, an official or employee may not:
(i) Be employed by or have a financial interest in any entity:
(a) Subject to the authority of the official or employee or the town office,
department, agency, board or commission with which the official or employee is
affiliated; or
(b) That is negotiating or has entered into a contract with, or that is administered
by, the town or an office, department, agency, board, or commission of the town with
which the official or employee is affiliated; or
(ii) Hold any other employment relationship that would impair the impartiality or
independence of judgment of the official or employee.
(2) The prohibitions of paragraph 1 of this subsection do not apply to:
(i) An official or employee who is appointed to a regulatory or licensing authority
pursuant to a statutory requirement that persons subject to the jurisdiction of the authority
be represented in appointments to the authority;
Perryville Code – Chapter 8 Financial Disclosure and Ethics
805
(ii) Subject to other provisions of law, a member of a board or commission in
regard to a financial interest or employment held at the time of appointment, provided the
financial interest or employment is publicly disclosed to the appointing authority and the
commission;
(iii) An official or employee whose duties are ministerial, if the private
employment or financial interest does not create a conflict of interest or the appearance of
a conflict of interest, as permitted and in accordance with regulations adopted by the
commission; or
(iv) Employment or financial interests allowed by regulation of the commission if
the employment does not create a conflict of interest or the appearance of a conflict of
interest or if the financial interest is disclosed.
(E) Post-employment limitations and restrictions.
(1) A former official or employee may not assist or represent any party other than the
town in a case, contract, or other specific matter involving the town if that matter is one
in which the former official or employee significantly participated as an official or
employee.
(2) A former elected official may not assist or represent another party for
compensation, or otherwise act as a lobbyist, in a matter that is the subject of legislative
action for one calendar year after the elected official leaves office.
(F) Contingent compensation. An official or employee may not assist or represent a
party for contingent compensation in any matter before or involving the town.
(G) Use of prestige of office.
(1) An official or employee may not intentionally use the prestige of office or public
position for the private gain of that official or employee or the private gain of another.
(2) This subsection does not prohibit the performance of usual and customary
constituent services by an elected local official without additional compensation.
(H) Solicitation and acceptance of gifts.
(1) An official or employee may not solicit any gift.
(2) An official or employee may not directly solicit or facilitate the solicitation of a
gift, on behalf of another person, from an individual regulated lobbyist.
(3) An official or employee may not knowingly accept a gift, directly or indirectly,
from a person that the official or employee knows or has the reason to know:
Perryville Code – Chapter 8 Financial Disclosure and Ethics
806
(i) Is doing business with or seeking to do business with the town office,
department, agency, board or commission with which the official or employee is
affiliated;
(ii) Has financial interests that may be substantially and materially affected, in a
manner distinguishable from the public generally, by the performance or nonperformance
of the official duties of the official or employee;
(iii) Is engaged in an activity regulated or controlled by the office, department,
agency, board or commission with which the official or employee is affiliated; or
(iv) Is a lobbyist with respect to matters within the jurisdiction of the official or
employee.
(4) Paragraph (5) of this subsection does not apply to a gift:
(i) That would tend to impair the impartiality and the independence of judgment of
the official or employee receiving the gift;
(ii) Of significant value that would give the appearance of impairing the
impartiality and independence of judgment of the official or employee; or
(iii) Of significant value that the recipient official or employee believes or has
reason to believe is designed to impair the impartiality and independence of judgment of
the official or employee.
(5) Notwithstanding paragraph (3) and subject to paragraph (4) of this subsection, an
official or employee may accept the following:
(i) Meals and beverages consumed in the presence of the donor or sponsoring
entity;
(ii) Ceremonial gifts or awards that have insignificant monetary value;
(iii) Unsolicited gifts of nominal value that do not exceed $ 20 in cost or trivial
items of informational value;
(iv) Reasonable expenses for food, travel, lodging, and scheduled entertainment of
the official or the employee at a meeting which is given in return for the participation of
the official or employee in a panel or speaking engagement at the meeting;
(v) Gifts of tickets or free admission extended to an elected local official to attend
a charitable, cultural, or political events, if the purpose of this gift or admission is a
courtesy or ceremony extended to the elected official’s office;
Perryville Code – Chapter 8 Financial Disclosure and Ethics
807
(vi) A specific gift or class of gifts that the commission exempts from the
operation of this subsection upon a finding, in writing, that acceptance of the gift or class
of gifts would not be detrimental to the impartial conduct of the business of the town and
that the gift is purely personal and private in nature;
(vii) Gifts from a person related to the official or employee by blood or marriage,
or any other individual who is a member of the household of the official or employee; or
(viii) Honoraria for speaking to or participating in a meeting provided that the
offering of the honorarium is in not related in any way to the official’s or employee’s
official position.
(I) Disclosure of confidential information. Other than in the discharge of official duties,
an official or employee may not disclose or use confidential information, that the official
or employee acquired by reason of the official’s or employee’s public position and that is
not available to the public, for the economic benefit of the official or employee or that of
another person.
(J) Participation in procurement.
(1) An individual who drafts or assists in the drafting of specifications, an invitation
for bids, or a request for proposals for a procurement for the town, may not assist or
represent another person, directly or indirectly, who is submitting a bid or proposal for
the procurement.
(2) An individual who drafts or assists in the drafting of specifications, an invitation
for bids, or a request for proposals for a procurement for the town, may not submit a bid
or proposal for the procurement.
(3) A person who employs a current or former town official or employee who drafted
or assisted in the drafting of specifications, an invitation for bids, or a request for
proposals for a procurement for the town, may not submit a bid or proposal for that
procurement or assist or represent another person, directly or indirectly, who is
submitting a bid or proposal for the procurement.
(4) For purposes of paragraphs (1), (2) and (3) of this subsection, assisting in the
drafting of specifications, an invitation for bids, or a request for proposals for a
procurement does not include:
(i) Providing descriptive literature such as catalogue sheets, brochures,
technical data sheets, or standard specification “samples”, whether
requested by the town or provided on an unsolicited basis;
(ii) Submitting written comments on a specification prepared by the town or on a
solicitation for a bid or proposal when comments are solicited from two or more persons
as part of a request for information or a prebid or preproposal process;
Perryville Code – Chapter 8 Financial Disclosure and Ethics
808
(iii) Providing specifications for a sole source procurement made in accordance
with of the code of the Town of Perryville § 66 – 5(B) of the code of the Town of
Perryville ; or
(iv) Providing architectural and engineering services for:
(A) Programming, master planning, or other project planning services; or
(B) The design of a construction project if:
1. The design services do not involve lead or prime design
responsibilities or construction phase responsibilities on
behalf of the town; and
2. (I) The anticipated value of the procurement contract at the
time of advertisement is at least $1,000,000, and not more
than $40,000,000; or
(II) Regardless of the amount of the procurement contract, the
payment to the individual or person for the design services
does not exceed $200,000.
§ 8-5 Financial Disclosure – Elected Officials and Candidates to be Town Elected
Officials. (Repealed §8-5A by Ord. 2019-19, 12-17-19)
(A) This section applies to all elected officials and candidates to be town elected
officials.
(B) (1) Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, an elected official or a
candidate to be a town elected official shall file the financial disclosure statement
required under this section:
(i) On a form provided by the commission;
(ii) Under oath or affirmation; and
(iii) With the commission.
(2) Deadlines for filing statements.
(i) An incumbent elected official shall file a financial disclosure statement
annually no later than April 30th of each year for the preceding calendar year.
(ii) An individual who is appointed to fill a vacancy in an elective office for which
a financial disclosure statement is required and who has not already filed a financial
disclosure statement, shall file a statement for the preceding calendar year within 30 days
after appointment.
Perryville Code – Chapter 8 Financial Disclosure and Ethics
809
(iii)(a) An individual who, other than by reasons of death, leaves an office for
which a statement is required shall file a statement within 60 days after leaving the office.
(b) The statement shall cover:
1. The calendar year immediately preceding the year in which the individual
left office, unless a statement covering that year has already been filed by the individual;
and
2. The portion of the current calendar year during which the individual held
the office.
(C) Candidates to be elected officials.
(1) Except an official who has filed a financial disclosure statement under another
provision of this section for the reporting period, a candidate to be an elected official
shall file a Financial Disclosure Statement each year beginning with the year in which the
Certificate of Candidacy is filed through the year of the election.
(2) A candidate to be an elected official shall file a statement required under this
section:
(a) In the year the certificate of candidacy is filed, no later than the filing of the
certificate of candidacy;
(b) In the year of the election, on or before the earlier of April 15 or the last day
for the withdrawal of candidacy; and
(c) In all other years for which a statement is required, on or before April 15.
(3) A candidate to be an elected official:
(a) Shall file the statement required under § 8-5(c)(2)(a) of this Chapter with the
Town with the Certificate of Candidacy or with the Commission prior to filing the
Certificate of Candidacy; and
(b) Shall file the statements required under § 8-5(c)(2)(b) and (c) with the
Commission.
(4) The Town may not accept any Certificate of Candidacy unless a statement has
been filed in proper form.
(5) If a candidate fails to file a statement required by this subsection after written
notice is provided by the town at least 5 days before the last day for the withdrawal of
Perryville Code – Chapter 8 Financial Disclosure and Ethics
810
candidacy, or at least 10 days before an election if no date is set for withdrawal of a
candidacy, the candidate is deemed to have withdrawn the candidacy.
(6) If a candidate fails to file a statement required by this subsection, the Town shall
provide written notice to the candidate directing the candidate to file the statement within
5 days from the date of the notice.
(7) Within 30 days of the receipt of a statement required under this subsection, the
person receiving the statement shall forward the statement to the commission or the
office designated by the commission.
(D) Public record.
(1) The commission or office designated by the commission shall maintain all
Financial Disclosure Statements filed under this section and under section § 8-6.
(2) Financial Disclosure Statements shall be made available during normal office
hours for examination and copying by the public subject to reasonable fees established by
the Town and administrative procedures established by the commission. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, the commission may not make available for examination and copying by
the public any portion of a financial disclosure statement that contains the home address
of an individual.
(3) If an individual examines or copies a Financial Disclosure Statement, the
commission or the office designated by the commission shall record:
(i) The name and home address of the individual reviewing or copying the
statement; and
(ii) The name of the person whose Financial Disclosure Statement was examined
or copied.
(4) Upon request by the official or employee whose Financial Disclosure Statement
was examined or copied, the commission or the office designated by the commission
shall provide the official or employee with a copy of the name and home address of the
person who reviewed the official’s or employee’s Financial Disclosure Statement.
(E) Retention requirements. The commission or the office designated by the
commission shall retain Financial Disclosure Statements for four years from the date of
receipt.
(F) Contents of statement.
(1)Interests in real property.
Perryville Code – Chapter 8 Financial Disclosure and Ethics
811
(i) A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of all interests
in real property wherever located.
(ii) For each interest in real property, the schedule shall include:
(a) The nature of the property and the location by street address, mailing
address, or legal description of the property;
(b) The nature and extent of the interest held, including any conditions and
encumbrances on the interest;
(c) The date when, the manner in which, and the identity of the person from
whom the interest was acquired;
(d) The nature and amount of the consideration given in exchange for the
interest or, if acquired other than by purchase, the fair market value of the interest at the
time acquired;
(e) If any interest was transferred, in whole or in part, at any time during the
reporting period, a description of the interest transferred, the nature and amount of the
consideration received for the interest, and the identity of the person to whom the interest
was transferred; and
(f) The identity of any other person with an interest in the property.
(2) Interests in corporations, partnerships and limited liability companies.
(i) A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of all interests in
any corporation, partnership, limited liability partnership, limited liability corporation or
limited liability company, regardless of whether the corporation, partnership, limited
liability partnership, limited liability corporation or limited liability company does
business with the town.
(ii) For each interest reported under this paragraph, the schedule shall include:
(a) The name and address of the principal office of the corporation, partnership,
limited liability partnership, limited liability corporation or limited liability company;
(b) The nature and amount of the interest held, including any conditions and
encumbrances on the interest;
(c) With respect to any interest transferred, in whole or in part, at any time
during the reporting period, a description of the interest transferred, the nature and
amount of the consideration received for the interest and, if known, the identity of the
person to whom the interest was transferred; and
Perryville Code – Chapter 8 Financial Disclosure and Ethics
812
(d) With respect to any interest acquired during the reporting period:
1. The date when, the manner in which, and the identity of the person from
whom the interest was acquired; and
2. The nature and the amount of the consideration given in exchange for the
interest or, if acquired other than by purchase, the fair market value of the interest at the
time acquired.
(iii) An individual may satisfy the requirement to report the amount of the interest
held under item (II)(b) of this paragraph by reporting, instead of a dollar amount:
(a) For an equity interest in a corporation or limited liability corporation, the
number of shares held and, unless the corporation’s stock is publicly traded, the
percentage of equity interest held;
(b) For an equity interest in a partnership or a limited liability partnership, the
percentage of equity interest held; or
(c) For an equity interest in a limited liability company, the percentage of equity
interest held.
(3) Interests in business entities doing business with town.
(i) A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of all interests in
any business entity that does business with the town, other than interests reported under
paragraph (2) of this subsection.
(ii) For each interest reported under this paragraph (3), the schedule shall include:
(a) The name and address of the principal office of the business entity;
(b) The nature and amount of the interest held, including any conditions to and
encumbrances in the interest;
(c) With respect to any interest transferred, in whole or in part, at any time
during the reporting period, a description of the interest transferred, the nature and
amount of the consideration received in exchange for the interest and, if known, the
identity of the person to whom the interest was transferred; and
(d) With respect to any interest acquired during the reporting period:
1. The date when, the manner in which, and the identity of the person from
whom the interest was acquired; and
Perryville Code – Chapter 8 Financial Disclosure and Ethics
813
2. The nature and the amount of the consideration given in exchange for the
interest or, if acquired other than by purchase, the fair market value of the interest at the
time acquired.
(4) Gifts.
(i) A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of each gift
received during the reporting period from or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, any one
person who does business with or is regulated by the town.
(ii) For each gift reported, the schedule shall include:
(a) A description of the nature and value of the gift; and
(b) The identity of the person from whom, or on behalf of whom, directly or
indirectly, the gift was received.
(5) Employment with or interests in entities doing business with town.
(i) A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of all offices,
directorships, and salaried employment by the individual or member of the immediate
family of the individual held at any time during the reporting period with entities doing
business with the town.
(ii) For each position reported under this paragraph, the schedule shall include:
(a) The name and address of the principal office of the business entity;
(b) The title and nature of the office, directorship, or salaried employment held
and the date it commenced; and
(c) The name of each town office, department, board, commission or agency
with which the entity is involved.
(6) Indebtedness to entities doing business with the town.
(i) A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of all liabilities,
excluding retail credit accounts, to persons doing business with the town owed at any
time during the reporting period:
(a) By the individual; or
(b) By a member of the immediate family of the individual if the individual was
involved in the transaction giving rise to the liability.
(ii) For each liability reported under this paragraph, the schedule shall include:
Perryville Code – Chapter 8 Financial Disclosure and Ethics
814
(a) The identity of the person to whom the liability was owed and the date the
liability was incurred;
(b) The amount of the liability owed as of the end of the reporting period;
(c) The terms of payment of the liability and the extent to which the principal
amount of the liability was increased or reduced during the year; and
(d) The security given, if any, for the liability.
(7) Employment of immediate family members by town. A statement filed under
this section shall include a schedule of the immediate family members of the individual
employed by the town in any capacity at any time during the reporting period.
(8) Sources of earned income.
(i) A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of the name and
address of each place of employment and of each business entity of which the individual
or a member of the individual’s immediate family was a sole or partial owner and from
which the individual or member of the individual’s immediate family received earned
income, at any time during the reporting period.
(ii) A minor child’s employment or business ownership need not be disclosed if
the agency that employs the individual does not regulate, exercise authority over, or
contract with the place of employment or business entity of the minor child.
(iii) For a statement filed on or after January 1, 2019, if the individual’s spouse is a
regulated lobbyist, the statement shall include the name and address of the entity that has
engaged the spouse for lobbying purposes.
(9) A statement filed under this section may also include a schedule of additional
interests or information that the individual making the statement wishes to disclose.
(G) For the purposes of § 8-5(F)(1), (2) and (3) of this chapter, the following interests
are considered to be the interests of the individual making the statement:
(1) An interest held by a member of the individual’s immediate family, if the interest
was, at any time during the reporting period, directly or indirectly controlled by the
individual.
(2) An interest held by a business entity in which the individual held a 30% or
greater interest at any time during the reporting period.
(3) An interest held by a trust or an estate in which, at any time during the reporting
period:
Perryville Code – Chapter 8 Financial Disclosure and Ethics
815
(i) The individual held a reversionary interest or was a beneficiary, or
(ii) If a revocable trust, the individual was a settlor.
(H)(1) The commission shall review the financial disclosure statements submitted
under this section for compliance with the provisions of this section and shall notify an
individual submitting the statement of any omissions or deficiencies.
(2) The commission may take appropriate enforcement action to ensure compliance
with this section.
(I) For purposes of this section “Interest” does not include a mutual fund or
exchange-traded fund that is publicly traded on a national scale unless the mutual fund or
exchange-traded fund is composed primarily of holdings of stocks and interests in a
specific sector or area that is regulated by the individual’s governmental unit.
§ 8-6 Financial Disclosure – Employees and Appointed Officials.
(A) This section only applies to the following appointed officials and employees:
(1) The Town Administrator.
(2) The Chief of Police.
(3) All Town Supervisors.
(4) Members of the Ethics Commission.
(5) Members of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(6) Members of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(7) Members of all other Town decision-making boards.
(B) A statement filed under this section shall be filed with the commission under oath
or affirmation.
(C) On or before April 30 of each year during which an official or employee holds
office or employment, an official or employee shall file a statement disclosing gifts
received during the preceding calendar year from any person that contracts with or is
regulated by town, including the name of the donor of the gift and the approximate retail
value at the time or receipt.
(D) An official or employee shall disclose employment and interests that raise conflicts
of interest or potential conflicts of interest in connection with a specific proposed action
Perryville Code – Chapter 8 Financial Disclosure and Ethics
816
by the employee or official sufficiently in advance of the action to provide adequate
disclosure to the public.
(E) The commission shall maintain all disclosure statements filed under this section as
public records available for public inspection and copying as provided in §§ 8-5(D) and
(E) of this chapter.
§ 8-7 Lobbying.
(A) A person shall file a lobbying registration statement with the commission if the
person:
(1) Personally appears before a town official or employee with the intent to
influence that person in performance of the official duties of the official or employee; and
(2) In connection with the intent to influence expends or reasonably expects to
expend in a given calendar year in excess of $25 on food, entertainment or other gifts for
officials or employees of the town.
(B) A person shall file registration statement required under this section on or before
the latter of January 15 of the calendar year or within 5 days after first performing an act
that requires registration in the calendar year.
(C)(1) The registration statement shall identify:
(i) The registrant;
(ii) Any other person on whose behalf the registrant acts; and
(iii) The subject matter on which the registrant proposes to make appearances
specified in subsection (a) of this section.
(2) The registration statement shall cover a defined registration period not to exceed
one calendar year.
(D) Within 30 days after the end of any calendar year during which a person was
registered under this section, the person shall file a report with the commission
disclosing:
(1) The value, date, and nature of any food, entertainment or other gift provided to a
town official or employee; and
(2) If a gift or series of gifts to a single official or employee exceeds $25 in value, the
identity of the official or employee.
Perryville Code – Chapter 8 Financial Disclosure and Ethics
817
(E) The commission shall maintain the registrations and reports filed under this section
as public records available for public inspection and copying for four years after receipt
by the commission.
§ 8-8 Exemptions and Modifications.
The commission may grant exemptions and modifications to the provisions of §§ 8-4
and §8-6 of this chapter to employees and to appointed members of town boards and
commissions, when the commission finds that an exemption or modification would not
be contrary to the purposes of this chapter, and the application of this chapter would:
(A) Constitute an unreasonable invasion of privacy; and
(B) Significantly reduce the availability of qualified persons for public service.
§ 8-9 Enforcement.
(A) The commission may:
(1) Assess a late fee of $2 per day up to a maximum of $250 for a failure to timely
file a financial disclosure statement required under §§ 8-5 or § 8-6 of this chapter;
(2) Assess a late fee of $10 per day up to a maximum of $250 for a failure to file a
timely lobbyist registration or lobbyist report required under § 8-7 of this chapter; and
(3) Issue a cease and desist order against any person found to be in violation of this
chapter.
(B)(1) Upon a finding of a violation of any provision of this chapter, the commission
may:
(i) Issue an order of compliance directing the respondent to cease and desist from
the violation;
(ii) Issue a reprimand; or
(iii) Recommend to the appropriate authority other appropriate discipline of the
respondent, including censure or removal if that discipline is authorized by law.
(2) If the commission finds that a respondent has violated § 8-7 of this chapter, the
commission may:
(i) Require a respondent who is a registered lobbyist to file any additional reports
or information that reasonably related to the information that is required under § 8-7 of
this chapter;
(ii) Impose a fine not exceeding $1,000 for each violation; and
Perryville Code – Chapter 8 Financial Disclosure and Ethics
818
(iii) Suspend the registration of an individual registered lobbyist if the commission
finds that the lobbyist has knowingly and willfully violated § 8-7 of this chapter or has
been convicted of a criminal offense arising from lobbying activities.
(C)(1) Upon request by the commission, the town attorney or other attorney designated
by the Town Council, may file a petition for injunctive or other relief in the circuit court
for Cecil County, or in any other court having proper venue for the purpose of requiring
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(2)(i) The court may:
(a) Issue an order to cease and desist from the violation;
(b) Except as provided in subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, void an official
action taken by an official or employee with a conflict of interest prohibited by this
chapter when the action arises from or concerns the subject matter of the conflict and if
the legal action is brought within 90 days of the occurrence of the official action, if the
court deems voiding the action to be in the best interest of the public; or
(c) Impose a fine of up to $500 for any violation of the provisions of this
chapter, with each day upon which the violation occurs constituting a separate offense;
(ii) A court may not void any official action appropriating public funds, levying
taxes, or providing for the issuance of bonds, notes, or other evidences of public
obligations.
(D) In addition to any other enforcement provisions in this chapter, a person who the
commission or a court finds has violated this chapter:
(1) Is subject to termination or other disciplinary action; and
(2) May be suspended from receiving payment of salary or other compensation
pending full compliance with the terms of an order of the commission or a court.
(E) A town official or employee found to have violated this chapter is subject to
disciplinary or other appropriate personnel action, including removal from office,
disciplinary action, suspension of salary, or other sanction.
(F) Violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor subject to a fine of up to $500 or
imprisonment of up to six months, or both.
(G) A finding of a violation of this chapter by the commission is public information.
Perryville Code – Chapter 10 Nondiscrimination
Chapter 10
NONDISCRIMINATION
§ 10-1. Nondiscrimination in employment practices.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Commissioners of the Town of Perryville 5-2-
1989 by Ord. No. 89-5. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Personnel – See Charter, Art. VII.
§ 10-1. Nondiscrimination in employment practices.
No employee or applicant for employment shall be discriminated against on the basis
of political or religious opinion or affiliation, marital status, race, color, creed, national
origin, sex, age (unless sex or age constitutes a bonafide occupational qualification) or
the physical or mental handicap of a qualified handicapped individual.
1001 2 - 25 - 91
Perryville Code – Chapter 14 Planning and Zoning Commission
14 01
CHAPTER 14
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Commissioners of the Town of Perryville 3-6-73
as Ord. No. 111. Amendments noted where applicable. Chapter 14 repealed in its
entirety by Ordinance 2014-03 on 6/3/14, effective on 6/23/14, information regarding
the Planning and Zoning Commission is available in the Zoning Ordinance.]
Perryville Code – Chapter 20 Zoning Board of Appeals
Chapter 20
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
[The Zoning Board of Appeals is established by Section 21 of the Town of Perryville
Zoning Ordinance, adopted 1-20-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-1. The complete text of the
legislation is available for inspection at the office of the Town Clerk during regular
office hours.]
2001
Perryville Code – Chapter 26 Alcoholic Beverages
26 01 04-04-17
CHAPTER 26
ALCOHOLIC AND INTOXICATING BEVERAGES
§ 26-1. Definitions.
§ 26-2. Possession of beverages or containers; applicability.
§ 26-3. Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Commissioners of the Town of Perryville 6-6-
1989 as Ord. No. 89-6. Amendments noted where applicable.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bars, taverns and pavilions – See Chapter 28.
Parks and playgrounds – See Chapter 61.
§ 26-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ALCOHOLIC OR INTOXICATING BEVERAGES – Any spirituous, vinous,
malt or fermented liquor or compound, by whatever name called, containing onehalf
of one percent (1/2 of 1%) or more of alcohol by volume, including alcohol,
brandy, whiskey, rum, gin, vodka, cordial, scotch, bourbon, tequila, beer, ale,
port, stout, wine and certain ciders.
§ 26-2. Possession of Beverages or Containers; applicability.
A. A person shall not possess in an opened container an alcoholic or intoxicating
beverage or a container that had contained alcoholic or intoxicating beverages on
any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks or ways of the Town of Perryville or on
the parking lots of private property that is used by the public unless authorized by
the owner of the said property. [Repealing and reenacting with amendments
Chapter 26 Alcoholic and Intoxicating Beverages, Section 26-2.A Code of the
Town of Perryville by Emergency Ord. 2015-11 05-05-15, Ord. 2017-06, 04-
04-17]
Perryville Code – Chapter 26 Alcoholic Beverages
26 02 04-04-17
B. It is intended that all public property within the town or owned by the Town shall
be subject to the provisions of this chapter. [Amended 7-12-1990 by Ord. No.
90-7]
§ 26-3. Violations and Penalties.
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of an infraction and shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of fifty
dollars ($50.) for the first offense and one hundred dollars ($100.) for each subsequent
offense.
Perryville Code – Chapter 28 Bars, Taverns and Pavilions
Chapter 28
BARS, TAVERNS AND PAVILIONS
§ 28-1. Definitions,
§ 28-2. Hours of use.
§ 28-3. Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Commissioners of the Town of Perryville 5-
1-1990 as Ord. No. 90-5. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages – See Chapter 26.
§ 28-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
OPEN-AIR TAVERN OR PAVILION- Any bar, tavern or pavilion or portion
thereof used for the purpose of eating, drinking, conducting parties or other social
functions that is not enclosed by insulated walls at least two (2) inches thick and a
complete roof so as to form an adequate sound barrier blocking the sound from
the bar, tavern or pavilion from neighboring properties.
§ 28-2. Hours of use.
Open-air taverns or pavilions shall not be in use between the hours of 10:00 p.m. in
the evening and 12:00 noon, with the exception that they may be used until 11:00 p.m.
Friday night and Saturday night. Any eating , drinking, socializing, record playing, tape
playing, radio playing, television playing, partying or selling or serving of food or drink
during such hours in an open-air tavern or pavilion shall constitute a violation of this
chapter.
2801 2 - 25 - 91
Perryville Code – Chapter 28 Bars, Taverns and Pavilions
2802 2 - 25 - 91
§ 28-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of an infraction and shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of fifty
dollars ($50.) for the first offense and one hundred dollars ($100.) for each subsequent
offense.
Perryville Code – Chapter 30 Brush, Weeds and Grass
3001
Chapter 30
BRUSH, WEEDS AND GRASS
§ 30-1. Height restriction; cutting and removal.
§ 30-2. Maintenance of sidewalk, curb and gutter area.
§ 30-3. Performance of work by Town in cases of noncompliance.
§ 30-4. Violations and penalties.
§ 30-5. Definitions.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Commissioners of the Town of Perryville during
codification; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse – See Chapter 50.
Property maintenance – See Chapter 63.
Soil erosion and sediment control – See Chapter 71.
§ 30-1. Height restriction; cutting and removal.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant or other person in control of any lots or
lands located within the corporate limits of Perryville to allow on any such lot or land any
growth of grass, brush or weeds to a height of one (1) foot or more, and any owner,
occupant or other person in control of any lot or land within the town limits of Perryville
shall be responsible for the cutting and removal of the grass, brush or weeds.
§ 30-2. Maintenance of sidewalk, curb and gutter area.
Property owners, occupants or other persons in control of any lots or lands located in
Perryville shall maintain their respective curb, gutter and sidewalk bordering their parcels
Perryville Code – Chapter 30 Brush, Weeds and Grass
3002
of land in such condition as to be clear of all growth of grass and weeds within the curb,
gutter and sidewalk.
§ 30-3. Performance of work by Town in cases of noncompliance. [Amended 7-10-
12 by Ord. No. 12-5 Amended]
In the event that the owner, occupant or other person in control of any such lot or
land within the corporate limits of Perryville shall fail or refuse to cut and remove such
grass, brush or weeds after notification from the town in accordance with § 30-4 and
within the time limit of said notification, such grass, brush or weeds shall be removed by
the employees or agents of the town. The Town shall submit a bill for all costs of such
cutting and removal to the aforesaid owner, occupant or other person in control of said lot
or land, and such bill shall be due and payable within thirty (30) days from its date. In the
event that such bill is not paid within thirty (30) days from its date, the town is
empowered to proceed with its collection by instituting suit on behalf of the town. All
such costs of cutting and removal not paid by the date that costs are due and payable also
shall be a lien on the property from which the grass, brush, or weeds are cut, enforced and
collectible in the same manner as town real property taxes.
§ 30-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-10-12 by Ord. No. 12-5 Amended,
Amended 7-3-18 by Ord. 2018-09]
Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner, occupant or other person so notified
to cut, destroy and remove such excessive growth of grass, brush or weeds and any
growth on curb, gutter and sidewalk, either or both, upon his property within seven (7)
days after the date of written notice from the town or upon expiration of fourteen (14)
days after the date of such written notice in the event the town, after making a reasonable
effort to do so, has been unable to deliver said notice to such owner, occupant or other
person, either by personal service or by certified mail, the owner, occupant or other
person shall be in violation of this chapter and shall be guilty of an infraction. Every such
person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day such violation shall continue.
Each initial violation shall be subject to a fine of twenty five dollars ($25.) and each
subsequent violation shall be subject to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.).
After the third violation of this Chapter in a calendar year, the town shall give the
owner, occupant or other person in charge of a premises forty-eight (48) hours notice to
correct any subsequent violation. If the violation is not corrected within forty-eight (48)
hours after notice, the town may then have the violation abated at the owner’s expense in
accordance with § 30-3.
§ 30-5. Definitions. [Added 7-3-18 by Ord. 2018-09]
In this chapter the following terms have the meanings indicated:
Perryville Code – Chapter 30 Brush, Weeds and Grass
3003
Grass - vegetation consisting of typically short plants with long, narrow leaves,
growing wild or cultivated on lawns and pastures.
Weeds - all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees, shrubs,
cultivated flowers and gardens.
Brush - a heavy growth of small trees and bushes and/or branches and twigs cut
from a tree.
Perryville Code – Chapter 32 Building Construction
3201 7-3-18
Chapter 32
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
Article I
Building Construction
§ 32-1. Building Construction Administration and Enforcement by Cecil County.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Commissioners of the Town of Perryville 1-8-85
as Ord. No. 85-1. Amendments noted where applicable. Repealed Section 32-1-32-7
and added new Section 32-1, Article I by Ord. 2018-08, 7-3-18]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage control – See Chapter 46.
Property maintenance – See Chapter 63.
Soil erosion and sediment control – See Chapter 71.
Water and sewers – See Chapter 82.
§ 32-1. Building Construction Administration and Enforcement by Cecil County.
A. The construction of buildings and structures in the Town of Perryville shall be
undertaken in accordance with, and administered and enforced by Cecil County,
Maryland, pursuant to, chapter 157 of the Cecil County code, in the same manner
and to the same extent as that chapter is administered and enforced in the
unincorporated areas of Cecil County. The Town of Perryville expressly subjects
itself to chapter 157 of the Cecil County code.
Perryville Code – Chapter 36 Curfew
Chapter 36
CURFEW
§ 36-1. Findings.
§ 36-2. Definitions.
§ 36-3. Unlawful conduct of minors.
§ 36-4. Unlawful conduct of parents.
§ 36-5. Unlawful conduct of owners or operators of establishments.
§ 36-6. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
§ 36-7. Authority of Town Commissioners.
§ 36-8. When effective.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Commissioners of the Town of Perryville during
codification 3-1-83 as Ord. No. 83-1; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 36-1. Findings.
The Town Commissioners find that:
A. An emergency has been created by a substantial increase in the number and in
the seriousness of crimes committed by minors against persons and property
within the Town and that this has created a menace to the preservation of
public peace, safety, health, morals and welfare.
B. The increase in juvenile delinquency has been caused in part by the large
number of minors who are permitted to remain in public places and in certain
establishments during night hours without adult supervision.
C. Education is the foundation of success and a productive life. The County of
Cecil provides the educational system and its staff, but the cooperation of
students and their parents determines the productivity of the educational
system. Late evening activity by certain of our youth prevents them from
concentrating in class or, even worse, causes their absence from class. The rate
3601 6 - 25 - 83
Perryville Code – Chapter 36 Curfew
of absenteeism has risen alarmingly in recent years while the achievement rate
has rapidly decreased. The end result is an increase in failures and dropouts,
frustration, malcontentment and, for many, a future without promise.
D. The problem of juvenile delinquency can be reduced by regulating the hours
during which minors may remain in public places and in certain establishments
without adult supervision and by imposing certain duties and responsible upon
the parents or other adult persons who have care and custody of minors.
§ 36-2. Definitions.
In this chapter, the following definitions apply:
ESTABLISHMENT- Any privately owned place of business carried on for a profit
or any place of amusement or entertainment to which the public is invited.
MINOR - Any person under the age of eighteen (18).
OPERATOR - Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation
operating, managing or conducting any establishment; and whenever used in any
clause prescribing a penalty, the term “operator” as applied to associations or
partnership shall include the members or partners thereof and as applied to
corporations shall include the officers thereof.
PARENT - Any natural parent of a minor, a guardian or any person twenty-one (21)
years of age or over responsible for the care and custody of a minor.
PUBLIC PLACE - Any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground,
wharf, dock, public building and vacant lot, as well as church, church ground,
library and other such privately owned property used for public purposes.
REMAIN - To loiter, lounge, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon.
§ 36-3. Unlawful conduct of minors.
A. No minor shall remain in or upon any public place or any establishment between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. Friday and 6:00 a.m. Saturday, nor between the hours of
10:00 p.m. Saturday and 6:00 a.m. Sunday, official Maryland time, nor between
the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day or any other day of the
week.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any minor accompanied by a
parent or other person over the age of thirty (30) years, nor to a minor upon an
errand directed by such minor’s parents, nor to a minor attending a cultural,
3602 6 - 25 - 83
Perryville Code – Chapter 36 Curfew
scholastic, athletic, or recreational activity supervised by a bona fide
organization, nor to any minor who is engaged in gainful, lawful employment
during the curfew hours. [Amended 12-7-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
§ 36-4. Unlawful conduct of parents.
No parent shall knowingly permit any minor not exempt under § 36-3B to remain in
any public place or any establishment between the hours of 10:00 p.m. Friday and 6:00
a.m. Saturday, or between the hours of 10:00 p.m. Saturday and 6:00 a.m. Sunday,
official Maryland time, or between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following
day or any other day of the week.
§ 36-5. Unlawful conduct of owners or operators of establishments.
No operator of an establishment or his agents or employees shall knowingly permit any
minor to remain upon the premises of said establishment between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
Friday and 6:00 a.m. Saturday, or between the hours of 10:00 p.m. Saturday and 6:00
a.m. Sunday, official time, or between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the
following day or any other day of the week.
§ 36-6. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Any police officer who finds a minor violating any provisions of this chapter
shall obtain information from such minor as to his name and address, age and the
name of his parent or parents. The minor shall thereupon be instructed to proceed
to his home forthwith. The information obtained from the minor shall be reported
to the Police Department, which shall cause a written notice to be mailed to the
parent or parents of the minor, advising of the violation of this chapter.
B. Any parent who shall violate any provision of this chapter after having received
notice of a prior violation occurring within the preceding twelve (12) months
shall be deemed to have committed a municipal infraction the penalty for which
shall be twenty-five dollars ($25) for each offense and fifty dollars ($50) for each
repeat offense.
C. Notice is presumed to be received by a parent if it is deposited in a depository for
mailing United States Mail, properly addressed and with the proper first-class
postage paid. Such mailing may be shown by the records of the sending agency
made in the regular course of its business.
3603 6 - 25 - 83
Perryville Code – Chapter 36 Curfew
36 04 6 - 25 - 83
D. Any minor found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be found
guilty of a misdemeanor and may be reported to juvenile services.
E. Violation of this chapter by the operator of an establishment and any agents and
employees of any operator is declared to be an infraction, the penalty for which
shall be twenty-five dollars ($25) for each initial offense.
F. Each violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 36-7. Authority of the Town Commissioners
The Board of Commissioners of the Town of Perryville shall have the authority to
suspend or amend the hours of the curfew in this chapter from time to time as it sees fit.
§ 36-8. When Effective.
This chapter will be effective twenty-one (21) days from the date of enactment.
Perryville Code- Chapter 38 Discharges into the Storm Drainage System
3801
Chapter 38
Discharges into Storm Drainage System
§ 38-1. Purpose and Intent.
§ 38-2. Definitions.
§ 38-3. Prohibited Discharge into the MS4.
§ 38-4. Exempt Discharges.
§ 38-5. Prohibition of Illicit Connections.
§ 38-6. Access and Inspections/Monitoring of Properties and Facilities.
§ 38-7. Enforcement.
[HISTORY: Added Chapter 38 Sections 38-1 through 38-7, adopted by the Town
Commissioners 06/18/19, Ord. 2019-09, effective 07/08/19.]
§ 38-1. Purpose and Intent.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of
the citizens of the Town of Perryville through the regulation of non-stormwater
discharges to the storm drainage system. This chapter establishes methods for
controlling the introduction of pollutants into the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
System (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process.
B. The objectives of this ordinance are to:
(1) Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by stormwater discharges by
any user;
(2) Prohibit illicit discharges and connections to the MS4;
(3) Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate
dumping or disposal, to the MS4; and
Perryville Code- Chapter 38 Discharges into the Storm Drainage System
3802
(4) Establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring
procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this ordinance.
C. Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter is a threat to the public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed
to be a public nuisance.
§ 38-2. DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following terms shall mean:
(1) Best Management Practices (BMPs): schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices regarding the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly
to storm water, receiving waters or storm water conveyance systems. BMPs also
include treatment practices, operating procedures and practices of control site
runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal or drainage from raw materials
storage.
(2) Best management practices minimum control measures: the following program
elements that describe how the quality of stormwater discharged from the MS4
will be controlled by incorporating activities and measurable goals:
i. Public education and outreach.
ii. Public involvement and participation.
iii. Illicit discharge detection and elimination.
iv. Construction site stormwater runoff control.
v. Post construction stormwater management.
vi. Pollution prevention and good housekeeping.
(3) Clean Water Act: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 u.s.0 1251 et seq.)
and any subsequent amendments thereto.
(4) Code official: A Town Official or Employee who is authorized by the Town
Administrator to administer and enforce this chapter.
(5) Construction activity: activities subject to NPDES construction permits. These
activities include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one (1)
acre or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing,
grading, excavating and demolition.
Perryville Code- Chapter 38 Discharges into the Storm Drainage System
3803
(6) Good Housekeeping Plan (GHP): A document which describes the BMPs and
activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of
pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce
pollutant discharges to storm water, storm water conveyance systems and/or
receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable in complying with the state
general permit for stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity.
(7) Hazardous materials: any material, including any substance, waste or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration or physical,
chemical or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to,
a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property or the
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or
otherwise managed.
(8) Illegal discharge: any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the storm
drain system, except as exempted by this chapter.
(9) Illicit connections: an illicit connection is defined as either of the following:
i. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows any illegal discharge to enter storm drain system including but not
limited to any conveyances which allow any non-storm water discharge
including sewage, process wastewater and wash water to enter storm
drain system and any connections to storm drain system from indoor
drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been
previously allowed, permitted or approved by an authorized enforcement
agency; or,
ii. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land
use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans,
maps or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement
agency.
(10) Industrial activity: activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in
40 cfr, section 122.26 (b)(14).
(11) Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4): the system of conveyances,
owned and operated by the Town, designed or used for collecting or conveying
stormwater.
(12) National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) storm water
discharge permit: a permit issued by EPA (or by the State of Maryland) that
authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the
permit is applicable on an individual, group or general area-wide basis.
Perryville Code- Chapter 38 Discharges into the Storm Drainage System
3804
(13) Non-storm water discharge: any discharge to the storm drain system that is not
composed entirely of storm water.
(14) Oil: any kind of oil in any form, including but not limited to petroleum, fuel oil,
crude oil, synthetic oil, motor oil, bio-fuel, cooking oil, grease, sludge, oil refuse,
and oil mixed with waste.
(15) Person: any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation
or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner’s
agent.
(16) Pesticide: a substance or mixture of substances intended to prevent, destroy,
repel, or migrate any pest, or substances intended for use as a plant regulator,
defoliant, or desiccant.
(17) Pollutant: anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may
include, but are not limited to paints, varnishes and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes
(including grass clippings); refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or
abandoned objects, ordinances and accumulations, so that same may cause or
contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers;
hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens;
dissolved and particulate metals; animal and pet waste; wastes and residues that
result from constructing a building or structure; and, noxious or offensive matter
of any kind.
(18) Premises: any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved
or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
(19) Storm drainage system: publicly-owned facilities by which storm water is
collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping
facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered
drainage channels, reservoirs and other drainage structures.
(20) Stormwater: any surface flow, runoff and drainage consisting entirely of water
from any form of natural precipitation and resulting from such precipitation.
(21) Waste water: any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm water,
discharged from a facility.
§ 38-3. Prohibited discharges into MS4.
A. The specific prohibitions and requirements in this section do not include all the
discharges prohibited, but are provided to address specific discharges that are
frequently found or are known to occur.
Perryville Code- Chapter 38 Discharges into the Storm Drainage System
3805
B. No person shall release or allow to be released any of the following substances into
MS4:
(1) Any new or used petroleum product.
(2) Any industrial waste.
(3) Any hazardous substance or hazardous waste, including household hazardous
waste.
(4) Any domestic sewage or septic tank waste, grease trap or grease interceptor
waste, holding tank waste, or grit trap waste.
(5) Any garbage, rubbish or other waste.
(6) Any new or used paints, including latex-based paints, oil-based paints, stains,
varnish, and primers, as well as cleaning solvents and other associated products.
(7) Any yard waste that has been moved or gathered by a person.
(8) Any wastewater that contains soap, detergent, degreaser, solvent, or surfactantbased
cleaner from a commercial motor vehicle wash facility; from any vehicle
washing, cleaning, or maintenance at any new or used motor vehicle dealership,
rental agency, body shop, repair shop, or maintenance facility; or from any
washing, cleaning or maintenance of any business or commercial or public
service vehicle, including a truck, bus or heavy equipment.
(9) Any wastewater from a commercial mobile power washer or from the washing
or other cleaning of a building exterior that contains soap, detergent, degreaser,
solvent, or any surfactant based cleaner.
(10) Any wastewater from commercial floor, rug, or carpet cleaning.
(11) Any wastewater from the wash down or other cleaning of pavement that
contains any soap, detergent solvent, degreaser, emulsifier, dispersant, or other
cleaning substance; or any wastewater from the wash down or other cleaning
of any pavement where any spill, leak, or other release of oil, motor fuel, or
other petroleum hazardous substance has occurred, unless all such materials
have been previously removed.
(12) Any effluent from a cooling tower, condenser, compressor, emissions
scrubber, emission filter, or the blowdown from a boiler.
Perryville Code- Chapter 38 Discharges into the Storm Drainage System
3806
(13) Any ready-mixed concrete, mortar, ceramic, or asphalt base material or
discharge resulting from the cleaning of vehicles or equipment containing or
used in transporting or applying such material.
(14) Any runoff, wash down water or waste from any animal pen, kennel, fowl or
livestock containment area or any pet wastes, generally.
(15) Any filter backwash from a swimming pool or fountain, except that nothing in
the ordinance shall be construed as to require the alteration of the filter
discharge plumbing of an existing swimming pool, fountain or spa if such
plumbing was compliant with applicable State, Federal, and Local regulations
at the time of construction.
(16) Any swimming pool, fountain or spa water or other water containing a level of
chlorine greater than 0.1 parts per million.
(17) Any discharge from water line disinfection by super chlorination if it contains
a level of chlorine greater than 0.1 ppm at the point of entry into the MS4 or
surface waters.
(18) Any contaminated runoff from a vehicle wrecking or storage yard.
(19) Any substance or material that will damage, block, or clog the MS4.
(20) Any release from a Petroleum Storage Tank (PST), or any leachate or runoff
from soil contaminated by leaking PST; or any discharge of pumped, confined,
or treated wastewater from the remediation of any such PST release, unless the
discharge has received an NPDES permit from the state.
(21) Any other discharge that causes or contributes to causing the Town to violate
a State water quality standard, the Town’s NPDES stormwater permit, or any
state-issued discharge permit for discharges from its MS4.
D. No person shall release or cause to be released into the MS4 any harmful quantity of
sediment, silt, earth, soil, or other material associated with clearing, grading, excavation
or other construction activities in excess of what could be retained on site or captured
by employing sediment and erosion control measures, except as allowed for in
conformance with § 38-4.
E. No person shall use pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers except in accordance with
manufacturer recommendations. Pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers shall be stored,
transported and disposed of in a manner to prevent release to the MS4.
F. No person shall tamper with, destroy, vandalize, or render inoperable any BMPs that
have been installed for the purpose of eliminating or minimizing pollutant discharges,
Perryville Code- Chapter 38 Discharges into the Storm Drainage System
3807
nor shall any person fail to install or fail to properly maintain any BMPs that have been
required by the Town or by other Local, State, or Federal jurisdictions.
§ 38-4. Exempt discharges.
Unless identified as a significant source of pollutants to waters of the state, the following
non-storm water discharges are examples of activities allowed to enter the MS4. Other activities
may apply if substantiated by permittees within the best management practices menu:
(1) Water line flushing performed by a government agency.
(2) Diverted stream flows.
(3) Rising groundwater.
(4) Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to separate storm sewer.
(5) Uncontaminated pumped groundwater.
(6) Discharges from potable water sources.
(7) Foundation drains.
(8) Air conditioning condensate.
(9) Irrigation water.
(10) Springs.
(11) Water from crawl space pumps.
(12) Footing drains.
(13) Individual residential vehicle washing.
(14) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(15) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges (< 1 ppm).
(16) Discharges or flows from firefighting activities.
(17) Other allowable discharges to consider: street wash waters; and, dye testing for
the purpose of investigating illicit connections or discharges.
(18) i. Except as provided in sub-paragraph ii., any wastewater from residential power
washing or from a commercial mobile power washer or from the washing or other
Perryville Code- Chapter 38 Discharges into the Storm Drainage System
3808
cleaning of a building exterior, that does not contain soap, detergent, degreaser,
solvent, or any surfactant based cleaner.
ii. If soap, detergent, degreaser, solvent or any surfactant based cleaner is used to
clean a building exterior, measures must be taken to prevent the resulting
wastewater runoff from entering the MS4 by directing the runoff toward vegetated
areas, and to ensure that the runoff stays off of streets and out of roadway gutters.
§ 38-5. Prohibition of illicit connections. .
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit connection to the
MS4 any domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water, process wastewater, or other
industrial waste (other than stormwater).
B. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the
MS4 is prohibited.
(1) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, prior illicit connections,
regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices
applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
C. A person is considered to be in violation of this section if the person connects a line
conveying sewage to the MS4 or allows such a connection to continue.
D. Any owner or person responsible for a property or premises which is, or may be, the
source of an illicit discharge, shall be required to implement, at the owner or person's
expense, the BMPs necessary to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the ms4.
Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the
discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable,
shall be deemed compliant with the provisions of this section.
§ 38-6. Access and inspection/monitoring of properties and facilities.
A. When a code official has reasonable cause to believe that a violation of this chapter
exists or when entry is required for periodic inspections and monitoring to determine
compliance, the code official is authorized to enter the structure or premises at
reasonable times to inspect.
B. Prior to inspection, the code official must make reasonable efforts to locate the owner
or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises to request entry.
If entry is refused or not obtained, the code official is authorized to pursue recourse as
provided by law.
Perryville Code- Chapter 38 Discharges into the Storm Drainage System
3809
§ 38-7. Enforcement.
A. Except as provided in subsection b., a violation of this chapter or of any order issued
under this chapter is a municipal infraction. A violation is punishable by a fine in the
amount of $250 for a first offense, $500 for a second offense and $1,000 for a third and
any subsequent offense. Each day that a violation continues is a separate offense.
B. A knowing and willful violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine
in the amount of $1,000, imprisonment for up to 120 days, or both fine and
imprisonment. Each day that a knowing and willful violation continues is a separate
offense.
C. When a code official finds that a person has violated this chapter, the code official may
order compliance by issuing a notice of violation to the responsible person. A notice
of violation may require, without limitation, one or more of the following:
(1) Performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(2) Elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(3) That the violator cease and desist the violating discharges, practices, or
operations;
(4) Abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination;
(5) Restoration of any affected property;
(6) Payment of a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000 to cover administrative costs;
and
(7) Implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
D. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of the affected property is required, the
notice of violation shall set forth a deadline within which the remediation or restoration
must be completed. The notice of violation shall further advise that, if the violator fails
to remediate or restore by the date specified in the notice, the work will be performed
by the Town or its designees at the violator’s expense.
E. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the code
official by filing a notice of appeal with the Town Administrator. The notice of appeal
shall specify all grounds for the appeal and shall set forth with particularity the manner
in which the notice of violation was arbitrary, capricious or illegal. The notice of
appeal must be received within 10 days from the date of the notice of violation. A
hearing on the appeal shall be held before the town board of appeals within 45 days
from the date of receipt of the notice of violation. The board of appeals, by order, shall
Perryville Code- Chapter 38 Discharges into the Storm Drainage System
3810
affirm, reverse or modify the determination of the code official. The decision of the
board of appeals shall be final.
F. A person to whom an order of the board of appeals is directed shall comply with the
order within such time as specified by the board in its order. If the person does not
comply with the order within the time specified by the board, representatives of the
town may enter onto the affected property and abate the violation or restore the
property, at the cost and expense of the owner of the property. A person may not hinder
or interfere with the Town’s exercise of its rights to abate the violation or restore the
property.
G. Within ten days after abatement of a violation under subsection f., the Town shall notify
the owner of the property of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The
property owner may file with the Town Administrator a written protest objecting to the
amount of the assessment within ten days after receipt of the notice. The Town
Administrator shall consider and decide the protest. If the amount due is not paid within
the time specified in the decision of the Town Administrator, or by the expiration of
the time for filing a protest if no protest is filed, the charges shall become a lien on the
property until paid. Interest shall accrue on all unpaid amounts at the rate of 8% per
annum.
H. In addition to or in lieu of other penalties and enforcement remedies available to the
Town under this chapter, the Town may seek injunctive relief and reasonable attorney
fees from the court.
I. The enforcement remedies available to the town under this section are in addition to
any remedies available under Federal, State or Local law. Remedies are not exclusive
but may be pursued cumulatively.
Perryville Code – Chapter 40 Dogs and Other Animals
40 01
Chapter 40
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
ARTICLE I
Animal Control
§ 40-1. Animal Control by Cecil County.
A. Animal Control in the Town of Perryville shall be undertaken, administered and
enforced by Cecil County, Maryland, pursuant to Chapter 142 of the Cecil
County Code in the same manner as in the incorporated areas of Cecil County,
The Town of Perryville expressly subjects itself to the provisions of Chapter 142.
B. The Town of Perryville may enter into agreements with Cecil County, Maryland,
to implement Subsection A. of this section.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Commissioners of the Town of Perryville during
codification: see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II. Amendments noted where
applicable. Repealed Chapter 40 Dogs and Other Animals of the Code of the Town
of Perryville and added Chapter 40 Dogs and Other Animals Article I, Section 40-1
Animal Control by Emergency Ordinance 2016-14 on 7/5/16, effective 7/5/16]
Perryville Code – Chapter 43 Fire and Burning Regulations
CHAPTER 43
FIRE AND BURNING REGULATIONS
§ 43-1. Prohibitions.
§ 43-2. Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Commissioners of the Town of Perryville 2-7-
1989 as Ord. No. 89-2. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, weeds and grass – See Chapter 30.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse – See Chapter 50.
Property maintenance – See Chapter 63.
Property nuisances – See Chapter 64.
§ 43-1. Prohibitions.
A. No person (as defined in § 82-8 of the Code) shall cause, suffer, allow, start or
permit a fire within the limits of the Town of Perryville except as provided in this
chapter. Only those fires permitted by the Cecil County Health Department,
Division of Environmental Health Services, pursuant to Title 10 of the
Regulations of Health and Mental Hygiene, Subtitle 18, as amended from time to
time, shall be permitted within the Town of Perryville. Prior to any such burning,
a permit shall be obtained from the Cecil County Health Department.
B. It shall be a violation of this chapter to burn refuse, garbage, trash, tires, roofing
material, lumber, railroad ties, piling hazardous waste or any other such
residential, institutional, commercial or industrial waste or to permit or cause any
fires not specifically permitted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 43-2. Violations and penalties.
A violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine
not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.) or imprisonment for thirty (30) days, or both.
4301 2 - 25 - 91
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4601 4-27-15
Chapter 46
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 46-1. Findings.
§ 46-1.1 Statutory Authorization
§ 46-2. Statement of Purpose.
§ 46-3. Areas to Which This Chapter Applies.
§ 46-4. Basis for Establishing Special Flood Hazard Areas and BFE’s.
§ 46-5. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.
§ 46-6. Interpretation.
§ 46-7. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability.
§ 46-8. Severability.
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 46-9. Words and terms defined.
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 46-10. Designation of the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 46-11. Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 46-12. Use and Interpretation of FIRM’s.
§ 46-13. Permits Required and Expiration.
§ 46-14. Application Required.
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4602 4-27-15
§ 46-15. Review of Application.
§ 46-16. Inspections.
§ 46-17. Submissions Required Prior to Final Inspection.
ARTICLE IV
Requirements in all Flood Hazard Areas
§ 46-18. Application of Requirements.
§ 46-19. Subdivision Proposals and Development Proposals.
§ 46-20. Protection of Water Supply and Sanitary Sewage Systems.
§ 46-21. Building and Structures.
§ 46-22. Placement of Fill.
§ 46-23. Historic Structures.
§ 46-24. Manufactured Homes.
§ 46-25. Recreational Vehicles
§ 46-26. Critical and Essential Facilities.
§ 46-27. Temporary Structures and Temporary Storage.
§ 46-28. Gas or Liquid Storage Tanks.
§ 46-29. Functionally Dependent Uses.
ARTICLE V
Requirements in Flood Hazard Areas
§ 46-30. General Requirements.
§ 46-31. Flood Protection Setbacks.
§ 46-32. Development that Affects Flood-Carrying Capacity of Nontidal Waters of the
State.
§ 46-33. Residential Structures and Residential Portions of Mixed Use Structures.
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4603 4-27-15
§ 46-34. Nonresidential Structures and nonresidential Portions of Mixed Use
Structures.
§ 46-35. Horizontal Additions.
§ 46-36. Accessory Structures.
ARTICLE VI
Variances
§ 46-37. General.
§ 46-38. Application for a Variance.
§ 46-39. Consideration for Variances.
§ 46-40. Limitations for Granting Variances.
ARTICLE VII
Requirements in Coastal High Hazard Areas (V Zones) and Coastal A Zones
§ 46-41. General Requirements.
§ 46-42. Location and Site Preparation.
§ 46-43. Residential and Nonresidential Structures.
§ 46-44. Horizontal Additions to Structures.
§ 46-45. Accessory Structures.
§ 46-46. Other Structures and Development.
ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement
§ 46-47. Compliance Required.
§ 46-48. Notice of Violation and Stop Work Order.
§ 46-49. Violations and Penalties.
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4604 4-27-15
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Commissioners of the Town of Perryville 11-5-
1991 as Ord. No. 91-5. Amendments noted where applicable. Repealed Chapter 46, Flood
Damage Control, Sections 46-1 through 46-32 Code of Town of Perryville, by adding
Chapter 46, Floodplain Management Sections 46-1 through 46-49 Code of Town of
Perryville by Ord. 2013-02, adopted with amendments 6-4-2013]. Amending the Floodplain
Management Ordinance recently enacted by Ord. 2013-02 by adding Section 46-1.1 titled
Statutory Authorization adopted by Ord. 2013-04 on 9-3-13. Repealing and reenacting,
with amendments Chapter 46, Floodplain Management adopted 4-7-2015 by Ord. 2015-05,
Sections 46-1-1, 46-2(N), 46-4(A), 46-9, 46-10, 46-11, 45-12(E), 46-14(B), 46-14(A)(10) and
(13), 46-21, 46-22, 46-24, 46-26, 46-30, 46-32, 46-34, 45-35, 46-36(A), 46-37(D), 46-38(C), 46-
39, 46-40(A), 46-41, 46-44, 46-45(A), and 46-47(B) Code of the Town of Perryville]
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
§ 46-1. Findings
The Federal Emergency Management Agency has identified special flood hazard areas
within the boundaries of the Town of Perryville. Special flood hazard areas are subject to
periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood
protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety and general welfare. Structures that are inadequately elevated, improperly
floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damage also contribute to flood losses.
The Town of Perryville, by resolution, agreed to meet the requirements of the National
Flood Insurance Program and was accepted for participation in the program on March 1, 1977.
Since, development and construction have been required to comply with floodplain management
regulations then in effect. From and after the effective date of this Chapter, all development and
new construction must comply with this Chapter.
§ 46-1.1 Statutory Authorization. [Adopted by Ord. 2013-04 on 9-3-13]
The enactment of floodplain management regulations is in furtherance of the public
health, safety and welfare that may be regulated through the police power. The Town may enact
and enforce this Chapter as an exercise of the Town’s broad police and enforcement powers
granted by the Local Government Article of the Maryland Annotated Code (implementing
Article XI-E of the Maryland Constitution), and § 4-5 of the Town of Perryville Charter (dealing
with enforcement of ordinances). The Mayor and Commissioners of the Town of Perryville
adopts this Chapter pursuant to this authority and such other authority that may be provided by
law.
§ 46-2. Statement of Purpose
It is the purpose of this Chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare,
and to:
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4605 4-27-15
(A) Protect human life, health and welfare;
(B) Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or
minimize flood damage in the future;
(C) Minimize flooding of water supply and sanitary sewage disposal systems;
(D) Maintain natural drainage;
(E) Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental units and its
residents, by discouraging unwise design and construction of development in areas
subject to flooding;
(F) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(G) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(H) Minimize damage to public facilities and other utilities such as water and gas mains,
electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges;
(I) Reinforce that those who build in and occupy special flood hazard areas should
assume responsibility for their actions;
(J) Minimize the impact of development on adjacent properties within and near floodprone
areas;
(K) Provide that the flood storage and conveyance functions of floodplains are
maintained;
(L) Minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial functions of
floodplains;
(M) Prevent floodplain uses that are either hazardous or environmentally incompatible;
and
(N) Meet community participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program
as set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) at 44 CFR Section 59.22.
§ 46-3. Areas to Which This Chapter Applies
This Chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the
Town of Perryville, and identified in §46-4.
§ 46-4. Basis for Establishing Special Flood Hazard Areas and BFEs
(A) For the purposes of this Chapter, the minimum basis for establishing special flood
hazard areas and base flood elevations is the most recent Flood Insurance Study for
Cecil County, Maryland and all incorporated areas effective July 8, 2013 and May 4,
2015, or the most recent revision thereof, and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate
Map(s) and all subsequent amendments and revisions to the FIRMs. The FIS and
FIRMs are retained on file and available to the public at the Town of Perryville Town
Hall.
(B) Where field surveyed topography or digital topography indicates that ground
elevations are below the closest applicable base flood elevation, even in areas not
delineated as a special flood hazard on the FIRM, the area shall be considered as
special flood hazard area.
(C) To establish base flood elevations in special flood hazard areas that do not have such
elevations shown on the FIRM, the Floodplain Administrator may provide the best
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4606 4-27-15
available data for base flood elevations, may require the applicant to obtain available
information from Federal, State or other sources, or may require the applicant to
establish special flood hazard areas and base flood elevations as set forth in §46-12,
§46-13, and §46-14 of this Chapter.
§ 46-5. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
This Chapter is not intended to repeal or abrogate any existing regulations and ordinances,
including subdivision regulations, zoning ordinances, building codes, or any existing easements,
covenants, or deed restrictions. In the event of a conflict between this Chapter and any other
ordinance, the more restrictive shall govern.
§ 46-6. Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of this Chapter, all provisions shall be:
(A) Considered as minimum requirements;
(B) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and,
(C) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes.
Notes referencing publications of the Federal Emergency Management Agency refer to the
most recent edition of those publications, are intended only as guidance, and do not bind or alter
the authority of the Floodplain Administrator to interpret and apply this Chapter.
§ 46-7. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
The degree of flood protection required by this Chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can
and will occur, and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This Chapter
does not imply that land outside of the special flood hazard areas or uses that are permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage.
§ 46-8. Severability
Should any section or provision of this Chapter be declared by the courts to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Chapter as a whole,
or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4607 4-27-15
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 46-9. Words and terms defined.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Chapter shall be
interpreted to have the meaning they have in common usage and to give this Chapter the most
reasonable application. Words that are italicized in this Chapter are defined in this Section.
Accessory Structure: A building or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily
incidental and subordinate to, the principal structure. For the purposes of this Chapter, an
accessory structure shall be used solely for parking of vehicles and limited storage.
Agreement to Submit an Elevation Certificate: A form on which the applicant for a permit to
construct a building or structure, to construct certain horizontal additions, to place or replace a
manufactured home, to substantially improve a building, structure, or manufactured home,
agrees to have an Elevation Certificate prepared by a licensed professional engineer or licensed
professional surveyor, as specified by the Floodplain Administrator, and to submit the certificate:
(1) Upon placement of the lowest floor and prior to further vertical construction; and
(2) Prior to the final inspection and issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy.
Alteration of a Watercourse: For the purpose of this Chapter, alteration of a watercourse
includes, but is not limited to widening, deepening or relocating the channel, including
excavation or filling of the channel. Alteration of a watercourse does not include construction of
a road, bridge, culvert, dam, or in-stream pond unless the channel is proposed to be realigned or
relocated as part of such construction.
Area of Shallow Flooding: A designated Zone AO on the Flood Insurance Rate Map with a 1-
percent annual chance or greater of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where
velocity flow may be evident; such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Base Building: The building to which an addition is being added. This term is used in
provisions relating to additions.
Base Flood: The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year; the base flood also is referred to as the 1-percent annual chance (100-year) flood.
Base Flood Elevation: The water surface elevation of the base flood in relation to the datum
specified on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map. In areas of shallow flooding, the base
flood elevation is the highest adjacent natural grade elevation plus the depth number specified in
feet on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, or at least four (4) feet if the depth number is not
specified.
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4608 4-27-15
Basement: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Building Code(s): The effective Maryland Building Performance Standards (COMAR
05.02.07), including the building code, residential code, and existing building code.
Certificate of Occupancy or Use: A permit to legally occupy or use a building for the intended
purpose.
Coastal A Zone: An area within a special flood hazard area, landward of a coastal high hazard
area (V Zone) or landward of a shoreline without a mapped coastal high hazard area, in which
the principal source(s) of flooding are astronomical tides and storm surges, and in which, during
base flood conditions, the potential exists for breaking waves with heights greater than or equal
to 1.5 feet. The inland limit of the Coastal A Zone may be delineated on FIRMs as the Limit of
Moderate Wave Action (LiMWA).
Coastal High Hazard Area: An area of special flood hazard extending from offshore to the
inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high
velocity wave action from storms. Coastal high hazard areas also are referred to as “V Zones”
and are designated on FIRMs as zones VE or V1-30.
Community: A political subdivision of the State of Maryland (county, city or town) that has
authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations within its jurisdictional
boundaries.
Critical and Essential Facilities: Buildings and other structures that are intended to remain
operational in the event of extreme environmental loading from flood, wind, snow or
earthquakes. Critical and essential facilities typically include hospitals, fire stations, police
stations, storage of critical records, facilities that handle or store hazardous materials, and similar
facilities.
Declaration of Land Restriction (Nonconversion Agreement): A form signed by the owner to
agree not to convert or modify in any manner that is inconsistent with the terms of the permit and
this Chapter, certain enclosures below the lowest floor of elevated buildings and certain
accessory structures. The form requires the owner to record it on the property deed to inform
future owners of the restrictions.
Development: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not
limited to buildings or other structures, placement of manufactured homes, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
The term “development” also includes the subdivision of land.
Elevation Certificate: FEMA form, on which surveyed elevations and other data pertinent to a
property and a building are identified and which shall be completed by a licensed professional
land surveyor or a licensed professional engineer, as specified by the Floodplain Administrator.
When used to document the height above grade of buildings in special flood hazard areas for
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4609 4-27-15
which base flood elevation data are not available, the Elevation Certificate shall be completed in
accordance with the instructions issued by FEMA.
Enclosure Below the Lowest Floor: An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure that is located
below an elevated building, is surrounded by walls on all sides, and is usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, provided that such
enclosure is built in accordance with the applicable design requirements specified in this
Chapter. Also see “Lowest Floor.”
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA): The Federal agency with the overall
responsibility for administering the National Flood Insurance Program.
Flood or Flooding: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters, and/or
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood Damage-Resistant Materials: Any construction material that is capable of withstanding
direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining any damage that requires more
than cosmetic repair.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): An official map on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has delineated special flood hazard areas to indicate the magnitude and
nature of flood hazards, to designate applicable flood zones, and to delineate floodways, if
applicable. FIRMs that have been prepared in digital format or converted to digital format are
referred to as Digital FIRMs (DFIRM).
Flood Insurance Study (FIS): The official report in which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has provided flood profiles, floodway information, and the water surface
elevations.
Flood Opening: A flood opening (non-engineered) is an opening that is used to meet the
prescriptive requirement of 1 square inch of net open area for every square foot of enclosed area.
An engineered flood opening is an opening that is designed and certified by a licensed
professional engineer or licensed architect as meeting certain performance characteristics,
including providing automatic entry and exit of floodwaters; this certification requirement may
be satisfied by an individual certification for a specific structure or issuance of an Evaluation
Report by the ICC Evaluation Service, Inc.
Flood Protection Elevation: The base flood elevation plus two (2) feet of freeboard. Freeboard
is a factor of safety that compensates for uncertainty in factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such
as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams, climate change, and the
hydrologic effect of urbanization in a watershed.
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4610 4-27-15
Flood Protection Setback: A distance measured perpendicular to the top of bank of a
watercourse that delineates an area to be left undisturbed to minimize future flood damage and to
recognize the potential for bank erosion. Along nontidal waters of the State, the flood protection
setback is:
(1) 100 feet, if the watercourse has special flood hazard areas shown on the FIRM,
except where the setback extends beyond the boundary of the flood hazard area; or
(2) 50 feet, if the watercourse does not have special flood hazard areas shown on the
FIRM.
Flood Zone: A designation for areas that are shown on Flood Insurance Rate Maps:
(1) Zone A: Special flood hazard areas subject to inundation by the 1-percent annual
chance (100-year) flood; base flood elevations are not determined.
(2) Zone AE and Zone A1-30: Special flood hazard areas subject to inundation by the
1-percent annual chance (100-year) flood; base flood elevations are determined;
floodways may or may not be determined. In areas subject to tidal flooding, the Limit
of Moderate Wave Action may or may not be delineated.
(3) Zone AH and Zone AO: Areas of shallow flooding, with flood depths of 1 to 3 feet
(usually areas of ponding or sheet flow on sloping terrain), with or without BFEs or
designated flood depths.
(4) Zone B and Zone X (shaded): Areas subject to inundation by the 0.2-percent annual
chance (500-year) flood; areas subject to the 1-percent annual chance (100-year) flood
with average depths of less than 1 foot or with contributing drainage area less than 1
square mile; and areas protected from the base flood by levees.
(5) Zone C and Zone X (unshaded): Areas outside of Zones designated A, AE, A1-30,
AO, VE, V1-30, B, and X (shaded).
(6) Zone VE and Zone V1-30: Special flood hazard areas subject to inundation by the
1-percent annual chance (100-year) flood and subject to high velocity wave action
(also see coastal high hazard area).
Floodplain: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source.
Floodproofing or Floodproofed: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to buildings or structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents,
such that the buildings or structures are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
Floodproofing Certificate: FEMA form that is to be completed, signed and sealed by a
licensed professional engineer or licensed architect to certify that the design of floodproofing and
proposed methods of construction are in accordance with the applicable requirements of §46-
35(B) of this Chapter.
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4611 4-27-15
Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to pass the base flood discharge such that the cumulative increase in the water
surface elevation of the base flood discharge is no more than a designated height. When shown
on a FIRM, the floodway is referred to as the “designated floodway.”
Free-of-Obstruction: A term that describes open foundations (pilings, columns, or piers)
without attached elements or foundation components that would obstruct the free passage of
floodwaters and waves beneath structures that are elevated on such foundations.
Freeboard: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to provide a factor of
safety for uncertainties in calculations, wave actions, subsidence or other unpredictable effects.
Functionally Dependent Use: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is
located or carried out in close proximity to water; the term includes only docking facilities, port
facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship
building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.
Highest Adjacent Grade: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to
construction, next to the proposed foundation of a structure.
Historic Structure: Any structure that is:
(1) Individually listed in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by
the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listings on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing
to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily
determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; or
(3) Individually listed on the Maryland Register of Historic Places.
Hydrologic and Hydraulic Engineering Analyses: Analyses performed by a licensed
professional engineer, in accordance with standard engineering practices that are accepted by the
Maryland Department of the Environment (Nontidal Wetlands & Waterways) and FEMA, used
to determine the base flood, other frequency floods, flood elevations, floodway information and
boundaries, and flood profiles.
Letter of Map Change (LOMC): A Letter of Map Change is an official FEMA determination,
by letter, that amends or revises an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance
Study. Letters of Map Change include:
Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA): An amendment based on technical data showing
that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A
LOMA amends the current effective Flood Insurance Rate Map and establishes that a
specific property or structure is not located in a special flood hazard area.
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4612 4-27-15
Letter of Map Revision (LOMR): A revision based on technical data that may show
changes to flood zones, flood elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and
planimetric features. A Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F) is a
determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base
flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer exposed to flooding associated with the base
flood. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and
placed in accordance with the Town’s floodplain management regulations.
Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment as to
whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum
NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard
areas. A Conditional Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (CLOMR-F) is a
determination that a parcel of land or proposed structure that will be elevated by fill
would not be inundated by the base flood if fill is placed on the parcel as proposed or the
structure is built as proposed. A CLOMR does not revise the effective Flood Insurance
Rate Map or Flood Insurance Study; upon submission and approval of certified as-built
documentation, a Letter of Map Revision may be issued by FEMA, to revise the effective
FIRM.
Licensed: As used in this Chapter, licensed refers to professionals who are authorized to
practice in the State of Maryland by issuance of licenses by the Maryland Board of Architects,
Maryland Board of Professional Engineers, Maryland Board of Professional Land Surveyors,
and the Maryland Real Estate Appraisers and Home Inspectors Commission.
Limit of Moderate Wave Action (LiMWA): Inland limit of the area affected by waves greater
than 1.5 feet during the base flood. Base flood conditions between the VE Zone and the LiMWA
will be similar to, but less severe than those in the VE Zone.
Lowest Floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) of a building
or structure; the floor of an enclosure below the lowest floor is not the lowest floor provided the
enclosure is constructed in accordance with this Chapter. The lowest floor of a manufactured
home is the bottom of the lowest horizontal supporting member (longitudinal chassis frame
beam).
Manufactured Home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities. The term manufactured home does not include a recreational
vehicle.
Market Value: The price at which a property will change hands between a willing buyer and a
willing seller, neither party being under compulsion to buy or sell and both having reasonable
knowledge of relevant facts. For the purposes of this Chapter, the market value of a building is
determined by a licensed real estate appraiser or the most recent, full phased-in assessment value
of the building (improvement) determined by the Maryland Department of Assessments and
Taxation.
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4613 4-27-15
Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE): A principal department of the State of
Maryland that is charged with, among other responsibilities, the coordination of the National
Flood Insurance Program in Maryland (NFIP State Coordinator) and the administration of
regulatory programs for development and construction that occur within the waters of the State,
including nontidal wetlands, nontidal waters and floodplains, and State and private tidal wetlands
(Tidal Wetlands). Unless otherwise specified, “MDE” refers to the Department’s Wetlands and
Waterways Program.
Mixed-use Structure: Any structure that is used or intended for use for a mixture of
nonresidential and residential uses in the same structure.
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP): The program authorized by the U.S. Congress in
42 U.S.C. §§4001 - 4129. The NFIP makes flood insurance coverage available in communities
that agree to adopt and enforce minimum regulatory requirements for development in areas prone
to flooding.
New Construction: Structures, including additions and improvements, and the placement of
manufactured homes, for which the start of construction commenced on or after March 1, 1977,
the initial effective date of the Town of Perryville Flood Insurance Rate Map, including any
subsequent improvements, alterations, modifications, and additions to such structures.
NFIP State Coordinator: See Maryland Department of the Environment.
Nontidal Waters of the State: As used in this Chapter, “nontidal waters of the State” refers to
any stream or body of water within the State that is subject to State regulation, including the
“100-year frequency floodplain of free-flowing waters.” COMAR 26.17.04 states that “the
landward boundaries of any tidal waters shall be deemed coterminous with the wetlands
boundary maps adopted pursuant to Environment Article, §16-301, Annotated Code of
Maryland.” Therefore, the boundary between the tidal and nontidal waters of the State is the
tidal wetlands boundary.
Person: An individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, or any
other entity, including State and local governments and agencies.
Recreational Vehicle: A vehicle that is built on a single chassis, 400 square feet or less when
measured at the largest horizontal projection, designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a light duty truck, and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA): The land in the floodplain subject to a one-percent or
greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are designated by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in Flood Insurance Studies and on Flood Insurance
Rate Maps as Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-30, and A99. The term includes areas shown on other
flood maps that are identified in §46-5.
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4614 4-27-15
Start of Construction: The date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was
within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of
piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations
or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory structures, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the
main structure. For substantial improvements, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Structure: That which is built or constructed; specifically, a walled and roofed building,
including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
Substantial Damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a building or structure whereby the
cost of restoring the building or structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed
50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the damage occurred. Also
used as “substantially damaged” structures.
Substantial Improvement: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement
of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of
the building or structure before the start of construction of the improvement. The term includes
structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a building or
structure to correct existing violations of State or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official prior to the
submission of an application for a permit and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe
living conditions.
Temporary Structure: A structure installed, used, or erected for a period of less than 180 days.
Variance: A grant of relief from the strict application of one or more requirements of this
Chapter.
Violation: Any construction or development in a special flood hazard area that is being
performed without an issued permit. The failure of a building, structure, or other development
for which a permit is issued to be fully compliant with this Chapter and the conditions of the
issued permit. A building, structure, or other development without the required design
certifications, the Elevation Certificate, or other evidence of compliance required is presumed to
be a violation until such time as the required documentation is provided.
Watercourse: The channel, including channel banks and bed, of nontidal waters of the State.
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4615 4-27-15
Waters of the State: Include:
(1) Both surface and underground waters within the boundaries of the State subject to its
jurisdiction;
(2) That portion of the Atlantic Ocean within the boundaries of the State;
(3) The Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries;
(4) All ponds, lakes, rivers, streams, public ditches, tax ditches, and public drainage
systems within the State, other than those designed and used to collect, convey, or
dispose of sanitary sewage; and
(5) The floodplain of free-flowing waters determined by MDE on the basis of the 100-
year flood frequency.
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 46-10. Designation of the Floodplain Administrator
The Director of Planning and Zoning is hereby appointed to administer and implement this
Chapter and is referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator
may:
(A) Delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in this Chapter to qualified technical
personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and other employees.
(B) Enter into a written agreement or written contract with another Maryland community
or private sector entity to administer specific provisions of this Chapter.
Administration of any part of this Chapter by another entity shall not relieve the Town
of its responsibilities pursuant to the participation requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program as set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) at 44 CFR
Section 59.22.
§ 46-11. Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include but are not
limited to:
(A) Review applications for permits to determine whether proposed activities will be
located in flood hazard areas.
(B) Interpret floodplain boundaries and provide available base flood elevation and flood
hazard information.
(C) Review applications to determine whether proposed activities will be reasonably safe
from flooding and require new construction and substantial improvements to meet the
requirements of this Chapter.
(D) Review applications to determine whether all necessary permits have been obtained
from the Federal, State or local agencies from which prior or concurrent approval is
required; in particular, permits from MDE for any construction, reconstruction, repair,
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4616 4-27-15
or alteration of a dam, reservoir, or waterway obstruction (including bridges, culverts,
structures), any alteration of a watercourse, or any change of the course, current, or
cross section of a stream or body of water, including any change to the 100-year
frequency floodplain of free-flowing nontidal waters of the State.
(E) Verify that applicants proposing an alteration of a watercourse have notified adjacent
communities and MDE (NFIP State Coordinator), and have submitted copies of such
notifications to FEMA.
(F) Advise applicants for new construction or substantial improvement of structures that
are located within an area of the Coastal Barrier Resources System established by the
Coastal Barrier Resources Act that Federal flood insurance is not available on such
structures; areas subject to this limitation are shown on Flood Insurance Rate Maps as
Coastal Barrier Resource System Areas (CBRS) or Otherwise Protected Areas (OPA).
(G) Approve applications and issue permits to develop in flood hazard areas if the
provisions of this Chapter have been met, or disapprove applications if the provisions
of this Chapter have not been met.
(H) Inspect or cause to be inspected, buildings, structures, and other development for
which permits have been issued to determine compliance with this Chapter or to
determine if non-compliance has occurred or violations have been committed.
(I) Review Elevation Certificates and require incomplete or deficient certificates to be
corrected.
(J) Submit to FEMA, or require applicants to submit to FEMA, data and information
necessary to maintain FIRMs, including hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
analyses prepared by or for the Town of Perryville, within six months after such data
and information becomes available if the analyses indicate changes in base flood
elevations or boundaries.
(K) Maintain and permanently keep records that are necessary for the administration of
this Chapter, including:
(1) Flood Insurance Studies, Flood Insurance Rate Maps (including historic studies
and maps and current effective studies and maps) and Letters of Map Change;
and
(2) Documentation supporting issuance and denial of permits, Elevation
Certificates, documentation of the elevation (in relation to the datum on the
FIRM) to which structures have been floodproofed, other required design
certifications, variances, and records of enforcement actions taken to correct
violations of this Chapter.
(L) Enforce the provisions of this Chapter, investigate violations, issue notices of
violations or stop work orders, and require permit holders to take corrective action.
(M) Provide proof of compliance with the intent of this Chapter, by preparing a staff report
with recommendation to the Board of Appeals for each application for a variance.
(N) Administer the requirements related to proposed work on existing buildings:
(1) Make determinations as to whether buildings and structures that are located in
flood hazard areas and that are damaged by any cause have been substantially
damaged.
(2) Make reasonable efforts to notify owners of substantially damaged structures of
the need to obtain a permit to repair, rehabilitate, or reconstruct, and prohibit the
non-compliant repair of substantially damaged buildings except for temporary
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4617 4-27-15
emergency protective measures necessary to secure a property or stabilize a
building or structure to prevent additional damage.
(O) Undertake, as determined appropriate by the Floodplain Administrator due to the
circumstances, other actions which may include but are not limited to: issuing press
releases, public service announcements, and other public information materials related
to permit requests and repair of damaged structures; coordinating with other Federal,
State, and local agencies to assist with substantial damage determinations; providing
owners of damaged structures information related to the proper repair of damaged
structures in special flood hazard areas; and assisting property owners with
documentation necessary to file claims for Increased Cost of Compliance coverage
under NFIP flood insurance policies.
(P) Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency when the corporate boundaries of
the Town of Perryville have been modified and:
(1) Provide a map that clearly delineates the new corporate boundaries or the new
area for which the authority to regulate pursuant to this Chapter has either been
assumed or relinquished through annexation; and
(2) If the FIRM for any annexed area includes special flood hazard areas that have
flood zones that have regulatory requirements that are not set forth in this
Chapter, prepare amendments to this Chapter to adopt the FIRM and appropriate
requirements, and submit the amendments to the governing body for adoption;
such adoption shall take place within six months of the date of annexation and a
copy of the amended regulations shall be provided to MDE (NFIP State
Coordinator) and FEMA.
(Q) Upon the request of FEMA, complete and submit a report concerning participation in
the NFIP which may request information regarding the number of buildings in the
SFHA, number of permits issued for development in the SFHA, and number of
variances issued for development in the SFHA.
§ 46-12. Use and Interpretation of FIRMs
The Floodplain Administrator shall make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact
location of special flood hazard areas, floodplain boundaries, and floodway boundaries. The
following shall apply to the use and interpretation of FIRMs and data:
(A) Where field surveyed topography indicates that ground elevations:
(1) Are below the base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special
flood hazard area on a FIRM, the area shall be considered as special flood
hazard area and subject to the requirements of this Chapter;
(2) Are above the base flood elevation, the area shall be regulated as special flood
hazard area unless the applicant obtains a Letter of Map Change that removes
the area from the special flood hazard area.
(B) In FEMA-identified special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and
floodway data have not been identified and in areas where FEMA has not identified
special flood hazard areas, any other flood hazard data available from a Federal,
State, or other source shall be reviewed and reasonably used.
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4618 4-27-15
(C) Base flood elevations and designated floodway boundaries on FIRMs and in FISs shall
take precedence over base flood elevations and floodway boundaries by any other
sources if such sources show reduced floodway widths and/or lower base flood
elevations.
(D) Other sources of data shall be reasonably used if such sources show increased base
flood elevations and/or larger floodway areas than are shown on FIRMs and in FISs.
(E) If a Preliminary Flood Insurance Rate Map and/or a Preliminary Flood Insurance
Study has been provided by FEMA:
(1) Upon the issuance of a Letter of Final Determination by FEMA, if the
preliminary flood hazard data is more restrictive than the effective data, it shall
be used and shall replace the flood hazard data previously provided from FEMA
for the purposes of administering this Chapter.
(2) Prior to the issuance of a Letter of Final Determination by FEMA, the use of
preliminary flood hazard data shall be deemed the best available data pursuant to
§46-4(C) and used where no base flood elevations and/or floodway areas are
provided on the effective FIRM.
(3) Prior to issuance of a Letter of Final Determination by FEMA, if the use of
preliminary flood hazard data is permitted where the preliminary base flood
elevations, floodplain or floodway boundaries exceed the base flood elevations
and/or designated floodway widths in existing flood hazard data provided by
FEMA. Such preliminary data may be subject to change and/or appeal to
FEMA.
§ 46-13. Permits Required and Expiration
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to begin any development or construction which is
wholly within, partially within, or in contact with any flood hazard area established in
§46-4, including but not limited to: filling; grading; construction of new structures;
the substantial improvement of buildings or structures, including repair of substantial
damage; placement or replacement of manufactured homes, including substantial
improvement or repair of substantial damage of manufactured homes; erecting or
installing a temporary structure, or alteration of a watercourse, until a permit is
obtained from the Town of Perryville. No such permit shall be issued until the
requirements of this Chapter have been met.
(B) In addition to the permits required in paragraph (A), applicants for permits in nontidal
waters of the State are advised to contact MDE. Unless waived by MDE, pursuant to
Code of Maryland Regulations 26.17.04, Construction on Nontidal Waters and
Floodplains, MDE regulates the “100-year frequency floodplain of free-flowing
waters,” also referred to as nontidal waters of the State. To determine the 100-year
frequency floodplain, hydrologic calculations are based on the ultimate development
of the watershed, assuming existing zoning. The resulting flood hazard areas
delineated using the results of such calculations may be different than the special flood
hazard areas established in §46-4 of this Chapter. A permit from the Town of
Perryville is still required in addition to any State requirements.
(C) A permit is valid provided the actual start of work is within 180 days of the date of
permit issuance. Requests for extensions shall be submitted in writing and justifiable
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4619 4-27-15
cause demonstrated. The Floodplain Administrator may grant, in writing, one or more
extensions of time, for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each and provided
there has been no amendment or revision to the basis for establishing special flood
hazard areas and BFEs set forth in §46-4.
§ 46-14. Application Required
Application for a permit shall be made by the owner of the property or the owner’s
authorized agent (herein referred to as the applicant) prior to the start of any work. The
application shall be on a form furnished for that purpose.
(A) Application Contents
At a minimum, applications shall include:
(1) Site plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and existing
and proposed topography of the area in question, and the location of existing and
proposed structures, excavation, filling, storage of materials, drainage facilities,
and other proposed activities.
(2) Elevation of the existing natural ground where buildings or structures are
proposed, referenced to the datum on the FIRM.
(3) Delineation of flood hazard areas, designated floodway boundaries, flood zones,
base flood elevations, and flood protection setbacks. Base flood elevations shall
be used to delineate the boundary of flood hazard areas and such delineations
shall prevail over the boundary of SFHAs shown on FIRMs.
(4) Where floodways are not delineated or base flood elevations are not shown on
the FIRMs, the Floodplain Administrator has the authority to require the
applicant to use information provided by the Floodplain Administrator,
information that is available from Federal, State, or other sources, or to
determine such information using accepted engineering practices or methods
approved by the Floodplain Administrator.
(5) Determination of the base flood elevations, for development proposals and
subdivision proposals, each with at least 5 lots or at least 5 acres, whichever is
the lesser, in special flood hazard areas where base flood elevations are not
shown on the FIRM. If hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses are
submitted, such analyses shall be performed in accordance with the
requirements and specifications of MDE and FEMA.
(6) Hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses for proposals in special flood
hazard areas where FEMA has provided base flood elevations but has not
delineated a floodway shall demonstrate that the cumulative effect of proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood by
more than one foot or a lower increase if required by MDE.
(7) For encroachments in floodways, an evaluation of alternatives to such
encroachments, including different uses of the site or portion of the site within
the floodway, and minimization of such encroachment.
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4620 4-27-15
(8) If fill is proposed to be placed for a purpose other than to elevate structures, the
applicant shall indicate the intended purpose for the fill.
(9) For proposed buildings and structures, including substantial improvement and
repair of substantial damage, and placement and replacement of manufactured
homes, including substantial improvement and repair of substantial damage:
(a) The proposed elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, referenced
to the datum on the FIRM and a signed Agreement to Submit an Elevation
Certificate.
(b) The signed Declaration of Land Restriction (Nonconversion Agreement)
that shall be recorded on the property deed prior to issuance of the
Certificate of Occupancy, if the application includes an enclosure below
the lowest floor or a crawl/underfloor space that is more than four (4) feet
in height.
(c) A written evaluation of alternative methods considered to elevate
structures and manufactured homes, if the location is in nontidal waters of
the State and fill is proposed to achieve the elevation required in §46-3
3(A) or §46-34(A).
(10) For accessory structures that are 300 square feet or larger in area (footprint) that
are below the base flood elevation, a variance is required as set forth in Article
VI. If a variance is granted, a signed Declaration of Land Restriction
(Nonconversion Agreement) shall be recorded in the County Land Records prior
to issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy.
(11) For temporary structures and temporary storage, specification of the duration of
the temporary use.
(12) For proposed work on existing buildings, structure, and manufactured homes,
including any improvement, addition, repairs, alterations, rehabilitation, or
reconstruction, sufficient information to determine if the work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage, including but not
limited to:
(a) If the existing building or structure was constructed after March 1, 1977,
evidence that the work will not alter any aspect of the building or structure
that was required for compliance with the floodplain management
requirements in effect at the time the building or structure was permitted.
(b) If the proposed work is a horizontal addition, a description of the addition
and whether it will be independently supported or structurally connected
to the base building and the nature of all other modifications to the base
building, if any.
(c) Documentation of the market value of the building or structure before the
improvement or, if the work is repair of damage, before the damage
occurred.
(d) Documentation of the actual cash value of all proposed work, including
the actual cash value of all work necessary to repair and restore damage to
the before-damaged condition, regardless of the amount of work that will
be performed. The value of work performed by the owner or volunteers
shall be valued at market labor rates. The value of donated or discounted
materials shall be valued at market rates.
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4621 4-27-15
(13) Certifications and/or technical analyses prepared or conducted by a licensed
professional engineer or licensed architect, as appropriate, including:
(a) The determination of the base flood elevations or hydrologic and
hydraulic engineering analyses prepared by a licensed professional
engineer that are required by the Floodplain Administrator or are required
by this Chapter in §46-19 for certain subdivisions and development; §46-
32(A) for development in designated floodways; §46-32(C) for
development in flood hazard areas with base flood elevations but no
designated floodways; and §46-32(E) for deliberate alteration or relocation
of watercourses.
(b) The Floodproofing Certificate for nonresidential structures that are
floodproofed as required in §46-34(B).
(c) Certification that engineered flood openings are designed to meet the
minimum requirements of §46-33(C)(3) to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces.
(d) Certification that the proposed elevation, structural design, specifications
and plans, and the methods of construction to be used for structures in
coastal high hazard areas (V Zones) and Coastal A Zones, are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice and meet the requirements
of §46-43(C).
(14) For nonresidential structures that are proposed with floodproofing, an operations
and maintenance plan as specified in §46-34(B)(3).
(15) Such other material and information as may be requested by the Floodplain
Administrator and necessary to determine conformance with this Chapter.
(B) New Technical Data
(1) The applicant may seek a Letter of Map Change by submitting new technical
data to FEMA, such as base maps, topography, and engineering analyses to
support revision of floodplain and floodway boundaries and/or base flood
elevations. Such submissions shall be prepared in a format acceptable to FEMA
and any fees shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant. A copy of the
submittal shall be attached to the application for a permit.
(2) If the applicant submits new technical data to support any change in floodplain
and designated floodway boundaries and/or base flood elevations but has not
sought a Letter of Map Change from FEMA, the applicant shall submit such
data to FEMA as soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the date
such information becomes available. Such submissions shall be prepared in a
format acceptable to FEMA and any fees shall be the sole responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 46-15. Review of Application
The Floodplain Administrator shall:
(A) Review applications for development in special flood hazard areas to determine the
completeness of information submitted. The applicant shall be notified of
incompleteness or additional information that is required to support the application.
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4622 4-27-15
(B) Notify applicants that permits from MDE and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and
other State and Federal authorities may be required.
(C) Review all permit applications to ensure that all necessary permits have been received
from the Federal, State or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is
required. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining such permits, including
permits issued by:
(1) The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors
Act and Section 404 of the Clean Water Act;
(2) MDE pursuant to COMAR 26.23 (Nontidal Wetlands) and Section 401 of the
Clean Water Act;
(3) MDE for construction on nontidal waters of the State pursuant to COMAR
26.17.04; and
(4) MDE pursuant to COMAR 26.24 (Tidal Wetlands).
(D) Review applications for compliance with this Chapter after all information required in
§46-15 of this Chapter or identified and required by the Floodplain Administrator has
been received.
(E) Review applications with caution when development is downstream of existing or
proposed dams. The condition of the dam, as well as the design criteria, hazard class
and the danger reach, should be investigated to avoid increasing potential hazards.
Dams must meet design criteria based on the potential impacts downstream of the
dam. Downstream development within the dam break flood wave shall be denied
unless the dam meets the design standards for a high-hazard dam.
§ 46-16. Inspections
The Floodplain Administrator shall inspect or cause to inspect development permitted in
special flood hazard areas, at appropriate times throughout the period of construction in order to
monitor compliance. Such inspections may include:
(A) Stake-out inspection, to determine location on the site relative to the flood hazard area
and designated floodway.
(B) Foundation inspection, upon placement of the lowest floor and prior to further vertical
construction, to collect information or certification of the elevation of the lowest floor.
(C) Inspection of enclosures below the lowest floor, including crawl/underfloor spaces, to
determine compliance with applicable provisions.
(D) Utility inspection, upon installation of specified equipment and appliances, to
determine appropriate location with respect to the base flood elevation.
(E) Final inspection prior to issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy.
§ 46-17. Submissions Required Prior to Final Inspection
Pursuant to the Agreement to Submit an Elevation Certificate submitted with the
application as required in §46-14(A)(9), the permittee shall have an Elevation Certificate
prepared and submitted prior to final inspection and issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for
elevated structures and manufactured homes, including new structures and manufactured homes,
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4623 4-27-15
substantially-improved structures and manufactured homes, and additions to structures and
manufactured homes.
ARTICLE IV
Requirements in all Flood Hazard Areas
§ 46-18. Application of Requirements
The general requirements of this Section apply to all development proposed within all
special flood hazard areas identified in §46-4.
§ 46-19. Subdivision Proposals and Development Proposals
(A) In all flood zones:
(1) Subdivision proposals and development proposals shall be consistent with the
need to minimize flood damage and are subject to all applicable standards in this
Chapter.
(2) Subdivision proposals and development proposals shall have utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
(3) Subdivision proposals and development proposals shall have adequate drainage
paths provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards and to guide floodwaters
around and away from proposed structures.
(4) Subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 5 lots or at
least 5 acres, whichever is the lesser, that are wholly or partially in flood hazard
areas where base flood elevation data are not provided by the Floodplain
Administrator or available from other sources, shall be supported by
determinations of base flood elevations as required in §46-14 of this Chapter.
(5) Subdivision access roads shall have the driving surface at or above the base
flood elevation.
(B) In special flood hazard areas of nontidal waters of the State:
(1) Subdivision proposals shall be laid out such that proposed building pads are
located outside of the special flood hazard area and any portion of platted lots
that include land areas that are below the base flood elevation shall be used for
other purposes, deed restricted, or otherwise protected to preserve it as open
space.
(2) Subdivision access roads shall have the driving surface at or above the base
flood elevation.
§ 46-20. Protection of Water Supply and Sanitary Sewage Systems
(A) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems.
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4624 4-27-15
(B) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into systems and discharges from systems into
floodwaters.
(C) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to or
contamination from them during conditions of flooding.
§ 46-21. Buildings and Structures
New buildings and structures (including the placement and replacement of manufactured
homes) and substantial improvement of existing structures (including manufactured homes) that
are located, in whole or in part, in any special flood hazard area shall:
(A) Be designed (or modified) and constructed to safely support flood loads. The
construction shall provide a complete load path capable of transferring all loads from
their point of origin through the load-resisting elements to the foundation. Structures
shall be designed, connected and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or permanent
lateral movement due to structural loads and stresses, including hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads and the effects of buoyancy, from flooding equal to the flood
protection elevation or the elevation required by this Chapter or the building code,
whichever is higher.
(B) Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
(C) Use flood damage-resistant materials below the elevation of the lowest floor required
in §46-33(A) or §46-34(A) (for A Zones) or §46-43(B) (for V Zones and Coastal A
Zones).
(D) Have electrical systems, equipment and components, and mechanical, heating,
ventilating, air conditioning, and plumbing appliances, plumbing fixtures, duct
systems, and other service equipment located at or above the elevation of the lowest
floor required in §46-33(A) or §46-34(A) (A Zones) or §46-34(B) (V Zones and
Coastal A Zones). Electrical wiring systems are permitted to be located below
elevation of the lowest floor provided they conform to the provisions of the electrical
part of the building code for wet locations. If replaced as part of a substantial
improvement, electrical systems, equipment and components, and heating, ventilation,
air conditioning, and plumbing appliances, plumbing fixtures, duct systems, and other
service equipment shall meet the requirements of this Section.
(E) As an alternative to paragraph (D), electrical systems, equipment and components, and
heating, ventilating, air conditioning, and plumbing appliances, plumbing fixtures,
duct systems, and other service equipment are permitted to be located below the
elevation of the lowest floor provided they are designed and installed to prevent water
from entering or accumulating within the components and to resist hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and stresses, including the effects of buoyancy, during the
occurrence of flooding to that elevation.
(F) Have the electric panelboard elevated at least three (3) feet above the BFE.
(G) If located in flood hazard areas (A Zones) that are not identified as Coastal A Zones
and coastal high hazard areas (V Zones), comply with the specific requirements of
Article V.
(H) If located in Coastal A Zone, comply with the specific requirements of:
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4625 4-27-15
(1) Article VII (new construction and placement of new manufactured homes); or
(2) Article V (substantial improvements (including repair of substantial damage)
and replacement manufactured homes).
(I) If located in coastal high hazard areas (V Zones), comply with the specific
requirements of Article VII.
(J) Comply with the requirements of the most restrictive designation if located on a site
that has more than one flood zone designation (A Zone, designated floodway, Coastal
A Zone, V Zone).
§ 46-22. Placement of Fill
(A) Disposal of fill, including but not limited to earthen soils, rock, rubble, construction
debris, woody debris, and trash, shall not be permitted in special flood hazard areas.
(B) Fill shall not be placed in Coastal A Zones or coastal high hazard areas (V Zones)
except as provided in §46-42.
(C) Fill proposed to be placed to elevate structures in flood hazard areas (A Zones) that
are not Coastal A Zones or coastal high hazard areas (V Zones) shall comply with the
floodways requirements in §46-32(A), §46-32(B), and §46-32(C) and the limitations
of §46-33(B).
§ 46-23. Historic Structures
Repair, alteration, addition, rehabilitation, or other improvement of historic structures that
does not conform with the requirements of this Chapter shall be permitted only by variance with
specific requirements in Article VI. Evidence submitted for consideration of the variance shall
include a determination that the proposed work will not preclude the structure’s continued
eligibility or designation as a historic structure.
§ 46-24. Manufactured Homes
(A) New manufactured homes shall not be placed or installed in floodways or coastal high
hazard areas (V Zones).
(B) For the purpose of this Chapter, the lowest floor of a manufactured home is the bottom
of the lowest horizontal supporting member (longitudinal chassis frame beam).
(C) New manufactured homes located outside of floodways and coastal high hazard areas
(V Zones), replacement manufactured homes in any flood hazard areas, and
substantial improvement (including repair of substantial damage) of existing
manufactured homes in all flood hazard area, shall:
(1) Be elevated on a permanent, reinforced foundation in accordance with Article V
or Article VII, as applicable to the flood zone;
(2) Be installed in accordance with the anchor and tie-down requirements of the
building code or the manufacturer’s written installation instructions and
specifications; and
(3) Have enclosures below the lowest floor of the elevated manufactured home, if
any, including enclosures that are surrounded by rigid skirting or other material
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4626 4-27-15
that is attached to the frame or foundation, that comply with the requirements of
Article V or Article VII, as applicable to the flood zone.
§ 46-25. Recreational Vehicles
Recreational vehicles shall:
(A) Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in §46-24; or
(B) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(C) Be on a site for less than 180 consecutive days.
§ 46-26. Critical and Essential Facilities
Critical and essential facilities shall:
(A) Not be located in coastal high hazard areas (V Zones), Coastal A Zones or floodways.
(B) If located in flood hazard areas other than coastal high hazard areas, Coastal A Zones
and floodways, be elevated to the higher of elevation required by this Chapter plus one
(1) foot, the elevation required by the building code, or the elevation of the 0.2 percent
chance (500-year) flood.
§ 46-27. Temporary Structures and Temporary Storage
In addition to the application requirements of §46-14, applications for the placement or
erection of temporary structures and the temporary storage of any goods, materials, and
equipment, shall specify the duration of the temporary use. Temporary structures and temporary
storage in floodways shall meet the limitations of §46-32(A) of this Chapter. In addition:
(A) Temporary structures shall:
(1) Be designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement
resulting from hydrodynamic loads and hydrostatic loads during conditions of
the base flood;
(2) Have electric service installed in compliance with the electric code; and
(3) Comply with all other requirements of the applicable State and local permit
authorities.
(B) Temporary storage shall not include hazardous materials.
§ 46-28. Gas or Liquid Storage Tanks
(A) Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy, during conditions of the base flood.
(B) Above-ground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to a supporting structure
and elevated to or above the base flood elevation, or shall be anchored or otherwise
designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement resulting
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4627 4-27-15
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during
conditions of the base flood.
(C) In flood hazard areas, tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be:
(1) At or above the base flood elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the
inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tanks during conditions of
the base flood; and
(2) Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the
base flood.
§ 46-29. Functionally Dependent Uses
Applications for functionally dependent uses that do not conform to the requirements of
this Chapter shall be approved only by variances issued pursuant to Article VI. If approved,
functionally dependent uses shall be protected by methods that minimize flood damage during
the base flood, including measures to allow floodwaters to enter and exit, use of flood damageresistant
materials, and elevation of electric service and equipment to the extent practical given
the use of the building.
ARTICLE V
Requirements in Flood Hazard Areas
(A Zones) That Are Not Coastal High Hazard Areas (V Zones) or Coastal A Zones
§ 46-30. General Requirements
In addition to the general requirements of Article IV, the requirements of this Section shall:
(A) Apply in flood hazard areas that are not identified as coastal high hazard areas (V
Zones) and Coastal A Zones. These flood hazard areas, referred to collectively as “A
Zones,” include, special flood hazard areas along nontidal waters of the State,
landward of coastal high hazard areas (V Zones), and landward of Coastal A Zones
(if delineated).
(B) Apply to all development, new construction, substantial improvements (including
repair of substantial damage), and placement, replacement, and substantial
improvement (including repair of substantial damage) of manufactured homes.
§ 46-31. Flood Protection Setbacks
Within areas defined by flood protection setbacks along nontidal waters of the State:
(A) No new buildings, structures, or other development shall be permitted unless the
applicant demonstrates that the site cannot be developed without such encroachment
into the flood protection setback and the encroachment is the minimum necessary after
consideration of varying other siting standards such as side, front, and back lot line
setbacks.
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4628 4-27-15
(B) Disturbance of natural vegetation shall be minimized and any disturbance allowed
shall be vegetatively stabilized.
(C) Public works and temporary construction may be permitted.
§ 46-32. Development that Affects Flood-Carrying Capacity of Nontidal Waters of the
State
(A) Development in Designated Floodways.
For proposed development that will encroach into a designated floodway, §46-14(A)(7)
requires the applicant to submit an evaluation of alternatives to such encroachment,
including different uses of the site or the portion of the site within the floodway, and
minimization of such encroachment. This requirement does not apply to fences that do not
block the flow of floodwaters or trap debris.
Proposed development in a designated floodway may be permitted only if:
(1) The applicant has been issued a permit by MDE; and
(2) The applicant has developed hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses and
technical data prepared by a licensed professional engineer reflecting such
changes, and the analyses, which shall be submitted to the Floodplain
Administrator, demonstrate that the proposed activity will not result in any
increase in the base flood elevation; or
(3) If the analyses demonstrate that the proposed activities will result in an increase
in the base flood elevation, the applicant has obtained a Conditional Letter of
Map Revision and Letter of Map Revision from FEMA upon completion of the
project. Submittal requirements and fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
(B) Development that Includes the Placement of Fill in Nontidal Waters of the State.
For proposed development that includes the placement of fill in nontidal waters of the
State, other than development that is subject to paragraph (D), a hydraulically-equivalent
volume of excavation is required. Such excavations shall be designed to drain freely.
(C) Development in Areas with Base Flood Elevations but No Designated Floodways.
For development in special flood hazard areas of nontidal waters of the State with base
flood elevations but no designated floodways:
(1) The applicant shall develop hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses and
technical data reflecting the proposed activity and shall submit such technical
data to the Floodplain Administrator as required in §46-14(A)(6). The analyses
shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer in a format required by
FEMA for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision and Letter of Map Revision
upon completion of the project. Submittal requirements and fees shall be the
responsibility of the applicant.
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4629 4-27-15
(2) The proposed development may be permitted if the applicant has received a
permit by MDE and if the analyses demonstrate that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and potential
flood hazard area encroachments will not increase the base flood elevation more
than 1.0 foot at any point.
(D) Construction of Roads, Bridges, Culverts, Dams and In-Stream Ponds.
Construction of roads, bridges, culverts, dams, and in-stream ponds in nontidal waters of
the State shall not be approved unless they comply with this Section and the applicant has
received a permit from MDE.
(E) Alteration of a Watercourse.
For any proposed development that involves alteration of a watercourse not subject to
paragraph (C), unless waived by MDE, the applicant shall develop hydrologic and
hydraulic engineering analyses and technical data reflecting such changes, including the
floodway analysis required in §46-14(A), and submit such technical data to the Floodplain
Administrator and to FEMA. The analyses shall be prepared by a licensed professional
engineer in a format required by MDE and by FEMA for a Conditional Letter of Map
Revision and Letter of Map Revision upon completion of the project. Submittal
requirements and fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
Alteration of a watercourse may be permitted only upon submission, by the applicant, of
the following:
(1) A description of the extent to which the watercourse will be altered or relocated;
(2) A certification by a licensed professional engineer that the flood-carrying
capacity of the watercourse will not be diminished;
(3) Evidence that adjacent communities, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and
MDE have been notified of the proposal, and evidence that such notifications
have been submitted to FEMA; and
(4) Evidence that the applicant shall be responsible for providing the necessary
maintenance for the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the
flood carrying capacity will not be diminished. The Floodplain Administrator
may require the applicant to enter into an agreement with Town of Perryville
specifying the maintenance responsibilities; if an agreement is required, the
permit shall be conditioned to require that the agreement be recorded on the
deed of the property which shall be binding on future owners.
§ 46-33. Residential Structures and Residential Portions of Mixed Use Structures
New residential structures and residential portions of mixed use structures, and substantial
improvement (including repair of substantial damage) of existing residential structures and
residential portions of mixed use structures shall comply with the applicable requirements of
Article IV and this Section. §46-35 establishes requirements for horizontal additions.
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4630 4-27-15
(A) Elevation Requirements
(1) Lowest floors shall be elevated to or above the flood protection elevation.
(2) In areas of shallow flooding (Zone AO), the lowest floor (including basement)
shall be elevated at least as high above the highest adjacent grade as the depth
number specified in feet on the FIRM plus two (2) feet, or at least four (4) feet if
a depth number is not specified.
(3) Enclosures below the lowest floor shall meet the requirements of paragraph (C).
(B) Limitations on Use of Fill to Elevate Structures
Unless otherwise restricted by this Chapter, especially by the limitations in §46-32(A),
§46-32(B), and §46-32(C), fill placed for the purpose of raising the ground level to support
a building or structure shall:
(1) Consist of earthen soil or rock materials only.
(2) Extend laterally from the building footprint to provide for adequate access as a
function of use. The Floodplain Administrator may seek advice from the State
Fire Marshal’s Office and/or the local fire services agency;
(3) Comply with the requirements of the building code and be placed and
compacted to provide for stability under conditions of rising and falling
floodwaters and resistance to erosion, scour, and settling;
(4) Be sloped no steeper than one (1) vertical to two (2) horizontal, unless approved
by the Floodplain Administrator;
(5) Be protected from erosion associated with expected velocities during the
occurrence of the base flood; unless approved by the Floodplain Administrator,
fill slopes shall be protected by vegetation if the expected velocity is less than
five feet per second, and by other means if the expected velocity is five feet per
second or more; and
(6) Be designed with provisions for adequate drainage and no adverse effect on
adjacent properties.
(C) Enclosures Below the Lowest Floor
(1) Enclosures below the lowest floor shall be used solely for parking of vehicles,
building access, crawl/underfloor spaces, or limited storage.
(2) Enclosures below the lowest floor shall be constructed using flood damageresistant
materials.
(3) Enclosures below the lowest floor shall be provided with flood openings which
shall meet the following criteria:
(a) There shall be a minimum of two flood openings on different sides of each
enclosed area; if a building has more than one enclosure below the lowest
floor, each such enclosure shall have flood openings on exterior walls.
(b) The total net area of all flood openings shall be at least 1 square inch for
each square foot of enclosed area (non-engineered flood openings), or the
flood openings shall be engineered flood openings that are designed and
certified by a licensed professional engineer to automatically allow entry
and exit of floodwaters; the certification requirement may be satisfied by
an individual certification or an Evaluation Report issued by the ICC
Evaluation Service, Inc.
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4631 4-27-15
(c) The bottom of each flood opening shall be 1 foot or less above the higher
of the interior floor or grade, or the exterior grade, immediately below the
opening.
(d) Any louvers, screens or other covers for the flood openings shall allow the
automatic flow of floodwaters into and out of the enclosed area.
(e) If installed in doors, flood openings that meet requirements of paragraphs
(a) through (d), are acceptable; however, doors without installed flood
openings do not meet the requirements of this Section.
§ 46-34. Nonresidential Structures and Nonresidential Portions of Mixed Use Structures
New nonresidential structures and nonresidential portions of mixed use structures, and
substantial improvement (including repair of substantial damage) of existing nonresidential
structures and nonresidential portions of mixed use structures shall comply with the applicable
requirements of Article IV and the requirements of this Section. §46-35 establishes requirements
for horizontal additions.
(A) Elevation Requirements.
Elevated structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the flood
protection elevation; or
(2) In areas of shallow flooding (Zone AO), have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated at least as high above the highest adjacent grade as the
depth number specified in feet on the FIRM plus two (2) feet, or at least four (4)
feet if a depth number is not specified; and
(3) Have enclosures below the lowest floor, if any, that comply with the
requirements of §46-34(C); or
(4) If proposed to be elevated on fill, meet the limitations on fill in §46-34(B).
(B) Floodproofing Requirements.
(1) Floodproofing of new nonresidential buildings is not allowed in:
(a) Nontidal waters of the State (COMAR 26.17.04.11(B)(7)); and
(b) Coastal A Zones.
(2) Floodproofing for substantial improvement of nonresidential buildings is
allowed in:
(a) Nontidal waters of the State; and
(b) Coastal A Zones.
(3) If floodproofing is proposed, structures shall:
(a) Be designed to be dry floodproofed such that the building or structure is
watertight with walls and floors substantially impermeable to the passage
of water to the level of the flood protection elevation plus 1.0 foot, or
(b) If located in an area of shallow flooding (Zone AO), be dry floodproofed
at least as high above the highest adjacent grade as the depth number
specified on the FIRM plus three (3) feet, or at least five (5) feet if a depth
number is not specified; and
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4632 4-27-15
(c) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;
(d) Have floodproofing measures that are designed taking into consideration
the nature of flood-related hazards; frequency, depth and duration of
flooding; rate of rise and fall of floodwater; soil characteristics; floodborne
debris; at least 12 hours of flood warning time from a credible
source; and time necessary to implement any measures that require human
intervention;
(e) Have at least one door above the applicable flood elevation that allows
human ingress and egress during conditions of flooding;
(f) Have an operations and maintenance plan that is filed with local
emergency management officials and that specifies the owner/occupant’s
responsibilities to monitor flood potential; the location of any shields,
doors, closures, tools, or other goods that are required for implementation;
maintenance of such goods; methods of installation; and periodic
inspection; and
(g) Be certified by a licensed professional engineer or licensed architect,
through execution of a Floodproofing Certificate that states that the design
and methods of construction meet the requirements of this Section. The
Floodproofing Certificate shall be submitted with the construction
drawings as required in §46-14(A)(13).
§ 46-35. Horizontal Additions
(A) A horizontal addition proposed for a building or structure that was constructed after
the date specified in §46-1 shall comply with the applicable requirements of Article IV
and this Section.
(B) In nontidal waters of the State that are subject to the regulatory authority of MDE, all
horizontal additions shall comply with the applicable requirements of Article IV and
this Section and:
(1) If the addition is structurally connected to the base building, the requirements of
paragraph (C) apply.
(2) If the addition has an independent foundation and is not structurally connected
to the base building and the common wall with the base building is modified by
no more than a doorway, the base building is not required to be brought into
compliance.
(C) For horizontal additions that are structurally connected to the base building:
(1) If the addition combined with other proposed repairs, alterations, or
modifications of the base building constitutes substantial improvement, the base
building and the addition shall comply with the applicable requirements of
Article IV and this Section.
(2) If the addition constitutes substantial improvement, the base building and the
addition shall comply with all of the applicable requirements of Article IV and
this Section.
(D) For horizontal additions with independent foundations that are not structurally
connected to the base building and the common wall with the base building is
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4633 4-27-15
modified by no more than a doorway, the base building is not required to be brought
into compliance.
(E) A horizontal addition to a building or structure that is not substantial improvement,
and is not located in nontidal waters of the State, is not required to comply with this
Section.
§ 46-36. Accessory Structures
(A) Accessory structures shall be limited to no more than 300 square feet in total floor
area.
(B) Accessory structures shall comply with the elevation requirements and other
requirements of §46-33, the floodproofing requirements of §46-34(B), or shall:
(1) Be useable only for parking of vehicles or limited storage;
(2) Be constructed with flood damage-resistant materials below the base flood
elevation;
(3) Be constructed and placed to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of
floodwaters;
(4) Be anchored to prevent flotation;
(5) Have electrical service and mechanical equipment elevated to or above the base
flood elevation; and
(6) Have flood openings that meet the requirements of §46-33(C).
ARTICLE VI
Variances
§ 46-37. General
(A) The Board of Appeals shall have the power to consider and authorize or deny variances
from the strict application of the requirements of this Chapter. A variance shall be
approved only if it is determined to not be contrary to the public interest and where,
owing to special conditions of the lot or parcel, a literal enforcement of the provisions
of this Chapter, an unnecessary hardship would result.
(B) Upon consideration of the purposes of this Chapter, the individual circumstances, and
the considerations and limitations of this Section, the Board of Appeals may attach such
conditions to variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this Chapter.
(C) The Board of Appeals shall notify, in writing, any applicant to whom a variance is
granted to construct or substantially improve a building or structure with its lowest
floor below the elevation required by this Chapter that the variance is to the floodplain
management requirements of this Chapter only, and that the cost of Federal flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk, with rates up to $25 per $100
of insurance coverage.
(D) A record of all variance actions, including findings reflecting justification for issuance
shall be maintained pursuant to §46-11(K) of this Chapter.
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4634 4-27-15
§ 46-38. Application for a Variance
(A) The owner of property, or the owner’s authorized agent, for which a variance is
sought shall submit an application for a variance to the Floodplain Administrator.
(B) At a minimum, the application shall contain the following information: name, address,
and telephone number of the applicant and property owner; legal description of the
property; parcel map; description of the existing use; description of the proposed use;
site map showing the location of flood hazard areas, designated floodway boundaries,
flood zones, base flood elevations, and flood protection setbacks; description of the
variance sought; and reason for the variance request. Variance applications shall
specifically address each of the considerations in §46-39.
(C) If the application is for a variance to allow the lowest floor (A Zones) or bottom of the
lowest horizontal structural member (V Zones and Coastal A Zones) of a building or
structure below the applicable minimum elevation required by this Chapter, the
application shall include a statement signed by the owner that, if granted, the
conditions of the variance shall be recorded as a covenant against the land in the
County Land Records.
(D) If the application is for a variance for a historic structure pursuant to §46-23 of this
Chapter, the application shall contain documentation that the proposed work does not
preclude the structure’s continued eligibility and designation as a historic structure.
The documentation shall be obtained from a source that is authorized to make such
determinations (see definition of “Historic Structure”).
§ 46-39. Considerations for Variances
The Floodplain Administrator shall request comments on variance applications from MDE
(NFIP State Coordinator) and shall provide such comments to the Board of Appeals along with
Staff Comments.
In considering variance applications, the Board of Appeals shall consider and make
findings of fact on all evaluations, all relevant factors, requirements specified in other Sections of
this Chapter, and the following factors:
(A) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others.
(B) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
(C) The susceptibility of the proposed development and its contents (if applicable) to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
(D) The importance of the services to the community provided by the proposed
development.
(E) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to,
or are subject to less, flooding or erosion damage.
(F) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable, or if the facility
is a functionally dependent use.
(G) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development.
(H) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and hazard mitigation
plan for that area.
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4635 4-27-15
(I) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for passenger vehicles and
emergency vehicles.
(J) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the
floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site.
(K) The costs of providing government services during and after flood conditions,
including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.
(L) The comments provided by MDE (NFIP State Coordinator).
§ 46-40. Limitations for Granting Variances
The Board of Appeals shall make an affirmative decision on a variance request only upon:
(A) A showing of good and sufficient cause. Good and sufficient cause deals solely with
the physical characteristics of the property and cannot be based on the character of the
improvement, the personal characteristics of the owner/inhabitants, or local provision
that regulate standards other than health and public safety.
(B) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship
due to the physical characteristics of the property. Increased cost or inconvenience of
meeting the requirements of this Chapter does not constitute an exceptional hardship
to the applicant.
(C) A determination that the granting of a variance for development within any designated
floodway, or flood hazard area with base flood elevations but no designated floodway,
will not result in increased flood heights beyond that which is allowed in this Chapter.
(D) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in additional threats to
public safety; extraordinary public expense, nuisances, fraud or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws.
(E) A determination that the building, structure or other development is protected by
methods to minimize flood damages.
(F) A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief,
considering the flood hazard.
ARTICLE VII
Requirements in Coastal High Hazard Areas (V Zones) and Coastal A Zones
§ 46-41. General Requirements
In addition to the general requirements of Article IV, the requirements of this Section
shall:
(A) Apply in flood hazard areas that are identified as coastal high hazard areas (V Zones)
and Coastal A Zones (if delineated).
(B) Apply to all development, new construction, substantial improvements (including
repair of substantial damage), and placement, replacement, and substantial
improvement (including repair of substantial damage) of manufactured homes.
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4636 4-27-15
Exception: In Coastal A Zones, the requirements of Article IV shall apply to
substantial improvements (including repair of substantial damage), and
substantial improvement of manufactured homes (including repair of substantial
damage) and replacement manufactured homes.
§ 46-42. Location and Site Preparation
(A) The placement of structural fill for the purpose of elevating buildings is prohibited.
(B) Buildings shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide.
(C) Minor grading, and the placement of minor quantities of fill, shall be permitted for
landscaping and for drainage purposes under and around buildings and for support of
parking slabs, pool decks, patios and walkways.
(D) Site preparations shall not alter sand dunes unless an engineering analysis
demonstrates that the potential for flood damage is not increased.
§ 46-43. Residential and Nonresidential Structures
New structures and substantial improvement (including repair of substantial damage) of
existing structures shall comply with the applicable requirements of Article IV and the
requirements of this Section.
(A) Foundations
(1) Structures shall be supported on pilings or columns and shall be adequately
anchored to such pilings or columns. Pilings shall have adequate soil penetrations
to resist the combined wave and wind loads (lateral and uplift). Water loading
values used shall be those associated with the base flood. Wind loading values
shall be those required by applicable building codes. Pile embedment shall include
consideration of decreased resistance capacity caused by scour of soil strata
surrounding the piling.
(2) Slabs, pools, pool decks and walkways shall be located and constructed to be
structurally independent of structures and their foundations to prevent transfer of
flood loads to the structures during conditions of flooding, scour, or erosion from
wave-velocity flow conditions, and shall be designed to minimize debris impacts
to adjacent properties and public infrastructure.
(B) Elevation Requirements
(1) The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member that supports the lowest
floor shall be located at or above the flood protection elevation.
(2) Basement floors that are below grade on all sides are prohibited.
(3) The space below an elevated building shall either be free-of-obstruction or, if
enclosed by walls, shall meet the requirements of paragraph (D).
(C) Certification of Design
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4637 4-27-15
As required in §46-14(A)(13), the applicant shall include in the application a certification
prepared by a licensed professional engineer or a licensed architect that the design and
methods of construction to be used meet the requirements of paragraph (A), paragraph (B),
paragraph (D), and the building code.
(D) Enclosures Below the Lowest Floor
(1) Enclosures below the lowest floor shall be used solely for parking of vehicles,
building access or limited storage.
(2) Enclosures below the lowest floor shall be less than 299 square feet in area
(exterior measurement).
(3) Walls and partitions are permitted below the elevated floor, provided that such
walls and partitions are designed to break away under flood loads and are not part
of the structural support of the building or structure.
(4) Electrical, mechanical, and plumbing system components shall not be mounted on
or penetrate through walls that are designed to break away under flood loads.
(5) Walls intended to break away under flood loads shall be constructed with insect
screening or open lattice, or shall be designed to break away or collapse without
causing collapse, displacement or other structural damage to the elevated portion
of the building or supporting foundation system. Such walls, framing and
connections shall have a design safe loading resistance of not less than 10 pounds
per square foot and no more than 20 pounds per square foot; or
(6) Where wind loading values of the building code exceed 20 pounds per square
foot, the applicant shall submit a certification prepared and sealed by a licensed
professional engineer or licensed architect that:
(a) The walls and partitions below the lowest floor have been designed to collapse
from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood.
(b) The elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation system have
been designed to withstand the effects of wind and flood loads acting
simultaneously on all building components (structural and nonstructural).
Water loading values used shall be those associated with the base flood; wind
loading values used shall be those required by the building code.
(c) In Coastal A Zones, in addition to the requirements of this Section, walls
below the lowest floor shall have flood openings that meet the requirements of
§46-33(C)(3).
§ 46-44. Horizontal Additions to Structures
(A) A horizontal addition proposed for a building or structure that was constructed after
the date specified in §46-1 shall comply with the applicable requirements of Article IV
and this Section.
(B) For horizontal additions, whether structurally connected or not structurally connected,
to the base building:
(C) A horizontal addition to a building or structure that is not substantial improvement is
not required to comply with this section.
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4638 4-27-15
(1) If the addition combined with other proposed repairs, alterations, or modifications
of the base building constitutes substantial improvement, the base building and the
addition shall comply with the applicable requirements of Article IV and this
Section.
(2) If the addition constitutes substantial improvement, the base building and the
addition shall comply with all of the applicable requirements of Article IV and this
Section. [Note: The base building is required to comply otherwise it is an
obstruction that does not comply with the free-of-obstruction requirement that
applies to the elevated addition, see §46-43(B)(3).]
§ 46-45. Accessory Structures
(A) Accessory structures shall be limited to no more than 300 square feet in total floor
area.
(B) Accessory structures shall comply with the elevation requirements and other
requirements of §46-43 or, if not elevated, shall:
(1) Be useable only for parking of vehicles or limited storage;
(2) Be constructed with flood damage-resistant materials below the base flood
elevation;
(3) Be constructed and placed to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of
floodwaters;
(4) Be anchored to prevent flotation;
(5) Have electrical service and mechanical equipment elevated to or above the base
flood elevation; and
(6) If larger than 100 square feet in size, have walls that meet the requirements of §46-
43(D)(3) through (6), as applicable for the flood zone; and if located in Coastal A
Zones, walls shall have flood openings that meet the requirements of §46-33(C)(3).
§ 46-46. Other Structures and Development
(A) Decks and Patios
In addition to the requirements of the building code or the residential code, decks and
patios shall be located, designed, and constructed in compliance with the following:
(1) A deck that is structurally attached to a building or structure shall have the bottom
of the lowest horizontal structural member at or above the flood protection
elevation and any supporting members that extend below the design flood
elevation shall comply with the foundation requirements that apply to the building
or structure, which shall be designed to accommodate any increased loads
resulting from the attached deck.
(2) A deck or patio that is located below the flood protection elevation shall be
structurally independent from structures and their foundation systems, and shall be
designed and constructed either to remain intact and in place during base flood
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4639 4-27-15
conditions or to break apart into small pieces that will not cause structural damage
to adjacent elevated structures.
(3) A deck or patio that has a vertical thickness of more than 12 inches or that is
constructed with more than the minimum amount of fill that is necessary for site
drainage shall not be approved unless an analysis demonstrates no harmful
diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase
damage to adjacent elevated structures.
(4) A deck or patio that has a vertical thickness of 12 inches or less and that is at
natural grade or on fill material that is similar to and compatible with local soils
and is the minimum amount necessary for site drainage may be approved without
requiring analysis of the impact on diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and
wave reflection.
(B) Other Development
Other development activities shall be permitted only if located outside the footprint of, and
not structurally attached to, structures, and only if an analysis demonstrates no harmful
diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection onto adjacent elevated
structures. Other development includes but is not limited to:
(1) Bulkheads, seawalls, retaining walls, revetments, and similar erosion control
structures;
(2) Solid fences, privacy walls, and fences prone to trapping debris, unless designed
and constructed to fail under base flood conditions; and
(3) Mounded septic systems.
ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement
§ 46-47. Compliance Required
(A) No building, structure or development shall hereafter be located, erected, constructed,
reconstructed, improved, repaired, extended, converted, enlarged or altered without
full compliance with this Chapter and all other applicable regulations.
(B) Failure to obtain a permit shall be a violation of this Chapter and shall be subject to
penalties in accordance with §46-49.
(C) Permits issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the Floodplain
Administrator authorize only the specific activities set forth in such approved plans
and applications or amendments thereto. Use, arrangement, or construction of such
specific activities that are contrary to that authorization shall be deemed a violation of
this Chapter.
Perryville Code – Chapter 46 Floodplain Management
4640 4-27-15
§ 46-48. Notice of Violation and Stop Work Order
If the Floodplain Administrator determines that there has been a violation of any provision
of this Chapter, the Floodplain Administrator shall give notice of such violation to the owner, the
owner’s authorized agent, and the person responsible for such violation, and may issue a stop
work order. The notice of violation or stop work order shall be in writing and shall:
(A) Include a list of violations, referring to the Section or Sections of this Chapter that
have been violated;
(B) Order remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of
this Chapter;
(C) Specify a reasonable period of time to correct the violation;
(D) Advise the recipients of the right to appeal; and
(E) Be served in person; or
(F) Be posted in a conspicuous place in or on the property and sent by registered or
certified mail to the last known mailing address, residence, or place of business of the
recipients.
§ 46-49. Violations and Penalties
Violations of this Chapter or failure to comply with the requirements of this Chapter or any
conditions attached to a permit or variance shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine
in the amount of $1,000 for each occurrence. Any person responsible for a violation shall
comply with the notice of violation or stop work order. Each day a violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Town of Perryville
from taking such other lawful action, including seeking injunctive relief, as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation.
Perryville Code – Chapter 48 Forest Conservation
48 01
Chapter 48
FOREST CONSERVATION
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Commissioners of the Town of Perryville 1-5-
1993 as Ord. No. 92-1, amended Section 48.15/B, 3-5-2002 by Ord, No. 2002-01.
Repealed Chapter 48 Forest Conservation Section 48-1 through 48-25 on 6-2-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-10 for the purpose of authorizing the Town of Perryville to enter
into an Agreement assigning the Town’s obligations under the Maryland Forest
Conservation Act to Cecil County.]
The State of Maryland has required all jurisdictions with planning and zoning authority to
develop and establish a local forest conservation program, consistent with the intent,
requirements, and standards of the Plan adopted by the State of Maryland. Local
jurisdictions in Cecil County may, with the concurrence of Cecil County and the
Maryland Department of Natural Resources, assign its obligations to the Cecil County
In consideration of the mutual promises and covenants provided herein, the parties do
hereby agree as follows:
A. In accordance with Section 5-1063 (a) (4) of Title 5 of the Natural Resources
Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, Perryville hereby assigns all of its
obligations under the Maryland Forest Conservation Act to Cecil County,
including, but not limited to, its administration, preparation and enforcement
obligations.
B. Perryville further agrees to abide by the procedures and regulations of Cecil
County’s Forest Conservation program consistent with the intent, requirements,
and standards of the Maryland Forest Conservation Act.
C. Perryville further agrees to coordinate its development approval activities for
building permits, site plan approvals, subdivision plat approvals, and any grading
and sediment control permits with the requirements of Cecil County’s forest
conservation program.
D. Perryville covenants and agrees that no final building permit, site plan,
subdivision plat, grading or sediment control permit shall be initiated or approved
until the application has demonstrated compliance with the provisions of Cecil
County’s forest conservation program and received approval from the Cecil
County’s Department of Planning and Zoning as may be required for that activity.
Perryville Code – Chapter 48 Forest Conservation
48 02
E. It is understood and agreed that Cecil County shall have the right and authority to
enforce fully its Forest Conservation Program within the corporate boundaries of
the Town of Perryville.
F. All applicants are subject to the fees established by Cecil County for review and
approval and all fees imposed and collected by Cecil County for administration of
the Forest Conservation Program within the corporate boundaries of the Town of
Perryville shall be retained by Cecil County.
G. The Town of Perryville hereby adopts, ratifies and approves the Forest
Conservation Program of Cecil County.
H. Cecil County hereby consents to and concurs with the Town of Perryville’s
assignment of its obligations under the Forest Conservation Act to Cecil County.
Perryville Code – Chapter 50 Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse
50 01
Chapter 50
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE
§ 50-1. Definitions.
§ 50-2. Normal household garbage; regulations.
§ 50-3. Heavy trash: collection; regulations.
§ 50-4. Deposition on public and private property.
§ 50-5. Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Commissioners of the Town of Perryville during
codification; see Chapter 1, General Provisions, Art. II. Amendments noted where
applicable. Repealing and reenacting in its entirety, with amendments Chapter 50
Garbage, Rubbish, and Refuse, adopted by Ord. 2013-08, 1-7-14. ]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds – See Chapter 30.
Property maintenance – See Chapter 63.
§ 50-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ASHES – The residue from the burning of wood, coal or other combustible
materials.
GARBAGE – Waste foodstuffs or table wastes of animal or vegetable origin.
RECYCLABLES- Uncontaminated materials such as aluminum cans, glass
bottles, rigid plastics, milk cartons and similar items as described on the Town
website.
REFUSE – Garden, lawn or tree trimmings and leaves.
RUBBISH – The waste material from normal household living conditions, but not
including waste materials from building construction or repairs. “Rubbish”
includes such items as paper, rags, bottles, tin cans, plastic containers and similar
materials.
Perryville Code – Chapter 50 Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse
50 02
§ 50-2. Normal household garbage; regulations.
A. Times of collection.
(1) Normal household garbage and trash will be collected per a schedule
established by Resolution of the Mayor and Commissioners and posted on
the Town’s website.
(2) A collection missed due to a legal holiday will be made the next scheduled
pickup day.
(3) Recyclables will be collected per a schedule determined by Resolution of
the Mayor and Commissioners and posted on the Town’s website.
(4) All containers shall be removed from curb within 24 hours following
collection.
B. Regulations.
(1) Waste materials should be placed in watertight, durable containers or in
heavy duty bags made of materials with a thickness no less than 1.5 mil. It
shall be unlawful for any person to place or locate waste materials and/or
containers in such a way as to obstruct either pedestrian or vehicular traffic
or to create a safety hazard.
§ 50-3. Heavy trash: collections; regulations.
A. Times of collections.
(1) Heavy trash will be collected per a schedule determined by Resolution of
the Mayor and Commissioners and posted on the Town’s website.
(2) All heavy trash for collection must be placed as prescribed in this
Subsection , by 7:00 a.m. of the scheduled pickup day.
(3) Requests for collections of heavy trash must be made to the town offices
by 2:00 p.m. on the Friday preceding the designated pickup day.
(4) All heavy trash must be placed at curbs and outside of fences. Heavy trash
will not be picked up from yards or driveways.
(5) All heavy trash, including waste materials from minor building
construction or repairs, shall be collected in accordance with provisions set
forth on the Town website.
Perryville Code – Chapter 50 Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse
50 03
(6) All refrigerators, washers, dryers and stoves must have doors removed for
collection.
(7) Large pieces of discarded furniture, mattresses, etc., may be set out for
collection.
§ 50-4. Deposition on public and private property.
A. No person shall cast, place, sweep or deposit ashes, garbage, rubbish or refuse in
such manner that it may be carried or deposited upon any street, sidewalk, alley,
sewer or other public place or into any premises.
B. All exterior property and premises shall be free of any unsheltered accumulation or
storage of refuse or garbage.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally place garbage, rubbish or refuse
or their containers on any premises other than those occupied by the tenant, owner
or occupant of those premises.
§ 50-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, be guilty of an infraction
and shall be subject to a fine of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for the first offense, and
fifty dollars ($50.00) for each subsequent offense.
§ 50-6. FAILURE TO ABATE; TOWN TO ABATE; COSTS.
In addition to the penalties specified in § 50-5, the Town, after reasonable written
notice to the owner(s) of a property on which a continuing violation of this chapter
exists, and failure of the property owner(s) to abate such violation within the time
provided in such notice, may enter upon the property for the purpose of abating the
violation. The costs incurred by the Town for the abatement of the violation shall be
an obligation of the owner(s) of the property and shall be due and payable upon
demand. Any portion of the cost of abatement that remains unpaid more than thirty
(30) days after demand shall be a lien against the real estate of the owner(s) and shall
bear the same interest, have the same priority and be collectible and enforceable in
the same manner as town real property taxes.





Perryville Code – Chapter 53 Hawkers and Peddlers
Chapter 53
HAWKERS AND PEDDLERS
§ 53-1. License required.
§ 53-2. Definitions.
§ 53-3. Registration requirements.
§ 53-4. Exemptions.
§ 53-5. Issuance, term and display of license.
§ 53-6. Prohibitions and revocation of licenses.
§ 53-7. Hours.
§ 53-8. Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Commissioners of the Town of Perryville 5-4-
1993 as Ord. No. 93-1. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 53-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to publicly sell, hawk or peddle any articles of
merchandise or to solicit any sales, any charitable gifts or donations or any paid
memberships to any club or organization within the territorial boundaries of Perryville
without having first obtained a license from the Town of Perryville, except as exempted
herein.
§ 53-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION:
A. Any nonprofit benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, not-for-profit, educational,
religious or eleemosynary group, association or corporation which qualifies
under Section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code as a tax-exempt organization.
5301 9 - 25 - 93
Perryville Code – Chapter 53 Hawkers and Peddlers
B. A nonprofit fire company which is organized for the prevention and
extinguishment of fires.
CONTRIBUTION – The promise or grant of any money, credit property,
financial assistance or any other thing of value, including payments for literature
in excess of the fair market value of said literature.
ESTABLISHED PLACE OF BUSINESS – Any building or room licensed for the
handling of the products enumerated in this chapter.
ITINERANT RETAIL PRODUCE DEALER – Any person without an
established place of business within the limits of the country, selling or offering
for sale from any cart, wagon, truck, automobile or other vehicle any fruits,
vegetables, garden produce, eggs, cheese, game, veal, pork, mutton, lamb, rabbits
or poultry.
ITINERANT RETAIL SEAFOOD DEALER – Any person without any
established place of business within the limits of the county, selling or offering for
sale from any cart, wagon, truck, automobile or other vehicle any seafood or
seafood products.
NEWSPAPER – A paper that is distributed and contains news, articles of opinion
and advertising. This definition includes community newspapers and
pennysavers.
PEDDLER – Any person, either principal or agent, who, in/on any public street,
road or highway or public place or from any vacant property, whether publicly or
privately owned, or by going from place to place or house to house, delivers or
distributes advertising material, literature, pamphlets, samples or handbills or sells
or offers for sale, barter or exchange any goods, wares, merchandise, service or
any other article or thing whatsoever, either in his possession or not in his
possession, either for immediate or future delivery.
PERSON – A natural person, corporation, partnership, association, joint-stock
company, society or any other entity of any kind.
PRODUCE – Agricultural products, fruits and vegetables.
RESIDENTIAL PREMISES – A house, apartment, condominium, cooperative or
mobile home which is used as a dwelling place or domicile by the occupant.
SOLICITOR – Any person, either principal or agent, who, in any public street,
road or highway or public place from any vacant property, whether publicly or
privately owned or goes from place to place or house to house for the following
purposes:
5302 9 - 25 - 93
Perryville Code – Chapter 53 Hawkers and Peddlers
A. To sell any goods, wares or merchandise, including magazines and printed
matter, or to accept subscriptions or orders therefore.
B. To accept or request donations for any charitable purpose.
§ 53-3. Registration requirements.
All persons desiring a permit under the requirements of this chapter shall register with
the Town Administrator and furnish the following information:
A. The name, home address and local address, if any, of the applicant.
B. A physical description of the applicant, setting forth the applicant’s age, height,
weight and color of hair and eyes, and any other distinguishing physical
characteristics of the applicant.
C. The name, address and telephone number for the firm or corporation for whom or
through whom orders are to be solicited and cleared.
D. The nature of the goods, wares or merchandise for which orders are to be solicited.
E. A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of a felony or
misdemeanor and, if so, what?
F. Current verification that the applicant holds a Maryland sales tax identification
number.
G. A copy of a valid state motor vehicle operator’s license (copy to be attached).
H. If the applicant is unable to meet the criteria of Subsection G above, some other
type of identification with a picture is required (copy to be attached).
§ 53-4. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
A. The peddling of farm produce by farmers or persons who produce such goods.
The term “farm produce” shall be interpreted to mean only edible farm products.
B. The peddling of seafood or seafood products of any kind which have been taken
within the limits of the county.
5303 9 - 25 - 93
Perryville Code – Chapter 53 Hawkers and Peddlers
C. Unpaid members of any civic or charitable organization who are registered with
the Town of Perryville by the organization as approved solicitors for the
organization if an approved means of identification with the organization
represented has been provided by the organization to the Town.
D. The delivery of food, goods, wares, merchandise, magazines, periodicals, produce,
services or commodities previously ordered by the occupant of the premises to
which the same is delivered or on which the services are to be performed.
E. Route deliverymen who make deliveries at least once a week to regular customers
and whose solicitations are only incidental to their regular deliveries.
F. The delivery of newspapers.
§ 53-5. Issuance, term and display of license.
A. Upon furnishing the information required under § 53-3, the applicant shall be
issued a peddler’s/solicitor’s license by the Town Administrator or other town
employee or officer as prescribed by the Mayor and Town Commissioners of
Perryville, upon payment of the fee established by resolution of the Mayor and
Town Commissioners.
B. A license issued under this chapter shall be good for the remainder of the calendar
year, beginning the date of issuance and expiring December 31 of the same year,
unless revoked as provided for in this chapter.
C. Each licensee shall at all times have on their person, while engaged in the purpose
licensed under this chapter, the license issued hereunder and shall exhibit the same
to any town official, county official or police officer upon request.
D. If a peddler’s license is lost or stolen, such shall be reported to the Town of
Perryville within ten (10) days. Upon notification, the Town Administrator shall
issue a replacement license at a cost to the licensee of fifteen dollars ($15.).
§ 53-6. Prohibitions and revocation of licenses.
A. No permit shall be issued under this chapter to any person under the age of
eighteen (18) years. However, persons under the age of eighteen (18) years may
peddle or solicit in connection with transactions as defined in § 53-4.
B. It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor in plying his trade to enter upon
any premises or property or to ring the doorbell or knock upon or enter any
building whereon there is painted or otherwise affixed or displayed to the public
view any sign containing any or all of the following words: “No Peddlers, No
5304 9 - 25 - 93
Perryville Code – Chapter 53 Hawkers and Peddlers
53 05 9 - 25 - 93
Solicitors, No Agents,” or other wording, the purpose of which purports to prohibit
peddling or soliciting on the premises.
C. It shall be unlawful to remain in a private residence or on the premises thereof
after the owner or the occupant has requested such person to leave.
D. No permit/license shall be transferred from one person to another.
E. A license will be revoked for fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in
the course of peddling or soliciting or for fraud, misrepresentation or false
statements made in applying for such a license.
F. A license will be revoked for any violation of this chapter.
§ 53-7. Hours.
Within the boundaries of Perryville, all soliciting or peddling by licensed
peddlers/solicitors shall be prohibited before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after the later of
8:00 p.m. or one-half (1/2) hour after sunset. Except as otherwise provided, this
provision shall not apply to transactions under § 53-4 of this chapter.
§ 53-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction and
shall be subject, upon conviction thereof, to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.) for each violation. Each violation of this chapter is considered a separate offense.
Perryville Code – Chapter 54 Unsolicited Papers
Chapter 54
UNSOLICITED PAPERS
§ 54-1. Definition.
§ 54-2 Compliance required.
§ 54-3 Resident Complaint process.
§ 54-4 Violation and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Town Commissioners of the Town of Perryville
6/1/10 as Ordinance # 10-1.]
“Section 54-1. Definition
(a) Deliver means to deliver, distribute, deposit, throw, cast or place, or cause or
permit to be delivered, deposited, thrown, cast or placed, a publication, directly or
indirectly by contractor, agent, employee or otherwise, but shall not include
delivery by the United States Postal Service, delivery by handing or transmitting
directly to the owner or occupant then present on the property, or delivery by
placing within a receptacle or container expressly maintained by the owner or
occupant of the property for the receipt of newspaper deliveries.
(b) Distributor means an entity who engages in the business of circulating or
delivering newspapers.
(c) Publication means any printed material issued monthly or more frequently,
including a newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any
collection of advertising or solicitations appended together in booklet or magazine
form and any newspaper distributed without cost to or subscription by the
recipient.
(d) Publisher means a person who engages in the business of printing and issuing for
circulation, or causing to be printed and issued for circulation, a publication.
(e) Unsolicited publication means a publication to which no owner or occupant of the
premises to which it is delivered currently subscribes or has not requested.
Section 54–2. Compliance Required
(a) Any publisher delivering or causing delivery of an unsolicited publication to a
location within the Town of Perryville shall:
5401 6-1-10
Perryville Code – Chapter 54 Unsolicited Papers
(1) Provide reasonable methods, including but not limited to, telephonic means, email
means and regular mail means, to allow owners and/or occupants of
premises located with the Town of Perryville to communicate to the publisher
that they do not wish to receive the unsolicited publication issued by the
publisher;
(2) Notice of all such methods for do not deliver request shall be regularly
included in, on or with the unsolicited publications issued by the publisher,
printed in at least 12 point boldface type that includes “If you no longer wish
to receive this publication” and then provide the methods, as required above,
to allow owners and/or occupants of premises located with the Town of
Perryville to communicate to the publisher that they do not wish to receive the
unsolicited publication issued by the publisher;
(3) Implement a process or system whereby the address of any person making a
request for no delivery pursuant to section 2(a)(1) above is, within two (2)
weeks of its receipt, communicated to any and all applicable distributors
responsible for distributing the unsolicited publication issued by the publisher;
(4) Communicate, within two (2) weeks of their receipt, the addresses of all
persons making requests for no delivery made pursuant to section 2(a)(1)
above to all applicable distributors pursuant to the process or system
implemented pursuant to section 2(a)(3) above;
(5) Implement and communicate to the requesting person a means of tracking
requests for no delivery made pursuant to section 2(a)(1) above, including, by
way of example, the assignment of a tracking number or some other reference
system, so as to allow all persons making such requests to reference same in
the event there is the need for follow-up, further communication or complaint.
(6) Implement and utilize a process or system to timely follow up with all
applicable distributors to ensure compliance with requests made pursuant to
section 2(a)(1) above;
(7) The requirements set forth in paragraphs (a)(1) through (a)(6) above shall not
apply to requests made by residents for temporary cessation of delivers.
(b) Any distributor delivering unsolicited publications within the Town of Perryville
shall:
(1) Not distribute to any address where the owner or occupant has made a request
for no delivery pursuant to section 2(a)(1) above and such request has been
communicated to the distributor by the publisher pursuant to sections (a)(3)
and (a)(4);
5402 6-1-10
Perryville Code – Chapter 54 Unsolicited Papers
(2) Implement and utilize a system or procedure for tracking and executing a
publisher’s direction regarding requests for no delivery made pursuant to
section (a)(1);
(3) Upon written request from the Town of Perryville provide the Town of
Perryville with facts, information and details related to complaints received by
the Town of Perryville from a resident regarding delivery of an unsolicited
publication after making a request pursuant to section (a)(1);
(4) The requirements set forth in paragraphs (b)(1) through (b)(3) above shall not
apply to requests made by residents for temporary cessation of delivers.
Section 54-3 Resident Complaint Process
(a) Any resident of the Town of Perryville wishing to make a complaint regarding
delivery of an unsolicited newspaper in violation of this Ordinance to the property
at which they reside or which they own shall provide the following information to
the appropriate Town of Perryville employee:
(1) The name of the requesting person;
(2) The address that was the subject of the request;
(3) The date and method used to make the no delivery request;
(4) The tracking number or other reference information provided by the publisher
in response to their request; and,
(5) The name and publication date of the unsolicited publication that is the subject
of the complaint.
(b) Any resident of the Town of Perryville wishing to make a complaint regarding a
publisher’s failure to provide a tracking number or other means of reference for a
no delivery request in violation of section 2(a)(2) hereof shall provide the
following information to the appropriate Town of Perryville employee:
(1) The name of the requesting person;
(2) The address that was the subject of the request;
(3) The date and method used to make the no delivery request; and,
(4) The name and publication date of the unsolicited publication that is the subject
of the complaint.
Section 54-4. Violation and penalties.
5403 6-1-10
Perryville Code – Chapter 54 Unsolicited Papers
5404 6-1-10
Violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be considered a municipal
infraction and shall be punishable by a civil fine not exceeding $100 for each violation.”
Perryville Code – Chapter 59 Parades
Chapter 59
PARADES
§ 59-1. Permit required; application and approval procedures; fee.
§ 59-2. Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Commissioners of the Town of Perryville during
codification; see Chapter 1, General Provisions, Art. II. Amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic – See Chapter 77.
§ 59-1. Permit required; application and approval procedures; fee.
A. No person shall organize or lead any parade or procession on the sidewalk or
through any street or other public place within the Town without a permit from the
Board of Commissioners.
B. Applications for permits shall state the date upon which the parade is to take place
and the hour of commencement thereof; the proposed route of march; the expected
length of the column of paraders; the number and type of vehicles, if any, expected
to be within the column; the purpose of the parade; and such other information as
the Chief of Police may require for purpose of traffic control planning.
C. Each application shall be in writing over the signature of the applicant, and
submitted to the Town Administrator. The Town Administrator shall then conduct
such investigation as may be necessary to determine the feasibility of such parade
from the point of view of traffic control and shall, without delay, forward the
application to the Board of Commissioners with his/her recommendations.
5901 6 - 25 - 83
Perryville Code – Chapter 59 Parades
59 02 6 - 25 - 83
D. Each application shall be accompanied with a fee of five hundred dollars ($500.)
to be paid to the Town at the time of filing the application. The Commissioners
may waive the application fee at their discretion.
§ 59-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be guilty of an infraction and shall be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.).
Perryville Code – Chapter 61 Parks and Playgrounds
61 01
Chapter 61
PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS
§ 61-1. Permits.
§ 61-2. Property destruction.
§ 61-3. Fires.
§ 61-4. Wildlife.
§ 61-5. Pets.
§ 61-6. Swimming.
§ 61-7. Camping.
§ 61-8. Motor-driven vehicles.
§ 61-9. Trespassing.
§ 61-10. Peddling and soliciting.
§ 61-11. Noise.
§ 61-12. Firearms.
§ 61-13. Disposal of refuse.
§ 61-14. Cycling and skating.
§ 61-15. Performances and exhibitions.
§ 61-16. Supervision of children.
§ 61-17. Alcoholic beverages.
§ 61-18. Hours of use.
§ 61-19. Additional regulations.
§ 61-20. Violations and penalties.
§ 61-21. Scheduling of ballfields at Perryville Community Park.
Perryville Code – Chapter 61 Parks and Playgrounds
61 02
§ 61-22. Town Boat Ramp.
§ 61-23. Kayak and Canoe Launch.
§ 61-24. Lower Ferry Pier and Transient Dock
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Commissioners of the Town of Perryville 9-8-
1976 as Ord. No. 1-76. Sections 61-1A, B and D, 61-7, 61-8D, 61-11, 61-15 and 61-20
amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
Other amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages – See Chapter 26.
Dogs and other animals – See Chapter 40.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse – See Chapter 50.
Soil erosion and sediment control – See Chapter 71.
§ 61-1. Permits.
A. Permits for exclusive use of any park facility may be issued at the discretion of the
Town Administrator. [Amended 12-6-1983 by Res. No. 83-1]
B. Application for a permit to reserve a pavilion or other facilities within Town park
property shall be made in writing to the Town Administrator or his or her
designee. At the time said application is made, a permit fee as established by
Resolution of the Mayor and Commissioners shall be paid to the Town. Unless
exempted by Resolution of the Mayor and Commissioners, applications for a
permit submitted by a sponsored group shall be required to provide a certificate of
liability insurance to the Town of Perryville at the time of the application in an
amount equal to at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.) liability coverage per
claim each for personal and bodily injury and property damage. The Town retains
the right to deny any application based upon past adverse experiences by the Town
with the applicant or the group the applicant represents, or past park use violations
by the applicant or the group the applicant represents. Permit fees generated shall
be used for cleanup and maintenance of the park and shall be deposited in a
separate park maintenance fund. [Amended 12-6-1983 by Res. No. 83-1; 2-6-
1990 by Ord. 90-2; 5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-3; 2/7/17 by Ord. No. 2017-04
and Res. 2017-01; 2/7/17]
Perryville Code – Chapter 61 Parks and Playgrounds
61 03
Permit Fees will be refunded upon receiving the cancellation request in writing
within two weeks prior to the event. The Park and Pavilions will be inspected
after use and the applicant shall be liable for any damage has been found to have
been done to the Park and Pavilions.
C. No permit shall be issued to anyone under the age of eighteen (18) years.
D. The holder of a group permit issued by the Town Administrator shall be
financially responsible for the destruction of park property by any person or
persons covered by the permit. [Amended 12-6-1983 by Res. No. 83-1]
E. All permits shall be displayed upon the request of town officials or law
enforcement agencies with enforcement duties within Cecil County, Maryland.
§ 61-2. Property destruction.
No person shall deface, alter, injure or disturb any monuments, boundary line,
physical structure, land, installation notices or signs.
§ 61-3. Fires.
No person shall build or cause to be built any fire except within designated areas nor
leave any fire unless attended by a responsible person.
§ 61-4. Wildlife.
No person shall pursue, catch, molest or kill any wildlife or disturb the nest, den or
burrow thereof.
§ 61-5. Pets.
All pets shall be properly licensed and under leash control at all times.
§ 61-6. Swimming.
Positively no swimming or wading.
§ 61-7. Camping.1
Organized groups may camp only by special permit and in such areas as may be
designated for such purpose by the Town Administrator.
Perryville Code – Chapter 61 Parks and Playgrounds
61 04
§ 61-8. Motor-driven vehicles.
A. No vehicle shall block or partially block any fire trail or road.
B. No person shall operate any type of minibike, trail bike, all-terrain vehicle,
snowmobile or other vehicle that cannot be registered for operation on the public
highways.
C. Ignition keys positively must be removed from vehicles.
D. No person shall operate any vehicle of a class eligible for registration for operation
on public highways, except upon roadways or within areas otherwise designated
by the Town Administrator for use of said vehicles.1
E. Speed limits on roads shall be fifteen (15) miles per hour and, on parking lots, five
(5) miles per hour.
____________
1 Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 61-9. Trespassing.
No person shall remain upon park property after a lawful command by any law
enforcement officer or by Town officials or their authorized representative.
§ 61-10. Peddling and soliciting.2
No person shall peddle, solicit business of any nature whatever, collect any funds for
any service or charity, distribute handbills or other advertising matter or post any signs on
any parklands, waters or structures, unless authorized by the Town Administrator in
writing.
§ 61-11. Noise.2
No person shall use a loudspeaker, public-address system or amplifier within or upon
park property without a permit issued by the Town Administrator.
Perryville Code – Chapter 61 Parks and Playgrounds
61 05
§ 61-12. Firearms.
No person shall have in his possession any firearm while upon park property. This
section shall not apply to any person authorized by law to carry firearms in the discharge
of his official duties.
§ 61-13. Disposal of refuse.
All litter shall be discarded in the container provided for such purpose. Only refuse
that is a result of use within park property shall be discarded in the container provided.
§ 61-14. Cycling and skating.
Cycling is permitted on roads and parking lots only. Positively no skating or
skateboarding shall be permitted.
§ 61.15. Performances and exhibitions.2
No person shall indulge in any exhibitions or carry on any performance which
interferes with the proper use of the park by the general public without first having a
permit from the Town Administrator.
____________
2 Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 61-16. Supervision of children.
Children under six (6) years old must be accompanied by proper supervision.
§ 61-17. Alcoholic beverages. [Added 7-12-1990 by Ord. No. 90-73] [Repealed and
reenacted with amendments 61-17 Parks and Playgrounds of the Code of the Town
of Perryville by Emergency Ord. 2015-11 adopted and effective 05-05-15.] [Repealed
and reenacted with amendments 61-17 Parks and Playgrounds of the Code of the
Town of Perryville by Ord. 2016-11, 12-6-16.]
The possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages, including but not limited to
beer, wine and all forms of liquor, shall be prohibited within the confines or boundary of
any public park or playground owned by or within the corporate limits of the Town of
Perryville, except as may be authorized by the Mayor and Commissioners in accordance
with Section 26-2.A.1. of this code.
§ 61-18. Hours of use. [Added 7-12-1990 by Ord. No. 90-7]
Unless otherwise permitted by a resolution of a majority of the Mayor and
Commissioners of the Town of Perryville, no person shall be on the premises of any
Perryville Code – Chapter 61 Parks and Playgrounds
61 06
public park or playground owned by or within the corporate limits of the Town of
Perryville between dusk and 7:30 a.m., so that usage of said parks and playgrounds shall
only be permitted from 7:30 a.m. until official sunset as posted or promulgated, subject,
however, to the provision that little league games being conducted at the park may be
continued until completion, but all participants and spectators shall vacate the park within
fifteen (15) minutes of the completion of the game.
§ 61-19. Additional regulations. [Added 7-12-1990 by Ord. No. 90-7]
The Mayor and Commissioners of the Town of Perryville shall have the power, by
passage of a resolution approved by a majority of said Board, to approve or adopt other
regulations concerning usage of public parks and playgrounds within the municipal limits
of the Town of Perryville or owned by the Town of Perryville. A violation of any such
resolution shall be considered a violation of this chapter of the Code.
§ 61-20. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-6-1983 by Res. No. 83-1, amended
3-5-2009 by Res. No. 2009-4]
Any violation of any provision of Chapter 61 shall be a municipal infraction or civil
offense punishable by a civil penalty of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for each offense.
____________
3 Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former § 61-17, Violations and
penalties, as § 61-20.
§ 61-21. Scheduling of ballfields at Perryville Community Park. [Added 5-7-1991
by Ord. No. 91-1]
A. Applications shall be filed with the Town Administrator for all league usage of
ballfields at the Perryville Community Park no later than March 1 of each year.
Evidence of league bylaws, charter, articles of incorporation, names of governing
officials and certificate of insurance shall be included with the written application,
as well as the number of teams county-wide. New leagues shall provide
satisfactory evidence of the proposed number of teams county-wide. There shall
be a minimum of six (6) teams to be considered a league.
B. Usage of the ballfields shall be based on the following formula which takes into
consideration the Perryville proportion of the county-wide need, based on the
number of teams.
(1) Example:
Number of Number of
League Teams % Slots*
A 100 56 x 9 5 (5.04)
B 50 27 x 9 2 (2.43)
C 30 17 x 9 2 (1.53)
180 100 9
Perryville Code – Chapter 61 Parks and Playgrounds
61 07
Notes:
*0.5 or greater shall be rounded to the next highest number; each league is to
receive no less than one (1) slot.
(2) Number of available time slots for fields: nine (9).
(a) Monday through Friday: five (5): 5:00 p.m. to closing.
(b) Saturday: two (2): 1:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m.; 5:00 p.m. to closing.
(c) Sunday: two (2): 1:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m.; 5:00 p.m. to closing.
(d) Saturday; Sunday: open to 1:00 p.m. and reserved for others.
C. The Council shall allow schedule modifications based upon mutual negotiations
between the leagues involved. Such modifications shall be subject to approval by
the Council.
D. The schedule shall be maintained and administered at the Town Hall by the
Administrator.
E. Each league shall be entitled to install a movable storage building for the purpose
of storing its equipment, and the structure and location will be reviewed and
approved by the Town. The Town shall not be responsible for the structure or the
contents in the building.
F. Each entity will be responsible for its proportional share of maintenance work on
the applicable playing fields. The Town assumes no responsibility for maintaining
fields to any league standards. No alterations to the existing physical
characteristics of the ballfields will be allowed (i.e., altering of mound locations,
base path lengths, etc.).
G. All leagues shall provide their own equipment (bases, bats, balls, etc.).
H. The Town reserves the right to refuse use of the premises to any party that does
not abide by these rules.
I. Care of baseball and softball fields.
(1) No cars, trucks or bikes of any kind are to be on grounds for the purpose of
dragging the infield.
(2) At the conclusion of all practices and games, the following field
management procedures must be done:
(a) All holes on the mound and batter’s boxes must be filled in and
leveled.
(b) All holes and depressions around each base must be filled in and
leveled.
Perryville Code – Chapter 61 Parks and Playgrounds
61 08
(c) Any rough, torn up areas in the infield must be smoothed and
leveled.
(3) Parking for spectators, players, coaches, etc., is limited to established
parking areas. There will be no parking on the grass.
(4) At the conclusion of all practices and games, each manager and team is
responsible for cleaning out the dugouts and bleachers area.
§ 61-22. Town Boat Ramp. [Amended 2-3-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-2, 7-6-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-2, 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-16]
A. It shall be unlawful to use any Town boat ramp, improved parking or public
grounds surrounding or adjacent to the boat ramp in violation of this section.
B. No one shall launch or remove a boat from any Town boat ramp or park a boat
trailer on Town property without first obtaining a permit from the Town. No
single vehicles are permitted to park in spaces designated specifically for vehicles
with boat trailers.
C. Cost of Permit. Anyone who is a resident of the State of Maryland and who owns
a boat and boat trailer with a valid registration in the State of Maryland or who has
rented/leased a boat and trailer registered in the State of Maryland under an
authorized rental contract may obtain a daily permit or a seasonal permit, which is
good for one year, at a cost established by resolution of the Mayor and
Commissioners. Proof of residency (i.e., driver’s license, tax bill, etc.), proof of
boat and trailer registration, and/or authorized rental contract shall be required.
Persons residing outside of the State of Maryland or whose boat or trailer is not
registered in the State of Maryland or who rented/leased a boat or trailer not
registered in the State of Maryland under an authorized out-of-state rental contract
may obtain a daily permit, valid any day of the week, or upon availability a
seasonal permit which is good for one year. The number and cost of non-resident
seasonal permits shall be established by resolution of the Mayor and
Commissioners. Non-resident permits may only be issued with proof of a valid
boat registration. The Mayor and Commissioners may increase or decrease the
aforesaid permit fees by resolution with the approval of the Department of Natural
Resources.
D. It shall be unlawful to use a Town boat ramp for any purpose between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. These hours may be changed by the Mayor and
Commissioners by resolution.
E. The following acts are strictly prohibited:
(1) Loitering on any Town property;
Perryville Code – Chapter 61 Parks and Playgrounds
61 09
(2) Littering on any Town property;
(3) Blocking any boat ramp, parking area or access;
(4) Blocking vehicles or trailers so that they cannot be moved or leave the
premises.
(5) Camping, sleeping, starting a fire, placing a camper or parking any vehicle
or trailer during non-operating hours as defined above in Section D.
(6) Fishing or swimming in violation of any posted “No Fishing” or “No
Swimming” sign.
(7) Leaving or abandoning any vehicle, boat, trailer or other personal property
on the premises.
F. All permits issued pursuant to this Section shall be prominently displayed.
Seasonal permits shall be located on the driver’s side of the tongue of the trailer
one foot from the vehicle hitch device. Daily permits shall be prominently
displayed on the vehicle dashboard so that it may be easily and clearly seen from
the outside of the vehicle.
G. Any violation of subsection B herein shall be an infraction subject to a fine of One
Hundred Dollars ($100.00). Each day that this subsection shall be violated shall
be considered a separate offense. Any violation of any other subsection herein
shall be an infraction and subject to a fine of Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) for
each offense with each day that the violation continues being considered a separate
offense. The penalties provided herein shall be in lieu of the penalties set forth in
Section 61-20 for violations of other sections of Chapter 61.
§ 61-23. Kayak and Canoe Launch. [Amended 2-3-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-3]
It shall be unlawful to launch any motorized watercraft at any kayak and canoe launch
owned by the Town and which is part of the Town’s Parks and Recreation system.
§ 61-24. Lower Ferry Pier and Transient Dock. [Added 6-5-12 by Ord. 2012-4
amended 10- 3-17 by Ord. 2017-12]
A. Except as provided in subsections (B) and (C), this section applies to the use of the
entire lower ferry pier and transient dock. As used in this section, “pier” includes
the entire bridge, pier and floating transient dock structure and facility.
B. The following restrictions and regulations apply to the pier:
Perryville Code – Chapter 61 Parks and Playgrounds
61 10
(1) The pier may be used only between sunrise and 11:00 p.m., seven days a
week during the April 1 through October 31 boating season. No overnight
use is permitted. The town may further limit days and times for the use of
the pier as needed for public safety because of inclement weather or other
conditions that require that use of the pier be limited.
(2) A person may not fish, dive or otherwise enter the water from the pier.
(3) A person may not consume or possess an open container of alcoholic
beverages on the pier.
(4) A person may not throw or cast trash or debris from the pier into the water.
(5) A person may not throw or leave trash and debris on the pier.
(6) A person may not use a charcoal or gas grill or other open fire on the pier.
(7) A person must act in a courteous manner and comply with all applicable
laws when on the pier.
(8) A person may not moor or tie up a boat or other vessel to the pier except in
transient slips available for that purpose or except pursuant to a slip use
license as authorized by paragraph 10 of this subsection.
(9) A person shall use the pier at his or her own risk.
(10) The Town may grant exclusive licenses for the use of up to eight slips on
the pier by boats up to 30 feet in length as provided in this paragraph (10),
except that not more than one slip use license may be issued to the same
person. The Town Administrator, for reasons of boating safety or other
good cause, may decrease the number of slips available for licensing for
any boating season. Upon recommendation of the Town Administrator, the
Mayor and Commissioners, by Resolution, may increase the number of
slips available for licensing for any boating season.
(a) A license shall entitle a boat owner to use a designated slip for
the April 1 through October 31 boating season for which the
license is issued. A boat must be removed from a licensed slip
not later than October 31.
(b) There is a non-refundable fee for license of a boat slip. the fee is
payable in full, in advance, when a boat owner submits an
application to license a slip and a signed slip license application.
The amount of the license fee shall be based on the length of the
boat as shown on the boat’s registration card in accordance with
the following:
[1] For a boat up to 20 feet, the fee is $1,400.
Perryville Code – Chapter 61 Parks and Playgrounds
61 11
[2] For a boat between 20 feet and 30 feet, the fee is $75 times
the length of the boat.
(c) The Town Administrator or designee shall administer the
licensing of slips on the pier including prescribing a slip license
application form and agreement, and the following:
[1] Beginning on February 1 of each year, the Town
Administrator shall accept applications for slip licenses
from holders of slip licenses during the prior boating season
who are seeking renewal for the ensuing year, and from
owners of boats registered in Maryland who did not hold
slip licenses during the prior boating season. If slips for
which licenses have not been issued remain available on
March 1, the Town Administrator shall then begin
accepting applications for slip licenses from owners of
boats registered in a State other than Maryland. Slip
licenses shall be issued on a first come first serve basis.
Except that a holder of a license during the prior boating
season shall have priority for the renewal of a license if the
owner submits an application, signed agreement and license
fee before March 1.
[2] On or before January 1, the Town Administrator shall
notify holders of slip licenses during the prior boating
season of the procedure and timetable for seeking renewal
of the license and that renewal of the license cannot be
assured if an application, agreement and fee are not
submitted by March 1.
(d) The Town Administrator shall designate which slips are available
for licensing.
(e) A boat slip license is personal to the owner of a boat. The holder
of a license may not transfer or assign the license or right to use
the slip.
C. The following restrictions and regulations apply to the transient dock, including its
slips and finger piers, at the end of the pier:
(1) Slips at the transient dock shall be available for use by boaters between
March 15 and November 30 each year. The town may further limit days
for the use of the pier as needed for public safety because of inclement
weather or other conditions that require that use of the transient dock be
Perryville Code – Chapter 61 Parks and Playgrounds
61 12
limited.
(2) The town shall not charge a fee for the use of slips at the transient dock.
(3) A person shall use the transient dock at his or her own risk.
(4) The owner and operator of a boat are jointly and severally liable for all
damage that the boat causes to the pier, to other boats, to persons and to
property.
(5) A person may not berth a boat at the transient dock for more than 24
consecutive hours at a time, except with prior permission of the town for
good cause shown. In deciding whether to approve a request for a stay at
the transient dock for more than 24 consecutive hours the town shall
consider the reason for the request, whether other similar requests have
been approved for the same time period, the anticipated demand for use of
slips at the transient dock at that period of time, the number of previous
similar requests from the same individual or for the same boat, and any
other factors the town considers relevant to acting on the request.
(6) A person may not discharge sewage, or throw or cast trash or other debris,
into the water from a boat berthed at the transient dock.
(7) A person must act in a courteous manner and comply with all applicable
laws when on a boat berthed at the transient dock.
(8) A person may not wash, clean or repair a boat when berthed at the transient
dock.
(9) A person may not use a charcoal or gas grill or other open fire on a boat
when berthed at the transient dock.
(10) A person may not hang any clothing or laundry on or from the transient
dock.
(11) A person may not berth a boat along the north side or west side of the
floating dock except for loading and unloading of passengers. The
berthing of a boat for the loading or unloading of passengers shall not
exceed thirty minutes at a time, except with prior permission of the town
for good cause shown. In deciding whether to approve a request for a stay
at the transient dock for more than 30 minutes the town shall consider the
reason for the request, whether other similar requests have been approved
for the same time period, the anticipated demand for use of the north side
or west side of the pier at that period of time, the number of previous
similar requests from the same individual or for the same boat, and any
other factors the town considers relevant to acting on the request.
Perryville Code – Chapter 61 Parks and Playgrounds
61 13
D. A violation of this section is a municipal infraction, punishable by a fine in the
amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250) for the first offense, and a fine of five
hundred dollars ($500) for each subsequent or repeat offense by the same
individual. Each day that the same violation continues is a separate offense. The
penalties provided in this subsection (D) are in lieu of the penalties set forth in
section 61-20.
E. Town police officers and other law enforcement officers with jurisdiction, and
Town Code Enforcement Officers, may enforce the provisions of this section and
issue municipal infraction citations for violations.





Perryville Code – Chapter 63 Property Maintenance
Chapter 63
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
§ 63-1. Adoption of code by reference; modifications.
§ 63-2. Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Commissioners of the Town of Perryville 11-3-
81 as Ord. No. 81-4. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement– See Chapter 5.
§ 63-1. Adoption of code by reference; modifications.
Be it enacted and ordained by the Commissioners of the Town of Perryville that a
certain property maintenance code known as the “BOCA Basic Property Maintenance
Code”, recommended by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International,
Inc., being particularly the 1981 Edition thereof and the whole thereof, is hereby adopted,
ratified and incorporated as the Property Maintenance Code for the Town of Perryville as
fully as if said code was set out in length herein, subject to the following change:
Article 1
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section PM-104.0 Duties and Powers of Code Official, Subsection PM-104.3,
Inspections shall be changed to read as follows:
PM-104.3 Inspections: In order to safeguard the safety, health and welfare of the public,
the Code Official is authorized:
1. Access to any exterior property area for the purpose of inspecting same, inspecting
the exterior of any existing structure and performing his duties under this code at
any reasonable time.
6301 2 - 25 - 91
Perryville Code – Chapter 63 Property Maintenance
63 02 2 - 25 - 91
2. To enter any structure or part thereof for the purpose of making inspections and
performing his duties under this code if, and only if:
i) It is requested by the owner/occupant; or
ii) A written complaint has been filed with the Code Official detailing a
suspected health or safety violation or violations within a structure.
Upon such complaint, the Code Official must investigate the validity of
the complaint by contacting the complainant, the owner of the structure
in question and neighboring residents. If sufficient evidence is found
to support the complaint, the Code Official must contact the unit’s
owner/occupant by mail detailing the suspected violation(s) and
informing the owner of the scheduled day and time of the interior
inspection at least five (5) days prior to the inspection; or
iii) The unit is owned and occupied by a person or persons who have
received public grant moneys within the past five (5) years for the
interior rehabilitation of their unit.
§ 63-2. Violations and penalties.
The violation of this chapter shall be an infraction. Each initial violation shall be
subject to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.) and each subsequent violation shall be subject to a
fine of two hundred dollars ($200.). Failure to remedy a violation after issuance of a
citation within one (1) week shall be considered a subsequent violation.
Perryville Code – Chapter 64 Property Nuisances
64 01
Chapter 64
PROPERTY NUISANCES
§ 64-1. Nuisance property.
§ 64-2. Responsibility of owner.
§ 64-3. Restrictions on storage.
§ 64-4. Violations and penalties.
§ 64-5. Failure to abate nuisance; Town or agent to perform work; costs.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Commissioners of the Town of Perryville 11-3-
87 as Ord. No. 87-2. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse – See Chapter 50.
Recreational and commercial vehicles – See Chapter 75.
Vehicle repairs – See Chapter 76.
Unlicensed or unregistered vehicles – See Chapter 78.
§ 64-1. Nuisance property.
Unsheltered storage or improperly secured storage of old, unused, stripped, junked or
unregistered automobiles, trucks, buses, motorcycles, vehicles of all sorts, appliances,
boats, trailers, machinery, farm implements, tractors and/or equipment and personal
property of any kind or of any such personal property as hereinbefore listed which is no
longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured, all collectively
referred to as “nuisance property,” except in enclosed buildings secured by locks or in
licensed junkyards, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and dangerous to the public safety
and harmful to the public welfare.
Perryville Code – Chapter 64 Property Nuisances
64 02
§ 64-2. Responsibility of owner.
The owner, owners, tenants, lessees and occupants of any property within the Town
upon which such storage is made, as well as the owner, owners and/or lessees of said
nuisance property, shall jointly and severally be responsible to abate said nuisance and to
pay any fines levied as a result of a violation of this chapter.
§ 64-3. Restrictions on storage.
It shall be unlawful to store, or to permit the storage of, nuisance property on any
property within the Town unless said property is a licensed junkyard or unless said
nuisance property is completely enclosed in a building that is secured and locked so that
access to said building is denied the general public and so that said nuisance property
cannot be seen from outside the building.
§ 64-4. Violations and penalties.
A violation of this chapter shall be an infraction. Each initial violation shall be subject
to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.), and each subsequent violation shall be subject to
a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.). Failure to remedy a violation after issuance of a
citation within one (1) week shall be considered a subsequent violation.
§ 64-5. Failure to abate nuisance; Town or agent to perform work; costs.
[Amended 4-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-7]
Notwithstanding other provisions of this Chapter for violations and penalties for
failure to abate any property nuisance, the Town or its agent may, after notice to the
property owner(s) of such property nuisance and failure of the property owner(s) to abate
such nuisance within the time provided in such notice, enter upon such property for the
purpose of abating all property nuisances. The costs incurred by the Town for the
abatement of such nuisances shall be a debt against the owner(s) of the property and the
property itself and shall become due and payable upon receipt. Unpaid bills beyond
thirty (30) days shall be a lien against the property and collected in the same manner as
Town taxes.
Perryville Code – Chapter 65 Real Estate Transfers
Chapter 65
REAL ESTATE TRANSFERS
§ 65-1. Certification of deed transfers by town required.
§ 65-2. Outstanding charges, taxes and assessments to constitute lien.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Commissioners of the Town of Perryville 5-4-65
as Ord. No. 100. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 65-1. Certification of deed transfers by town required.
Prior to the transfer of any real estate located in the corporate limits of Perryville,
Maryland, on the land records of Cecil County, it will be necessary that the deed to
effectuate said transfer be stamped, printed or marked in a manner by the Clerk of the
Commissioners of Perryville so as to indicate that all water and sewer charges, real and
personal property taxes and any other municipal assessments due against the particular
parcel of property to be transferred are fully satisfied.
§ 65-2. Outstanding charges, taxes and assessments to constitute lien.
All said charges due and payable shall be a lien against the real estate and shall take
precedence over any other lien on said real estate, whether the same shall have been
created by a mortgage or otherwise.1
_______________________
1 Editor’s Note: Former Sections 3 and 4, which immediately followed this section, and which concerned
the publication of this ordinance, and the notification of the Clerk of the Cecil County Circuit Court as to
the adoption of this ordinance, were deleted during codification; see Chapter 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
6501
Perryville Code - Chapter 66 Purchasing Policy
6601
Chapter 66
PURCHASING POLICY
§ 66-1. Purpose.
§ 66-2. Definitions.
§ 66-3. Applicability.
§ 66-4. Purchase requisition procedure.
§ 66-5. Competitive bidding.
§ 66-6. Capital expenditures.
§ 66-7. Local bidder preference.
§ 66-8. Use of Town credit cards.
§ 66-9. Purchase of supplies.
§ 66-10. Execution of written contracts.
§ 66-11. Compliance with other laws.
[History: Adopted by the Mayor and Commissioners of the Town of Perryville 5-7-13 as
Ord. No. 2013-1, adding new Chapter 66, sections 66-1 thru 66-11 to the Code of Perryville.
Repealing and reenacting with amendments Section 66-2.B. on 7-7-15 Ord. No. 2015-09]
§ 66-1. Purpose. The purpose of this Chapter is to ensure that sound business judgment is used
in all Town procurement transactions and that the Town obtains supplies, equipment,
construction, and services efficiently and economically.
§ 66-2. Definitions. The following definitions apply to this Chapter unless the context requires
a different meaning:
A. “Bid most advantageous to the Town” means a bid chosen on the basis of price,
quality of merchandise, suitability of merchandise and the service reputation of the vendor, and
therefore may not necessarily mean the lowest bid received.
B. “Capital expenditures” means expenditures or assets with initial cost of more than
$5,000 for a single item, or $10,000 for like items purchased as a group, and an estimated useful
life in excess of one year.
Perryville Code - Chapter 66 Purchasing Policy
6602
C. “Competitive bidding” means the process of obtaining the bid most advantageous
to the Town for any purchase, whether through formal or informal bidding procedures.
D. “Cooperative purchase” means a purchase opportunity that relies upon a federal,
state, county, or municipal contract, or a procurement opportunity through a government
cooperate purchasing arrangement, that is established by a competitive process.
E. “Emergency purchase” means an expenditure for goods or services that is due to a
sudden and unanticipated event or occurrence.
F. “Formal bid” means a written quotation obtained by advertisement.
G. “Informal bid” means a written or oral quotation obtained from a vendor where
the purchase is not required to be to be solicited by advertisement.
H. “Local bidder” means a business that maintains a place of business within the
corporate limits of the Town of Perryville, or a business located within the greater Perryville area
which is a member in good standing of the Greater Perryville Chamber of Commerce.
I. “Purchase order” means a document that authorizes a purchase transaction.
J. “Request for purchase order form” means a document provided to the Town
Finance Department to request the procurement of goods or services.
K. “Supplies” means items such as paper, pens, screws, light bulbs, etc., that are used
on a regular basis by the Town.
§ 66-3. Applicability. This Chapter applies to all purchases made by departments and agencies
of the Town, except as otherwise specified in this Chapter.
§ 66-4. Purchase requisition procedure. As part of the Town’s internal financial controls, the
Finance Department maintains the following purchase requisition procedure:
A. A Request for Purchase Order form must be submitted to the Finance Department
for the procurement of any goods or services. The Request for Purchase Order form must be
originated and approved by the department or agency that is requesting the procurement of the
goods or services.
Perryville Code - Chapter 66 Purchasing Policy
6603
B. After the Finance Director approves a Purchase Order for a purchase of up to
$5,000 the Purchase Order shall be signed by Finance Director, or by the Administration
Supervisor in the Finance Director’s absence.
C. The Town Administrator shall sign all Purchase Orders for purchases of $5,000 or
more, except that Purchase Orders of $5,000 or more for recurring utility or contractual
(including debt service payments) expenses may be signed by Finance Director, or by the
Administration Supervisor in the Finance Director’s absence.
D. For emergency purchases, the Finance Department must be notified and the
purchasing requisition process must be followed as soon as possible after the expenditure.
§ 66-5. Competitive bidding.
A. Except as provided in subsection B. of this Section, the Town shall seek
competitive bids for purchases as follows:
(1) For goods with a total value between $5,000 and $25,000, seek three
informal bids from suppliers.
(2) For services with a total value between $10,000 and $25,000, seek three
(3) informal bids from suppliers.
(3) For goods or services with a total value greater than $25,000, seek formal
bids from suppliers.
B. The following purchases are exempt from the requirements of subsection A.:
(1) Purchases of supplies or services available only through one source.
(2) Contracts for professional services such as those of attorneys, physicians,
architects, engineers, accountants, consultants, and other possessing a similar high degree of
technical skill and expertise, provided that to the extent appropriate for the particular service to
be provided, an attempt is made to secure competitive proposals for these services.
(3) Emergency purchases.
(4) Purchases based on federal, state, county, or municipal contracts, or
procurement opportunities thru government cooperative purchasing arrangements, that are
established by a competitive process.
Perryville Code - Chapter 66 Purchasing Policy
6604
(5) The acquisition of real property.
(6) The purchase of insurance through an insurance broker.
§ 66-6. Capital expenditures. All capital expenditures must be approved by the Mayor and
Commissioners before a Request for Purchase Order may be submitted and processed.
Authorization for the capital expenditure during the annual budget process or through a budget
amendment constitutes approval for the expenditure by the Mayor and Commissioners.
§ 66-7. Local bidder preference. In determining whether a bid submitted by a local bidder is
the bid most advantageous to the Town, the Town shall award the bid to the local bidder if, all
other factors being equal, the local bidder’s price is not more than 6% higher than the price
submitted by a non-local bidder.
§ 66-8. Use of Town credit cards.
A. A Town credit card may be used only by an official or employee who has been
authorized to use that card.
B. An authorized person may not use a Town credit card, except for a gas credit
card, for a purchase except in accordance with the purchase requisition procedure set forth in §
66-4.
C. An authorized person may use a Town gas credit card for the purchase of gasoline
for a Town vehicle without prior approval, using the pin number that has been assigned to that
person by the Finance Department. Any person who purchases gasoline using a Town gas credit
card shall promptly provide the purchase receipt to the Finance Department.
§ 66-9. Purchase of supplies. Department heads should make all practicable efforts to order
supplies on a monthly basis.
§ 66-10. Execution of written contracts. Written contracts for the purchase of goods or
services shall be executed by the Mayor or Town personnel designated by the Mayor.
§ 66-11. Compliance with other laws. All purchases by the Town shall comply with any State
and federal laws applicable to municipal procurements.
Perryville Code – Chapter 67 Public Nuisances Article I, Feeding of Waterfowl and
Wildlife
6701
Chapter 67
PUBLIC NUISANCES
ARTICLE I, FEEDING OF WATERFOWL AND WILDLIFE
§ 67-1. Prohibition against feeding of waterfowl and wildlife.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Commissioners of the Town of Perryville 8-5-14
as Ord. No. 2014-07.]
A. As used in this section the following words have the meaning specified:
(1) “Feed” means to place, deposit, scatter or distribute in a location
accessible to water fowl, migratory birds or wildlife any type of food,
including but not limited to corn, wheat or other grains, bread, popcorn
or scraps or any substance liable to be eaten by the water fowl.
Migratory birds or wildlife. Feeding does not include baiting in the
legal taking of fish or game.
(2) “Water Fowl” and “Fowl” mean any water fowl of the family anatidae,
either migratory, nonmigratory or resident fowl, and includes those
species of birds commonly known as "swans," "geese" and "ducks"
and any other water fowl falling under the jurisdiction of the united
states fish and wildlife service.
(3) “Wildlife” means all animals that are neither human nor domesticated,
including, but not limited to, squirrels, groundhogs, feral cats, deer,
migratory birds, wild birds or aquatic life.
B. Except as expressly authorized as part of a “trap, neuter and return” program
approved by the town, a person may not feed, cause to be fed or provide food
for any water fowl or wildlife in any park, lands or waterways publicly
owned, leased or operated by and within the Town of Perryville.
C. This section shall be enforced by officers of the Town of Perryville Police
Department and Town of Perryville Code Enforcement Officers.
D. A person who is observed feeding water fowl or wildlife in violation of this
section shall be directed to cease the feeding immediately. A person who does
not cease the feeding as directed, or who feeds in violation of this section after
having previously been directed to cease feeding, is guilty of a municipal
Perryville Code – Chapter 67 Public Nuisances Article I, Feeding of Waterfowl and
Wildlife
6702
infraction.
E. A violation of this section is a municipal infraction. Each incident of feeding
in violation of this section is a separate and new offense. The fine for a
violation of this section is $50 for the first offense and $100 for each
subsequent offense.
Perryville Code - Chapter 68
Public Safety Home Ownership Incentive
6801
Chapter 68
Public Safety Home Ownership Incentive
§ 68-1. Purpose.
§ 68-2. Definitions.
§ 68-3. Program Established.
§ 68-4. Implementation and Administration of Program.
§ 68-5. Eligibility for Participation in Program.
§ 68-6. Program Participation Application Process.
§ 68-7. Application Evaluation Process.
§ 68-8. Home Ownership Program Incentives.
§ 68-9. Incentives Subject to Appropriation.
[History: Adopted by the Mayor and Commissioners of the Town of Perryville 10/1/19 as
Ord. No. 2019-15, adding new Chapter 68, sections 68-1 thru 68-9 to the Code of the Town
of Perryville.
§ 68-1. Purpose. The purpose of this Chapter is to establish a Public Safety Home Ownership
Incentive Program as an incentive for public safety employees to own a principal residence in the
Town.
§ 68-2. Definitions. As used in this Chapter the following terms have the meanings indicated:
A. “Active member” means an individual who is classified by The Community Fire
Company of Perryville, Md, Inc. as an active member of that organization.
B. “Applicant” means an individual who seeks to apply for incentives under this
chapter.
C. “Lifetime member” means an individual who is classified by The Community Fire
Company of Perryville, Md, Inc. as a lifetime member of that organization.
D. “Principal Residence” means a residential property located in the Town and
identified as an applicant’s residence for voter registration purposes or, if the applicant is not a
registered voter, the residential property listed on the applicant’s Federal and State income tax
returns.
Perryville Code - Chapter 68
Public Safety Home Ownership Incentive
6802
E. “Program” means the public safety home ownership incentive program provided
for by this chapter.
F. “Public Safety Employee” means:
(1) A sworn officer of the Perryville Police Department;
(2) An active member of the Community Fire Company of Perryville, Md, Inc.;
or
(3) A lifetime member of the Community Fire Company of Perryville, Md, Inc.
G. “Town” means the Town of Perryville.
§ 68-3. Program Established.
A. A public safety home ownership incentive program is established in and for the
Town. The program shall be implemented and administered in accordance with this chapter.
B. The program consists of several parts:
(1) Criteria for eligibility for participation;
(2) Application and approval process; and
(3) Available home ownership incentives.
C. The incentives provided under the program may be used with other incentives that
may be available to encourage home ownership.
§ 68-4. Implementation and Administration of Program.
The Town Administrator and the Town Finance Director shall implement and administer the
program.
§ 68-5. Eligibility for Participation in the Program.
A. An individual must file an application annually between July 1 and September 30 to
participate in the program that year.
B. Eligibility to participate in the program is limited to those applicants who timely file an
application and satisfy the criteria in this section.
Perryville Code - Chapter 68
Public Safety Home Ownership Incentive
6803
C. An applicant must be a public safety employee as defined in §68-2(d) or the surviving
spouse of a public safety employee.
(1) In order for the surviving spouse of a public safety employee to be an applicant for
an incentive under the program, the public safety employee must have been receiving benefits under the
program at the time of death.
D. The applicant must:
(1) Own and occupy a principal residence in the Town; and
(2) Have owned and occupied the principal residence during the preceding tax year;
and
(3) Be current in the payment of Town real property taxes and utility charges for the
principal residence.
E. The applicant must be the only individual who resides at the principal residence claiming
or applying for the incentive provided by the program.
§ 68-6. Program Participation Application Process.
A. The Town Administrator and Finance Director shall prescribe the form of an application
for an individual to participate in the program. The application shall require the submittal of documents
necessary to demonstrate that an applicant is eligible to receive an incentive under the program and will
satisfy the requirements of the program.
(1) If an applicant is seeking to participate in the program as an active member or a
lifetime member, the applicant must submit a certification of the applicant’s status as an active member or
a lifetime member by The Community Fire Company of Perryville, Md, Inc., on a form prescribed by the
Town Administrator and Finance Director.
B. The Town Administrator and Finance Director shall determine when an application is
complete. Completeness of an application includes the submittal of all required documents.
§ 68-7. Applicant Evaluation Process.
A. The Finance Director and the Town Administrator are the application evaluation team.
B. The evaluation team shall evaluate each complete application. The evaluation team shall
consider:
(1) Whether the applicant is eligible for participation in the program; and
(2) Whether the application complies with the requirements of this chapter and the
program.
Perryville Code - Chapter 68
Public Safety Home Ownership Incentive
6804
C. The evaluation team may request the applicant to furnish additional materials as the team
needs to complete its review.
D. After the evaluation team completes its review of an application, the evaluation team shall
approve an application that satisfies the requirements of § 68-5(c), (d) and (e).
§ 68-8. Home Ownership Program Incentives.
The Town may provide the following program incentives each year to an individual whose
application is approved for that year:
(1) A financial grant in amount of $100 annually to a public safety employee; or
(2) A financial grant in the amount of $50 annually to a surviving spouse of a public safety
employee.
§ 68-9. Incentives Subject to Appropriation.
The Mayor and Commissioners shall provide incentives under the program in any fiscal year only to
the extent that funds are appropriated in the town’s annual budget to pay incentives under the program for
that fiscal year.
Perryville Code – Chapter 69 Snow and Ice Removal
69 01
Chapter 69
SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL
§ 69-1. Responsibility for removal.
§ 69-2. Deposition of snow and ice restricted.
§ 69-3. Violations and penalties.
§ 69-4. Enforcement; cost.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Commissioners of the Town of Perryville during
codification; see Chapter 1, General Provisions, Art. II. Amendments noted where
applicable.] Repealing and reenacting, with amendments, Chapter 69 Snow and Ice
Removal Sections 69-1, 69-3, and 69-4, by Ord. 2015-19 Revised 12/01/15, effective
12/21/15.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, weeds and grass – See Chapter 30.
Property maintenance – See Chapter 63.
§ 69-1. Responsibility for removal.
A. All owners and persons in possession of any land or premises situated on any
street, alley or highway within the limits of the Town where sidewalks have been
or may hereafter be laid shall remove the snow therefrom the entire length thereof
for a width of at least three (3) feet and may deposit the same along the remaining
portion of said sidewalks nearest the curb within twenty four (24) hours after it has
ceased falling, except that owners and persons in possession of land or premises
that lie along a designated state or town snow emergency route shall remove snow
from sidewalks within thirty (30) hours after it has ceased falling.
B. However, in the event snow and ice on a sidewalk has become so hard that it
cannot be removed without likelihood of damage to the sidewalk, the person
charged with its removal shall, within the time mentioned in Subsection A, cause
Perryville Code – Chapter 69 Snow and Ice Removal
69 02
enough CaCl2 or some comparable substance to be put on the sidewalk to make
travel on the sidewalk reasonably safe, and then shall, as soon thereafter as
weather permits, cause a path in said sidewalk of at least three (3) feet in width to
be thoroughly cleaned.
C. A property owner or person in possession of land within the town who, because of
factors such as age, handicap or disability, will be unable to comply with the
requirements of Subsection A. and B. during the upcoming winter season, may
apply for an exemption for that season and request the town to undertake snow
removal. An application shall be submitted to the Town Administrator or the
Administrator’s designee by November 1 of each year, or as soon thereafter as
practicable. The application shall be submitted on forms, and be accompanied by
documentation justifying the exemption, as required by the town administrator.
The property owner, if different from the person in possession, also shall join in
the application. Where an exemption has been granted, the property owner shall
be responsible for the town’s cost of removing snow and ice from the sidewalk.
The town shall bill the property owner for all costs incurred by the town for snow
and ice removal. If the property owner does not pay all costs within thirty (30)
days after the date of billing, the cost for such work as billed shall be a lien on the
land and collected in the same manner, and bear the same interest and penalties, as
town real property taxes.
§ 69-2. Deposition of snow and ice restricted.
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any snow and ice on or against a fire
hydrant or on any sidewalk, roadway or loading and unloading areas of a public
transportation system, except that snow and ice may be windrowed on public roadways
incident to the cleaning thereof.
§ 69-3. Violations and penalties.
In the event that a person violates §69-2, or fails to clear away or treat with CaCl2 or
some comparable substance and subsequently clear away any snow and ice from any
sidewalk as provided in §69-1, or fails to cause this to be done, such violation or failure is
hereby declared to be an infraction and subject to a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.) for
the first offense and fifty dollars ($50.) for each subsequent offense in the same winter
weather season.
§ 69-4. Enforcement; cost.
Except for a person to whom an exemption has been granted pursuant to section 69-
1.C., if a property owner or other person in possession of land in the town fails or
refuses to clear away or properly treat sidewalks in accordance with this chapter, the
Perryville Code – Chapter 69 Snow and Ice Removal
69 03
town, after at least twenty-four (24) hours written notice delivered to the premises,
shall cause the snow and ice to be removed. The town shall bill the property owner
for all costs incurred by the town for snow and ice removal. If the property owner
does not pay all costs within thirty (30) days after the date of billing, the cost for such
work as billed shall be a lien on the land and collected in the same manner, and bear
the same interest and penalties, as town real property taxes.
Perryville Code – Chapter 71 Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Chapter 71
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
§ 71-1. Statement of purpose.
§ 71-2. When permit required.
§ 71-3. Administration and enforcement; inspections; fees.
§ 71-4. Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Commissioners of the Town of Perryville 8-3-71
as Ord. No. 108. Sections 71-3A and B and 71-4 amended at time of adoption of
Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions, Art. I. Other amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction – See Chapter 32.
Flood damage control – See Chapter 46.
§ 71-1. Statement of purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard the natural resources of the Town by
ensuring compliance with minimum requirements for the control of grading and
earthmoving; to provide measures to control soil erosion and sedimentation; and to
establish procedures by which these requirements and measures are to be administered
and enforced. Provisions of this chapter are adopted under authority of, and in
compliance with, §§ 105 through 110 of Article 96A of the Annotated Code of Maryland
and Section 20 of the Cecil County Zoning Ordinance.
§ 71-2. When permit required.
A. A grading permit shall be obtained from Cecil County offices prior to the start of
any grading, clearing or other earth change which may:
7101 6 - 25 - 83
Perryville Code – Chapter 71 Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
(1) Introduce sediment into any watercourse of the Town, county or state;
(2) Move more than one hundred (100) cubic yards of earth; or
(3) Create undue erosion and sediment damage to landowners downstream,
adjacent to or in the immediate vicinity of the subject site.
B. Exceptions to this requirement are:
(1) Agricultural land management practices approved by and installed under
supervision of the Cecil Soil Conservation District.
(2) Construction of agricultural structures or the construction of single-family
residences and/or their accessory buildings on lots of two (2) acres or
more.
(3) Construction or maintenance of county roads for which an erosion and
sediment control plan has been approved by the Cecil Soil Conservation
District.1
§ 71-3. Administration and enforcement; inspections; fees.
A. The grading, erosion and sediment control program of the Town of Perryville will
operate under the control of and be administered by Cecil County agencies.
Applications for all grading permits will be submitted to and approved by the
Cecil County Soil Conservation District.2
B. Inspections will be conducted by the Cecil County Soil Conservation District.
However, law or enforcement officers of Perryville may require evidence of the
county grading permit at any time such grading or construction is underway.
Failure to produce the proper grading permit upon request may result in immediate
suspension of the work underway and initiation of any corrective measures
necessary to ensure the protection of the natural resources or health and welfare of
the Town should such elements be endangered by the work underway.1
C. Any fees associated with the grading permit or subsequent inspection will be
assessed by and paid to the county agency charged with administration of this
program.
_____________________
1 Editor’s Note: Original Subsection C, Existing activities and structures, which immediately followed
this subsection, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
2 Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
7102 6 - 25 - 83
Perryville Code – Chapter 71 Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
71 03 6 - 25 - 83
§ 71-4. Violations and penalties.3
Any violation of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor, and the person,
partnership or corporation who is found guilty of such violation shall be subject to a fine
not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.) or ninety (90) days’ imprisonment for each
and every violation. Any agency whose approval is required under this chapter or any
person in interest may seek an injunction against any person, partnership or corporation,
whether public or private, violating or threatening violation of any provisions of this
chapter. Notice of violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be filed with the
Maryland Department of Natural Resources as well as with appropriate county agencies,
including the Cecil Soil Conservation District.
_______________________
3 Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
Perryville Code – Chapter 72 Streets and Roads
Chapter 72
STREETS AND ROADS
§ 72-1. Standards and Specifications.
§ 72-2. Naming of streets and roads.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Commissioners of the Town of Perryville
7-3-1990 as Ord. No. 90-6. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public ways – See Art. VIII of the Charter.
Parades – See Chapter 59.
Snow and ice removal – See Chapter 69.
Subdivision of land – See Chapter 74.
§ 72-1. Standards and Specifications.
All new streets and roads within the Town of Perryville, as well as any existing
private streets and roads, shall be designed and constructed in conformity with the Cecil
County Road Specifications, as adopted pursuant to Chapter 242 of the Code of Cecil
County and as modified or clarified by § 255-39 of the Code of Cecil County, all as
amended from time to time. No street shall be dedicated to the Town or accepted by the
Town unless it complies with said specifications and regulations.
§ 72-2. Naming of streets and roads.
All new streets and roads within the Town of Perryville shall be named by the Mayor
and Commissioners of Perryville, after consultation with the Cecil County Planning
Department or such other department of the county government that is responsible for the
naming of streets and roads, to determine that said proposed name does not duplicate the
name of some other street or road within the county.
7201 2 - 25 - 91
Perryville Code – Chapter 73 Stormwater Management
Chapter 73
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
§ 73-1. Purpose; applicability.
§ 73-2. Compliance required; exempt activities; waivers; variances.
§ 73-3. Administration; fees.
§ 73-4. Violations and penalties.
§ 73-5. Private stormwater management facilities.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Commissioners of the Town of Perryville 12-4-
84 as Ord. No. 84-4. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction – See Chapter 32.
Flood damage control – See Chapter 46.
Soil erosion and sediment control – See Chapter 71.
§ 73-1. Purpose; applicability.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health,
safety and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures
to control the adverse impacts associated with increased stormwater runoff.
Proper management of stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and
private property, reduce the effects of development on land and stream channel
erosion, assist in the attainment and maintenance of water quality standards,
reduce local flooding and maintain after development, as nearly as possible, the
predevelopment runoff characteristics.
B. The provisions of this chapter, pursuant to § 8-11A-02 of the Natural Resources
Article, Annotated Code of Maryland, 1983 replacement volume, shall apply to all
development occurring within the incorporated area of Perryville. The application
of this chapter and the provisions expressed herein shall be the minimum
stormwater management requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation or
repeal of any other powers granted by state statute. The Cecil County Department
of Public Works shall be responsible for the coordination and enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter.
7301 9 - 25 - 85
Perryville Code – Chapter 73 Stormwater Management
§ 73-2. Compliance required; exempt activities; waivers; variances.
A. Scope. No person shall develop any land for residential, commercial, industrial or
institutional uses without having provided for appropriate stormwater management
measures that control or manage runoff from such developments, except as
provided within this section, in accordance with regulations promulgated in the
Cecil County Stormwater Management Ordinance.
B. Exemptions. The following development activities are exempt from the provisions
of this chapter and the requirements of providing stormwater management:
(1) Agricultural land management activities.
(2) Additions or modifications to existing single-family detached residential
structures.
(3) Developments that do not disturb over five thousand (5,000) square feet of
land area.
(4) Land development activities which the Water Resources Administration
determines will be regulated under specific state laws which provide for
managing stormwater runoff.
(5) Residential developments consisting of single-family houses, each on a lot
of two (2) acres or greater.
C. Waivers. The Cecil County Department of Public Works may grant a waiver of
the stormwater management requirements for individual developments, provided
that a written request is submitted by the applicant containing descriptions,
drawings and any other information that is necessary to evaluate the proposed
development. A separate written waiver request shall be required in accordance
with the provisions of this section if there are subsequent additions, extensions or
modifications to a development receiving a waiver. Eligibility for a waiver shall
be determined if the applicant can conclusively demonstrate that:
(1) The proposed development will not generate more than a ten-percent
(10%) increase in the two-year predevelopment peak discharge rate and
will not cause an adverse impact on the receiving wetland, watercourse or
waterbody;
(2) A site is completely surrounded by existing developed areas which are
served by an existing network of public storm drainage systems of
adequate capacity to accommodate the runoff from the additional
development; or
7302 9 - 25 - 85
Perryville Code – Chapter 73 Stormwater Management
(3) Provisions to control direct outfall to tidewater are provided when the first
inch of rainfall is managed according to infiltration standards and
specifications promulgated by the Water Resources Administration.
D. Variances. The Cecil County Department of Public Works may grant a written
variance from any requirement of Section 6.0, Stormwater Management Criteria,
of the Cecil County Stormwater Ordinance, if there are exceptional circumstances
applicable to the site such that strict adherence to the provisions of this chapter
will result in unnecessary hardship and not fulfill the intent of the ordinance. A
written request for variance shall be provided to the Department of Public Works
and shall state the specific variances sought and reasons for their granting. The
Department of Public Works shall not grant a variance unless and until sufficient
specific reasons justifying the variances are provided by the person developing
land.
§ 73-3. Administration; fees.
A. The stormwater management and control program of the Town of Perryville will
operate under the control of and be administered by Cecil County agencies as
specified in the Cecil County Stormwater Management Ordinance. A stormwater
management plan or an application for a waiver shall be submitted to and
approved by the Cecil County Department of Public Works.
B. Inspections will be conducted by the Cecil County Department of Public Works.
However, law or enforcement officers of Perryville may require evidence of the
county stormwater management permit at any time grading or construction is
under way. Failure to produce the proper stormwater management permit upon
request may result in immediate suspension of the work under way and initiation
of any corrective measures necessary to ensure the protection of the natural
resources or health and welfare of the Town, should such elements be endangered
by the work under way.
C. Any fees associated with the stormwater management permit or subsequent
inspection will be assessed by and paid to the county agency charged with
administration of this program.
§ 73-4. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor; and the person,
partnership or corporation who is found guilty of such violation shall be subject to a fine
not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.) and/or ninety (90) days’ imprisonment for
each and every violation. Each day that the violation continues shall be a separate
offense.
7303 9 - 25 - 85
Perryville Code – Chapter 73 Stormwater Management
73 04 9 - 25 - 85
§ 73-5. Private stormwater management facilities. [Amended 5-2-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-2]
A. If a private stormwater management facility exists within a subdivision, the Town
shall require that said facility be maintained to design standards of said facility by
a homeowners association to be comprised of those parties owning lots within said
subdivision. If a private stormwater management facility exists within the
property, the Town shall require that said facility be maintained by the owner of
said property. If the owners of said lots or property do not properly maintain said
stormwater management facility, the Town may undertake said maintenance and
shall assess the cost of said maintenance to the owners of lots within said
subdivision, or the owners of said property, so that each lot or property owner
shall pay an equal portion of said cost. Said assessment shall be included on the
next tax bill of the owner of each lot or property within said subdivision or served
by said private stormwater management facility and shall be collected in the same
fashion as property tax. If not paid, said assessment shall operate as a lien against
said lot and property in the same fashion as unpaid property tax operates as a lien
against said property. Said lien may be collected and satisfied in the same fashion
as any unpaid property tax lien.
B. For purposes of this section, homeowners association shall include a homeowners
association, a management association, a condominium association, or any other
association formed to manage common spaces, open spaces, or other
improvements within a residential community or subdivision. Subdivision for
purposes of this section shall include a single family home subdivision, a multifamily
home subdivision, a condominium complex, a townhouse or townhome
subdivision, or any other development of property that is segregated into separate
units, parcels, or lots, and owned by various different parties.
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
Chapter 74
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
ARTICLE I
Title; Applicability; Purpose
§74-1. Title.
§74-2. Applicability.
§74-3. Purpose.
ARTICLE II
Word Usage; Definitions
§74-4. Word usage.
§74-5. Definitions.
§74-6. Definitions applicable to critical area.
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§74-7. Plat required.
§74-8. Plat approval required prior to recording.
§74-9. Transfer of land prior to recording prohibited.
§74-10. Compliance with requirements.
ARTICLE IV
Procedures for Plat Submission and Approval
§74-11. Sketch plan; consultations.
§74-12. Preliminary plat.
§74-13. Hearing; tentative approval.
§74-14. Submission of plans for installation of improvements.
§74-15. Submission of final plats.
§74-16. Final plat approval and recording.
7401 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
ARTICLE V
Design Standards and Requirements
§74-17. Compliance.
§74-18. Suitability of land.
§74-19. Street layout.
§74-20. Street design standards.
§74-21. Blocks.
§74.22. Lots.
§74-23. Easements.
§74-24. Public sites and open spaces.
ARTICLE VI
Preliminary Plat
§74-25. General requirements.
§74-26. Information to be shown.
§74-27. Supporting statements to be included.
ARTICLE VII
Improvements
§74-28. Required improvements.
§74-29. Minimum requirements for installation of improvements.
§74-30. Submission of plans.
§74-31. Inspection and approval of improvements.
§74-32. Sediment control.
§74-33. Critical areas.
ARTICLE VIII
Final Plat
§74-34. General requirements.
§74-35. Information to be shown.
§74-36. Certificates and supporting statements to be included.
7402 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
ARTICLE IX
Miscellaneous Provisions
§74-37. Modification and exceptions.
§74-38. Amendments.
§74-39. Violations and penalties.
§74-40. Appeals.
§74-41. Fees.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Commissioners of the Town of Perryville 5-5-81.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning and Zoning Commission – See Chapter 14.
Zoning Board of Appeals – See Chapter 20.
Building Construction – See Chapter 32.
Soil erosion and sediment control – See Chapter 71.
Stormwater management – See Chapter 73.
Zoning – See Zoning Ordinance No. 2005-1 adopted 1-20-2005.
Fees – See Chapter A86.
ARTICLE I
Title; Applicability; Purpose
§74-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known, referred to and cited as the “Land Subdivision Ordinance
of Perryville, Maryland”.
§74-2. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to the incorporated territory of Perryville, Maryland, within the
area encompassed by the adopted transportation plan of the Town. The regulations
contained herein are adopted under the authority of Article 66B, Code of Public General
Laws of Maryland, as amended, and shall be in addition to any regulations pertaining to
land subdivision promulgated by the State Department of Health and Mental Hygiene or
other agency of the State of Maryland and, in the case of any conflict, the more exacting
regulation shall prevail.
7403 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
§74-3. Purpose. (Amended 5-26-88)
This chapter has been established for the purpose of building and accomplishing the
coordinated and harmonious development of the Town of Perryville, Maryland, and its
environs, in order to promote, in accordance with present and future needs, the health,
safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare of the citizens of the
Town. In the accomplishment of this purpose, the regulations as herein established
provide for, among other things, efficiency and economy in the process of development;
the proper arrangement of streets, in relation to each other and to the existing and planned
streets and other features of the Comprehensive Plan of the Town; adequate open spaces
for recreation, light and air; convenient distribution of population and traffic; adequate
provision for public utilities and other public facilities; and other requirements for land
subdivision which will tend to create conditions favorable to the health, safety,
convenience and prosperity of the citizens of Perryville, Maryland, and its environs.
Furthermore, in accordance with the Town of Perryville critical area program, this
chapter has been established for the protection of wetlands, streams, areas of steep slopes,
highly erodible and other soils with development constraints, shorelines and plant and
wildlife habitats. These regulations for procedures and standards in subdividing land are
adopted and prescribed by the Town of Perryville.
ARTICLE II
Word Usage; Definitions
§74-4. Word usage.
The following general rules of construction shall apply to the regulations of this
Chapter:
A. The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular, unless the
context clearly indicates the contrary.
B. Words used in the present tense include the past and future tenses, and the future
the present.
C. The word “shall” is always mandatory. The word “may” is permissive.
D. The word “public” means “open to common use,” whether or not public ownership
is involved.
E. Words and terms not defined herein shall be interpreted in accord with their
normal meanings and customary usage.
7404 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
§74-5. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined:
ALLEY – A narrow public thoroughfare, not exceeding sixteen (16) feet in width,
which provides a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting properties and
which is not intended for general circulation.
BUILDING LINE – A line within a lot, so designated on a plat of subdivision,
between which line and the street line of any abutting street no building or
structure may be erected.
COLLECTOR STREET – A street which is intended to collect traffic from the
minor streets within a neighborhood or a portion thereof and to distribute such
traffic to major thoroughfares, in addition to providing access to properties
abutting thereon.
CROSSWALKWAY – A public way intended for pedestrian use and excluding
motor vehicles, which cuts across a block in order to furnish improved access to
adjacent streets or properties.
CUL-DE-SAC – A minor street having but one (1) end open for vehicular traffic
and with the other end permanently terminated by a turnaround or backaround for
vehicles.
EASEMENT – A strip of land for which the owner grants a right of use to
someone else for one (1) or more designated purposes, which purposes are
consistent with the general property rights of the owner.
ENGINEER – The Town Engineer of Perryville, who shall be a qualified civil
engineer designated by the Town Commissioners.
HEALTH OFFICER – The Health Officer of the county.
LOT – A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for the purpose
of building development, whether immediate or future.
LOT AREA – The total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot.
LOT DEPTH – The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
LOT LINE – The boundary line of the lot.
LOT WIDTH – The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at the
required building setback line.
7405 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
MAJOR THOROUGHFARE – A street or highway so designated in the
transportation section of the Perryville Comprehensive Plan.
MINOR STREET – A street other than a major thoroughfare or collector street
and intended primarily for providing access to abutting properties.
PLANNING COMMISSION – The Perryville Planning and Zoning Commission.
REGULATIONS – The whole body of regulations, tests, charts, diagrams,
notations and references contained or referred to in this chapter.
ROADWAY – That portion of a street or highway available for and intended for
use by motor vehicle traffic.
SERVICE DRIVE – A minor street which is parallel to and adjacent to a major
thoroughfare and which provides access to abutting properties and restricts access
to the major thoroughfare.
STREET – A public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of
access to abutting properties, whether designated as a freeway, expressway,
highway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, circle or however otherwise designated.
STREET LINE – A dividing line separating a lot, tract or parcel of land and a
contiguous street, and also referred to as a “right-of-way line”.
SUBDIVIDER – Any person, individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, estate, trust or any other group or combination, acting as a unit,
dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as defined
herein, and including any agent of the subdivider.
SUBDIVISION – The division of any tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more
plots, parcels, lots or sites, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of
transfer of ownership or of building development. The term shall include
resubdivision and, where appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of
subdividing or to the land subdivided.
§74-6. Definitions applicable to critical area. (Added 5-26-88.)
Definitions applicable to the Perryville critical area shall be the same as those contained
in the Perryville Zoning Chapter.1
_____________________
1 Editor’s Note: See Zoning Ordinance No. 2005-1 adopted 1-20-2005.
7406 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§74-7. Plat required.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, any owner, agent or proprietor of any
tract of land located within the territory to which these regulations shall apply, who
subdivides such land into lots, blocks, streets, alleys, public ways or public grounds, shall
cause a plat of such subdivision to be made in accordance with the regulations set forth
herein and the laws of the State of Maryland and shall cause a copy of said plat to be
recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court.
§74-8. Plat approval required prior to recording.
No plat of subdivision shall be recorded by the Clerk of the Circuit Court unless and
until it shall have been submitted to and approved by the Planning Commission as
provided herein. The Planning Commission shall not approve said plat unless and until
the plat satisfactorily complies with the requirements of these regulations.
§74-9. Transfer of land prior to recording prohibited.
No parcel of land in a subdivision created after the effective date of this chapter shall be
transferred, sold or offered for sale, nor shall a building permit be issued for any structure
thereon, until a plat of subdivision shall have been recorded with the Clerk of the Circuit
Court in accordance with these regulations and the laws of the State of Maryland. Any
person who violates this provision shall be subject to the penalties contained herein.
§74-10. Compliance with requirements.
In the preparation of a plat of subdivision, the subdivider shall comply with the general
principles of design and minimum requirements for the layout of subdivisions as set forth
in Article V, and with the rules and regulations concerning required improvements as set
forth in Article VII and in the standards and specifications for improvements as adopted
by the Town Commissioners, and in every case, the preparation of such plat shall be in
accordance with the procedure of Article IV.
7407 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
ARTICLE IV
Procedures for Plat Submission and Approval
§74-11. Sketch plan; consultations.
A. Before undertaking the preparation of a subdivision plat, the subdivider shall have
prepared a sketch of the property in question, drawn to approximate scale, showing
the boundaries, general topography, important physical features and other significant
information, as well as the proposed scheme for development of the property,
including the proposed street and lot locations, areas to be reserved for public use
and proposed improvements. The subdivider shall also show, on the sketch plan of
the property in question, the critical area boundary line on parcels created, habitat
protection areas, forests and developed woodlands on or in the vicinity of the
proposed minor subdivision, limits of tidal wetlands and the mean high water line.
When applicable, the subdivider shall show the location and extent of existing
and/or proposed erosion control measures. The subdivider shall include an
environmental assessment with the sketch plan. [Amended 5-26-88]
B. The subdivider shall then consult with the Planning Commission or its staff to
ascertain the location of proposed major streets, highways, parks, playgrounds,
school sites and other planned public improvements, and to determine the zoning
regulations and other requirements related to, affecting or applying to the proposed
subdivision. The subdivider shall also consult with the Engineer and the Health
Officer on the proposed street layout and the proposed facilities for sanitary sewage
disposal, storm drainage and water supply to serve the proposed subdivision. The
purpose of these consultations is to assist the subdivider by furnishing information
and advice, in order to expedite matters for the subdivider, save him unnecessary
expense and promote the best coordination between the plans of the subdivider and
those of the Town.
§74-12. Preliminary plat.
A. The subdivider shall then prepare a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision
conforming to the requirements for the preparation of such plat as set forth in Article
VI. At least two (2) weeks prior to a regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning
Commission at which action on such plat is desired, the following items shall be
filed with the Secretary of the Planning Commission:
(1) Three (3) black-line or blue-line prints of the preliminary plat.
(2) Supporting statements on required improvements and proposed deed
restrictions, as set forth in Article VI.
(3) An application for the approval of the plat on a form to be supplied by the
Planning Commission.
7408 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
(4) A nonrefundable application fee from the fee schedule as set by the Town
Commissioners.2
B. The preliminary plat shall be checked by the Planning Commission or its staff for its
conformity with the transportation plan and other pertinent features of the
Comprehensive Plan of the Town, the applicable zoning and other regulations and
the design principles and standards and requirements for submission as set forth in
this chapter. Copies of the preliminary plat shall be referred to the Engineer, Health
Officer and other appropriate public officials concerned with public improvements
or health requirements, for review, comments and approval.
C. As applicable, the preliminary plat will also be checked by the Town of Perryville
Planning Commission or its staff for its conformity with the Town of Perryville
critical area program, the requirements of the zoning and subdivision regulations of
the Town and the recommendations of any authorized federal, state and county
agencies. Incomplete plats, or those lacking the required information, shall be
returned to the subdivider for completion and subsequent resubmission. [Added 5-
26-88]
§74-13. Hearing; tentative approval.
A. A hearing on the preliminary plat shall be held at the next regular meeting of the
Planning Commission. No hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission until
notice thereof shall have been sent to the subdivider and to such other interested
parties as may be determined by the Planning Commission. At the hearing, the
Planning Commission shall submit its findings and recommendations, together with
those of the other public officials to who copies where referred. The Planning
Commission shall either tentatively approve or disapprove the preliminary plat, or it
may approve the plat subject to specific changes or modifications. One (1) copy of
the preliminary plat, with any comments, shall be returned to the subdivider, with
other copies retained in the files of the Planning Commission.
______________________
2 Editor’s Note: See Chapter A86, Fees.
7409 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
B. Tentative approval of a preliminary plat shall be valid for not more than two (2)
years. Unless a final plat (substantially in accordance with the approved preliminary
plat and including any required changes or modifications) shall be filed with the
Planning Commission within two (2) years from the date of approval of the
preliminary plat, the Planning Commission’s approval of the Preliminary Plat shall
be deemed canceled and of no legal effect. However, the final plat may include only
a portion of the area included within the preliminary plat, and those final plats for
remaining portions may be filed at a later date without a new preliminary plat,
subject to any changes in the regulations contained herein made after such two year
period; provided however, that said additional final plat(s) is filed within two years
of the most recent approval of a final plat for the subdivision. If no additional final
plat(s) is filed within any two year period of time, a new preliminary plat for the
remainder of the subdivision for which a final plat(s) has not been recorded will be
required. In reviewing and approving or rejecting said new preliminary plat, the
Planning Commission shall not be bound by any prior approval granted of a
previous preliminary plat. [Amended 2-1-2000 by Ord. No. 99-08]
§74-14. Submission of plans for installation of improvements.
Following tentative approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall prepare and
submit plans for the installation of those improvements which he is required to make
under the provisions of this chapter. Copies of such improvement plans shall be
submitted to the Perryville Planning Commission for approval. Upon being notified that
such improvement plans have been approved, the subdivider shall proceed with either the
installation of such improvements prior to filing a final plat for the subdivision with the
Planning Commission or, in lieu of completing the required improvements prior to such
filing, the subdivider may furnish the Town Commissioners with a cash deposit,
performance bond or a secured line of credit, executed in accordance with the provisions
of 74-28 of this chapter.
§74-15. Submission of final plat.
A. Following completion of the required improvements to the satisfaction of the
appropriate public officials, or following the posting of a performance bond, cash
deposit or a secured line of credit in lieu of such completion, the subdivider shall
prepare a final plat of the subdivision. Such final plat may be for all the property
included in the preliminary plat, or it may be limited to any portion thereof which is
intended to be developed as a unit. Additional final plats covering additional units
of the property may be submitted later, provided that the preliminary plat is still
valid. Every final plat shall be substantially in accordance with the tentatively
approved preliminary plat, including any changes or additions required by the
Planning Commission as a condition for its tentative approval, and it shall conform
in every respect to the requirements for the preparation of such plat as set forth in
Article VIII.
7410 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
B. At least two (2) weeks prior to a regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning
Commission at which action on the final plat is desired, the subdivider shall file the
following items with the Secretary of the Planning Commission:
(1) Three (3) copies of the plat on linen or dimensionally stable plastic film.
(2) Six (6) black-line or blue-line prints of the plat.
(3) A properly executed statement of dedication of all streets in the subdivision
to the appropriate jurisdiction, constituting an irrevocable offer to dedicate
for a period of not less than five (5) years from the date of its filing with the
Planning Commission.
(4) An application for approval of the plat on a form to be supplied by the
Planning Commission.
(5) [Added 5-26-88] For subdivisions in the critical area, the following shall be
tabulated:
(a) The total area of the subdivision or parcels to be recorded in the
Critical Area District.
(b) The total number of lots in the Critical Area District.
(c) The residential density in the Critical Area District.
(6) For subdivisions in the critical area, accurate outlines (metes and bounds,
where required) of any common or reserved areas or portions of lots to be
maintained by covenant, easement or similar approved instrument, in
permanent forest cover, including existing forested areas, reforested areas
and afforested areas. [Added 5-26-88]
(7) For subdivisions in the critical area, accurate outlines (metes and bounds,
where required) of any areas to be maintained as permanent wildlife and
plant habitat protection areas. [Added 5-26-88]
§74-16. Final plat approval and recording.
A. Upon receipt by the Planning Commission of evidence of the satisfactory
completion of required improvements, or the posting of a cash deposit, performance
bond or a secured line of credit therefore, the Planning Commission shall consider
approval of the final plat at its next regular meeting. If the final plat is found to
comply with the requirements of this chapter, the intent and philosophy of the
Perryville Comprehensive Plan and with the preliminary plat as approved, the
Planning Commission shall approve said plat and endorse the fact of such approval
7411 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
on each of the several copies submitted by placing the signature of its Chairman
thereon.
B. The Planning Commission shall approve or disapprove the final plat within thirty
(30) days after the filing of such plat with the Secretary of the Planning
Commission; otherwise, such plat shall be deemed to have been approved, and a
certificate to that effect shall be issued by the Planning Commission on demand;
provided, however, that the subdivider may waive this requirement and consent to
an extension of such period. The grounds for the disapproval of any final plat shall
be stated upon the record of the Planning Commission.
C. Upon approval of the final plat by the Planning Commission, the three (3) signed
copies of the plat on linen or plastic film shall be filed by the subdivider with the
Clerk of the Circuit Court. The signed black-line or blue-line prints shall be
forwarded by the Planning Commission to the Supervisor of Assessments, the State
Department of Health, the Health Officer and the Engineer, with one (1) print
retained by the Planning Commission and one (1) print returned to the subdivider.
ARTICLE V
Design Standards and Requirements
§74-17. Compliance.
A. The subdivision layout shall conform in all essential respects to the official
transportation plan and other aspects of the adopted Comprehensive Plan for the
Town.
B. The subdivision layout shall be in full compliance with the provisions of the zoning
districts in which it is located.
C. The subdivision layout shall be designed in accordance with the principles and
standards contained in this Article, with the objective of achieving the most
advantageous development of the subdivision and adjoining areas.
D. The subdivision layout in the Town of Perryville critical area shall conform to the
Town of Perryville critical area program and be of such character that it protects
water quality and plant and wildlife habitat. [Added 5-26-88]
7412 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
§74-18. Suitability of land.
A. Land subject to periodic flooding shall not be subdivided for commercial, industrial
or residential occupancy nor for any other use which might involve danger to health,
life or property or aggravate the flood hazard, and such land within any proposed
subdivision shall be reserved for uses which will not be endangered by periodic or
occasional inundation.
B. A plat for the subdivision of land with poor drainage or other adverse physical
conditions will be considered for approval only if the subdivider shall agree to make
whatever improvements are necessary, in the judgment of the Planning Commission,
to render the land safe and otherwise acceptable for development, and to file an
environmental impact statement with the Planning Commission concerning the
environmental impacts of such improvements.
§74-19. Street layout.
A. The street layout shall be designed to create desirable building sites while respecting
existing topography, minimizing street grades, avoiding excessive cuts and fills and
preserving trees to the maximum extent possible.
B. Streets shall be spaced to allow for blocks meeting the dimensional requirements
contained herein and to minimize the number of intersections with existing or
proposed major thoroughfares.
C. Where the subdivision adjoins or embraces any part of a major thoroughfare as
designated on the transportation plan, the layout of such subdivision shall provide
for the platting and dedication of such part of the major thoroughfare in the location
and at the width indicated on such plan, except that the subdivider shall not be
required to dedicate that part of such major thoroughfare which is in excess of eighty
(80) feet in width.
D. Wherever deemed desirable to the layout of the subdivision and adjoining areas, the
Planning Commission may require the platting and dedication of one (1) or more
collector streets, or parts thereof, to serve the subdivision.
E. Minor residential streets, intended primarily for access to individual properties, shall
be so arranged as to discourage their use by through traffic.
F. Streets shall be laid out to intersect one another at as near to right angles as
topography and the limiting factors of good design will permit, and no street shall
intersect another street at an angle of less than sixty degrees (60º).
G. Proposed streets in the subdivision shall provide for the continuation of existing,
planned or platted streets on adjacent tracts, unless such continuation shall be
7413 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
prevented by topography or other physical condition, or unless such extension is
found by the Planning Commission to be unnecessary for the coordination of
development between the subdivision and such adjacent tract
H. Where the Planning Commission deems it desirable or necessary to provide access
to adjacent tracts not presently subdivided, proposed streets in the subdivision shall
be extended to the boundary lines with such adjacent tracts, and temporary
turnarounds shall be provided at the ends of such streets by means of temporary
easements or otherwise.
I. Reduction of impact of heavy traffic.
(1) Where the subdivision abuts or contains a primary highway as designated on
the transportation plan, the Planning Commission may require that measures
be taken to reduce the impact of heavy traffic on the residential lots abutting
or fronting upon such highway and to afford separation of through and local
traffic, through one (1) of the following means:
(a) By providing vehicular access to such lots by means of a service
drive separated from the major thoroughfare by a planting strip and
connecting therewith at infrequent intervals.
(b) By designing reverse frontage lots having access only from a
parallel minor street or from cul-de-sac or loop streets, and with
vehicular access to such lots from the major thoroughfare
prohibited by deed restrictions or other means.
(2) The choice of the most appropriate method of accomplishing the desired
purpose in a specific instance shall be made by the Planning Commission,
giving consideration to topography and other physical conditions, the
character of existing and contemplated development in the subdivision and
its surroundings and other pertinent factors.
J. Cul-de-sac streets, generally not exceeding six hundred (600) feet in length, shall be
permitted where they are necessitated by topographic conditions or where, in the
judgment of the Planning Commission, they are appropriate to the type of
development contemplated.
K. Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial areas, unless adequate access
to parking and loading areas is provided by other means. Alleys will not be
permitted in residential areas, except for providing rear access to row or townhouse
dwellings or where required by topographic or other unusual conditions. In the
absence of alleys, easements will be required for utility lines or drainage facilities.
L. Half streets will be prohibited, except where they are essential to the reasonable
development of the proposed subdivision in conformity with the other requirements
7414 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
of these regulations and where the Planning Commission finds that it will be
practicable to require dedication of the remaining half when the adjoining property
is subdivided. Wherever a half street adjoins the proposed subdivision, the
remaining half of the street shall be platted within such subdivision.
M. Private streets shall not be permitted in any proposed subdivision.
N. Roads or streets serving development shall be located to avoid disturbances to
habitat protection areas. When no alternative exists and such infrastructure must
cross or be located in habitat protection area, the developer shall demonstrate how
impacts to habitats have been minimized and that no feasible alternative location of
such infrastructure exists. [Added 5-26-88]
§74-20. Street design standards.
A. Right-of-way widths. Right-of-way widths for primary and secondary highways
shall be as designated in the transportation plan, and in any case not less than one
hundred fifty (150) feet for primary highways and eighty (80) feet for secondary
highways; provided, however, that widths above these minimums may be required
by state officials to meet particular traffic conditions. Right-of-way widths for other
street types shall be not less than sixty (60) feet for commercial and industrial areas,
fifty (50) feet for collector streets, forty (40) feet for minor streets in residential
areas, forty (40) feet for service drives and sixteen (16) feet for alleys.
B. Roadway widths. Roadway widths for primary and secondary highways shall be not
less than the minimum specified by state officials, but in any case not less than
twenty-four (24) feet with ten-foot shoulders. Roadway widths for other street types
shall be not less than the following:
(1) Collector streets and minor streets in multiple-family residential: thirty (30)
feet, with curbs and gutters, except that streets serving lots of one (1) acre or
more may, with the approval of the Planning Commission, have a minimum
roadway width of twenty-four (24) feet.
(2) Minor streets in single-family residential areas and service drives: twentyeight
(28) feet, with curbs and gutters, except that streets serving lots of onehalf
(1/2) acre or more may, with the approval of the Planning Commission,
have a minimum roadway of twenty-two (22) feet.
(3) The Perryville Planning Commission may reduce the above street standards
of width in accordance with good planning practice and techniques.
(4) Collector streets and minor streets in commercial and industrial areas: forty
(40) feet with curb and gutter.
7415 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
(5) Alleys: twelve (12) feet.
C. Cul-de-sac. Cul-de-sac streets shall have a circular turnaround of not less than one
hundred (100) feet in diameter to the street line, and with a roadway of not less than
eighty (80) feet in diameter, unless the Planning Commission approves a “T” or “Y”
backaround. The center of the culls-de-sac shall be planted with trees and shrubs.
D. Street grades. Street grades shall not exceed five percent (5%) for primary and
secondary highways and collector streets and eight percent (8%) for minor streets,
service drives and alleys, except that the Planning Commission may permit a
variation of not greater than two percent (2%) from these maximums where
topographic conditions warrant. Street grades shall be not less than one-half of one
percent (1/2 of 1%) at the gutter. All changes in street grades of more than one
percent (1%) shall be connected by vertical curves with a minimum length of fifty
(50) feet or fifteen (15) times the algebraic difference in the change in grade,
whichever is greater.
E. Curvature. The radius of curvature on the center line shall be not less than four
hundred (400) feet for primary and secondary highways, three hundred (300) feet for
collector streets and one hundred (100) feet for minor streets, service drives and
alleys. Between reversed curves, either of which has a radius of less than two
hundred (200) feet, there shall be a tangent section at least one hundred (100) feet in
length.
F. Intersections. Each property corner at street intersections shall be rounded off by an
arc, the radius of which shall be not less than twenty (20) feet, except that in a
business area a chord may be substituted for such arc. Curbs at street intersections
shall be rounded off concentrically with the property lines. The design of the
intersection should provide clear sight distance for oncoming vehicles, and there
should be a suitable leveling of the street grade within and approaching the
intersection.
§74-21. Blocks.
A. Residential blocks shall normally not exceed one thousand three hundred (1,300)
feet in length nor be less than five hundred (500) feet in length, between street lines.
In any residential block more than eight hundred (800) feet in length, a crosswalk
way of not less than ten (10) feet in width may be required where necessary to
provide convenient access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers and other
community facilities.
B. Residential blocks shall normally be of sufficient width to provide two (2) tiers of
lots of appropriate depth.
7416 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
C. Blocks for business or industrial use shall be of such length and width as may be
necessary to serve their prospective use, including making adequate provision for
off-street parking and for the loading and unloading of delivery vehicles.
D. Irregularly shaped blocks indented by cul-de-sac or looped streets, and containing
interior parks or playgrounds, will be acceptable when they are properly designed,
including making provision for adequate parking and for the maintenance of the
public or joint-use recreation area.
§74-22. Lots.
A. The lot arrangement, design and orientation shall be such that all lots will provide
satisfactory building sites, properly related to topography and the character of
surrounding development and to maximize solar exposure during the winter solstice.
B. The dimensions and areas of all lots shall comply with the requirements of the
zoning district in which they are located.
C. Excessive lot depth in relation to lot width shall be avoided. A ratio of depth to
width of two to one (2:1) shall be considered a desirable maximum.
D. Corner lots shall desirably have extra width to permit appropriate building setback
from both streets in accordance with the zoning regulations.3
E. Every lot shall abut upon, and have access to, a public street.
F. Double-frontage and reverse-frontage lots shall be avoided, except where their use is
essential to overcoming special topographic problems or to separating residential
development from heavy street traffic.
G. Residential lots fronting or abutting on major thoroughfares shall desirably have
twenty-five percent (25%) extra lot depths and deeper building setbacks.
H. Lots adjoining a railroad line shall have thirty percent (30%) extra lot depth with
thirty percent (30%) deeper building setbacks. There shall be provided an
appropriate means of buffering such lots from such railroad line.
I. Insofar as possible, side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to the
street line, except where a variation to this requirement will provide an improved
street and lot layout.
_____________________
3 Editor’s Note: See Zoning Ordinance No. 2005-1 adopted 1-20-2005.
7417 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
J. The size and shape of lots intended for single-family residential use shall be
sufficient to permit the ultimate provision of a garage on each lot, except that the
Planning Commission may permit the grouping of garages into a compound serving
such lots.
§74-23. Easements.
A. Where alleys are not provided in appropriate locations, easements of not less than
ten (10) feet in width shall be provided where necessary to meet public utility
requirements. Easements of greater width may be required along lot lines or across
lots where necessary for the extension of trunk sewers or other primary utility lines.
B. Where a proposed subdivision is traversed by any stream, watercourse or drainage
way, the subdivider shall make adequate provision for the proper drainage of surface
water, including the provision of easements along such streams, watercourses and
drainage ways.
C. Utility easements in private rights-of-way or in joint-use recreation areas may be
permitted at the discretion of the Planning Commission if the design considerations
of the proposed subdivision warrant such easements.
D. No building or structure shall be constructed on any easement without the written
authorization of the Town Commissioners.
§74-24. Public sites and open spaces.
A. Where the proposed subdivision includes lands proposed for use as parks,
playgrounds, playfields, public landings or school sites under the Comprehensive
Plan, the subdivider shall indicate the location of such lands on the subdivision plat
and shall dedicate such lands to the appropriate jurisdiction.
B. Where deemed essential by the Planning Commission, upon consideration of the
type and size of development proposed in the subdivision, the subdivider may be
required to dedicate sites and recreational facilities, of a character, extent and
location suitable to meeting the needs of such development. In lieu of dedicating
such additional areas, they may be reserved for the common use of all property
owners in the proposed subdivision through deed restrictions.
7418 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
ARTICLE VI
Preliminary Plat
§74-25. General requirements.
The preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision shall comply with the following
general requirements with regard to style and content:
A. It shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor, preferably at a scale of one (1)
inch to one hundred (100) feet, but in any case at a scale not smaller than one (1)
inch to two hundred (200) feet.
B. It shall provide all the pertinent information on existing site conditions, property
ownership and the like, which may be necessary for the Planning Commission to
properly consider the proposed subdivision, and such information shall be accurate
and reliable.
C. It shall show the general plan for the ultimate development of the property,
including as much of the surrounding area as may be necessary for an adequate
consideration of the land to be subdivided. Such plan shall be accurately drawn to
scale, but surveyed dimensions are not required.
§74-26. Information to be shown.
A. The preliminary plat shall be drawn in a clear and legible manner and shall show the
following information:
(1) The proposed subdivision name, which shall not duplicate nor closely
approximate the name of any other subdivision in the county.
(2) The names and addresses of the owner of record, the subdivider and the
surveyor preparing the plat.
(3) The sale, date, North point and small-scale key map showing the location of
the proposed subdivision.
(4) The boundaries of the land being subdivided in heavy outline, with the
approximate dimensions of the property and the approximate acreage
contained therein.
(5) The names and locations of adjacent subdivisions and the location of
adjoining parcels of unplatted land, with the names of owners of record.
7419 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
(6) The location of existing property lines, streets and alleys, easements,
buildings, utilities, wooded areas, watercourses and any other significant
natural or man-made physical features affecting the proposed subdivision.
(7) The present zoning classifications of the proposed subdivision and adjoining
properties, and proposed uses of property within the area being platted.
(8) The layout, widths and names of all streets, alleys, crosswalkways and
easements proposed to be dedicated for public use, with the tentative centerline
grade of each street and alley. Street names shall not duplicate nor
closely resemble existing street names in the county, except for extensions
of existing streets.
(9) The layout, numbering and approximate dimensions and areas of all
proposed lots or parcels.
(10) The proposed building lines along all streets, with the minimum amount of
setback required.
(11) The designation of parcels of land to be conveyed or reserved for public
use or for the common use of property owners within the subdivision.
(12) The tentative locations for all utilities and drainage facilities, with
easements indicated where necessary.
B. [Added 5-26-88] For proposed subdivisions located in the critical area, the
following additional information will be shown on the preliminary plat as
applicable:
(1) An area or vicinity map showing such information as the names and
numbers of adjoining roads, streams, banks, bodies of water, railroads,
subdivisions, election districts or other landmarks sufficient to clearly
identify the location of the property.
(2) A boundary survey plat of the entire site at a scale that provides legibility
without undue size and which shows the following:
(a) The existing topography at two- or five-foot contour intervals.
(b) Slopes of fifteen percent (15%) or greater.
(c) Existing and proposed regraded surface of the land.
(d) The location of natural features, such as streams, major ravines,
drainage patterns and, within the area to be disturbed by
7420 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
construction, trees measuring greater than twelve (12) inches in
diameter to be retained.
(e) The one-hundred-year floodplain boundaries.
(f) The location and extent of area of all soils exhibiting the following
characteristics as determined by the soil survey:
(1a) Septic limitations.
(2a) Wet Soils.
(3a) Hydric soils and soils with hydric properties.
(4a) Highly erodible soils [soils on slopes greater than fifteen
percent (15%) or soils on slopes greater than five percent (5%)
with K values greater than thirty-five hundredths (0.35)].
(3) Detailed drawing.
(a) A detailed drawing showing:
(1) The location, proposed use and height of all buildings
(delineate all existing buildings and structures).
(2) The location of all parking and loading areas, with ingress and
egress drives thereto.
(3) The location of outdoor storage (if any).
(4) The location of recreation facilities (if any).
(5) The location of all existing or proposed site improvements,
including storm drains, culverts, retaining walls, fences and storm
water management facilities, as well as any sediment and erosion
control structures and shore erosion structures.
(6) A description, method and location of water supply and
sewerage disposal facilities.
(7) The locations, sizes and types of all signs.
(8) The locations, sizes and types of vehicular entrances to the site.
7421 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
(b) In addition to the information required above, the detailed drawing
shall show the following information on site plans for development
in the Critical Area Overlay District (O):
(1) The location of the Critical Area Overlay District boundary,
the Buffer and other buffer areas, open space areas, forested areas
and landscaping (the plan shall show all areas to be maintained as
landscaping and the type of plantings to be provided and the means
by which such landscaping will be permanently maintained shall
be specified).
(2) The location of all habitat protection areas.
(3) The location of all contiguous forested areas adjacent to the
site.
(4) The location of tidal and nontidal wetlands on the site.
(5) The location of existing water-dependent facilities on and
adjacent to the site, including the number of existing slips and
moorings on the site.
(6) The location and extent of existing and/or proposed erosionabatement
approaches.
(7) A detailed drawing locating shore erosion abatement
techniques to be included with the site plan.
(4) Computations of:
(a) the total lot area.
(b) The building floor area for each type of proposed use.
(c) The building ground coverage (percentage).
(d) The road area.
(e) The number and area of off-street parking and loading spaces.
(f) The general open space area.
(g) In addition to the computations required above, the following
additional computations will be submitted with all site plans for
development in the Critical Area Overlay District (O):
7422 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
(1) The total area in the Critical Area Overlay District (O).
(2) The total man-caused impervious surfaces areas and
percentage of site.
(3) Separate computations of the total acres of existing forest
cover in the Buffer and in the critical area.
(4) The total area of the site that will be temporarily disturbed
during development and area that will be permanently disturbed.
“Disturbed” is defined as any activity occurring on an area which
may result in the loss of or damage to existing natural vegetation.
(5) Commercial or industrial uses to include:
(a) Specific uses proposed.
(b) The maximum number of employees for which buildings are
designed.
(c) The type of energy to be used for any manufacturing processes.
(d) The type of wastes or by-products to be produced by any
manufacturing process.
(e) The proposed method of disposal of such wastes or by-products.
(f) The location of outdoor lighting facilities.
(g) Other information as may be specified in the regulations for
industrial or commercial uses in the Town of Perryville Zoning
Chapter.4
C. In addition to the information above, the site plans for development in the Critical
Area Overlay District (O) shall be accompanied by the following as appropriate:
(1) A forest management plan, including the comments of the Bay Watershed
Forester, required when a proposed development site contains or will contain
forest or developed woodland areas.
(2) A habitat protection plan, including the comments of the Maryland Forest,
Park and Wildlife Service or the Water Resources Administration required
when a habitat protection area (not including the Buffer) is on or adjacent to
the site.
_____________________
4 Editor’s Note: See Zoning Ordinance No. 2005-1 adopted 1-20-2005.
7423 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
(3) A storm water management plan.
(4) A sediment and erosion control plan.
(5) An environmental assessment report which provides a coherent statement of
how the proposed development addresses the goals and objectives of the
Town of Perryville Chesapeake Bay critical area program. At a minimum,
the environmental assessment shall include:
(a) A statement of existing conditions, e.g., amount and types of forest
cover, amount and type of wetlands, discussion of existing
agriculture activities on the site, soil types, topography, etc;
(b) A discussion of proposed development project, including number
and type of residential units, amount of impervious surfaces,
proposed sewer treatment and water supply, acreage devoted to
development, proposed open space and habitat protection areas;
(c) A discussion of the proposed development’s impacts on water
quality and habitat protection areas; and
(d) Documentation of all correspondence and findings.
D. In additional to the information above, the preliminary site plan shall be
accompanied by the following when the subdivision or development is proposed in
the critical area, as required:
(1) A planting plan for reforested and afforested areas and forest management
plan with the comments of the Bay Forester.
(2) A habitat protection plan including the comments of the Maryland Forest,
Park and Wildlife Service or the Water Resources Administration.
(3) A preliminary storm water management plan.
(4) A preliminary sediment and erosion control plan.
(5) A shore erosion protection plan with complete specification for proposed
shore erosion work.
(6) An environmental assessment report which provides a coherent statement of
how the proposed development addresses the goals and objectives of the
Town of Perryville Chesapeake Bay critical area program. At a minimum,
the environmental assessment shall include:
7424 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
(a) A statement of existing conditions, e.g., the amount and types of
forest cover, amount and type of wetlands, discussion of existing
agricultural activities on the site, soil types, topography, etc.
(b) A discussion of proposed development project, including number
and type of residential units, amount of impervious surface,
proposed sewer treatment and water supply, acreage devoted to
development, proposed open space and habitat protection areas.
(c) A discussion of the proposed development’s impacts on water
quality and habitat protection areas.
(d) Documentation of all correspondence and findings.
§74-27. Supporting statements to be included.
Accompanying the preliminary plat shall be the following written and signed
statements in support of the subdivider’s application for tentative approval:
A. Statements explaining how and when the subdivider proposes to provide and
install required water supply, sewers or other means of sewage disposal, street
pavements, curbs and gutters and drainage structures.
B. A statement concerning any proposed deed restrictions to be imposed by the
owner.
C. If the property to be developed is within the Town of Perryville critical area,
statements explaining how and when the subdivider proposes to fulfill the
requirements of the Town of Perryville critical area program. [Added 5-26-88]
ARTICLE VII
Improvements
§74-28. Required improvements.
A. The subdivider shall be required to provide and install, or to enter into agreements
to provide and install, certain minimum improvements in the subdivision as a
condition for approval of the final plat by the Planning Commission. All such
required improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the minimum
requirements of these regulations and the construction standards and specifications
adopted by the Town Commissioners or such other governmental agency as may
have jurisdiction over a particular improvement. Nothing contained herein,
7425 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
however, shall be construed as prohibiting the subdivider from installing
improvements meeting higher standards than the minimum requirements.
B. Prior to filing the final plat with the Planning Commission, the required
improvements shall be completed, inspected and approved by the proper
authorities, except that, in lieu of completing all improvements prior to submission
of the final plat, the subdivider may furnish the Town Commissioners with a cash
deposit, or a secured line of credit, or a performance bond executed by a surety
company and running to the Town. Such cash deposit or performance bond shall
be in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of the improvements required to be
installed by the subdivider, thereby insuring the actual construction and
installation of such improvements prior to, or in no case later than, the time that
such improvements are needed to serve buildings placed on abutting lots. The cost
of required improvements shall be estimated by the Engineer or other authority
having jurisdiction. In the event of any dispute concerning the amount of cash
deposit or bond required, the Town Commissioners shall make the final decision
based upon at least two (2) additional cost estimates.
§74-29. Minimum requirements for installation of improvements.
The minimum requirements for the installation of improvements in subdivisions shall
be as follows:
A. Roads and streets.
(1) All new roads and streets shall be constructed in accordance with the
minimum requirements of these regulations and the minimum construction
standards adopted by the Town Commissioners. Existing roads and streets
which do not meet these specifications with regard to width or type of
construction shall be widened and brought into conformity with that portion
of the road or street within or adjoining the subdivision.
(2) The roadbed and roadway wearing surface shall be constructed in
accordance with applicable town standards. Curbs and gutters shall be
provided in all subdivisions where the average lot area is less than one (1)
acre. Where curbs and gutters are not required, stabilized shoulders and
stabilized drainage ways outside the shoulders shall be provided.
B. Surface drainage facilities. The subdivision shall be provided with such storm
drains, culverts, drainage ways or other works as are necessary to collect and
dispose of surface and storm water originating on or flowing across the
subdivision, in order to prevent inundation and damage to streets, lots and
buildings.
7426 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
C. Water supply facilities. Every subdivision shall require a public water supply
under the regulations of the State Department of Health. Where a public source of
water supply will not be available, private on-site sources of water supply,
approved by the Health Officer, shall be provided.
D. Sanitary sewerage facilities. Every subdivision shall require a public sewer
system under the regulations of the State Department of Health. (See § 74-22B.)
E. Plantings. [Amended 9-7-1999 by Ord. No. 99-05]
(1) Street trees and other landscaping shall be required by the Planning
Commission on all new streets and parking areas of over five (5) cars. The
proposed location and the species of plant material to be used shall be
subject to approval of the Planning Commission.
(2) It will be the responsibility of the developer to landscape all public rightsof-
way which are contained in the proposed development. The developer
shall at a minimum either plant or retain sufficient trees so that between
the paved portion of the street and a line running parallel to and fifty (50)
feet from the centerline of the street, there is for every fifty (50) feet of
street frontage at least an average of one (1) deciduous tree that has or will
have when fully mature a trunk of at least twelve (12) inches in diameter.
The preservation of existing trees along the right-of-way will compensate
for the required new plantings.
(3) All parking areas shall be landscaped with trees planted at a rate of not less
than one (1) tree per two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of
gross parking area.
F. Sidewalks.
(1) The minimum width of sidewalks shall be four (4) feet along all streets.
The prepared subgrade shall consist of four-inch (insulation) course of
stone or gravel. This material shall be compacted thoroughly.
(2) The thickness of the concrete placed over the prepared subgrade shall be at
least four (4) inches for standard sidewalks and six (6) inches for all
sidewalks which cross private driveways.
(3) Sidewalks shall be required on all streets; sidewalks shall be placed on at
least one (1) side of any road and may, at the discretion of the Planning
Commission, be required on both sides of the street. The Planning
Commission may waive sidewalk requirements in single-family
subdivisions where the density is less than four (4) units per acre.
7427 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
G. Streetlighting.
(1) The subdivider shall make application to the Planning Commission and
Town Engineer for necessary streetlights. Purchase and installation of the
required lighting shall be the responsibility of the subdivider.
(2) To provide sufficient streetlighting and provide for energy efficiency, each
new residence constructed on a lot created after the effective date of this
chapter shall have installed a coach lamp controlled by individual
residents.
H. Community facilities. All residential plans submitted to the Planning
Commission, preliminary or final, may be referred to the Cecil County Department
of Education for an advisory report and recommendation. The Department of
Education will determine the projected school population anticipated from the
subject development and compare the future school-age population to existing and
proposed school capacities in determining whether that agency can endorse the
development.
I. Public utilities. The subdivider shall place or cause to be placed underground,
extensions of electric and telephone distribution lines necessary to furnish
permanent residential, commercial or electric and telephone service within a new
accordance with the rules and regulations of the Public Service Commission of
Maryland.
J. Off-Street parking.
(1) Applicability. Every subdivision plan which shall be submitted to the
Planning Commission for approval shall provide off-street parking space
and facilities in accordance with the requirements of the Perryville Zoning
Chapter.5
(2) Design.
(a) Parking spaces and all access and maneuvering space for offstreet
parking shall be surfaced and maintained with a dustless,
all-weather material, except for single-family and two-family
dwellings.
(b) Every parking facility shall have a safe and efficient means of
vehicular access to a recorded street.
(c) No driveway serving a parking facility of five (5) cars or more
shall be closer than five (5) feet to a side property line.
_________________________
5 Editor’s Note: See Zoning Ordinance No. 2005-1 adopted 1-20-2005.
7428 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
(d) No motor vehicle shall be parked in any yard or court closer than
ten (10) feet to any door, window or other opening of a dwelling,
institution or other property.
(e) In the design of off-street facilities, the public right-of-way shall
not be obstructed by the use of the same as aisle space or
maneuvering space. Each off-street parking facility shall provide
sufficient maneuvering space within the boundaries of the lot or
lots on which it is located and shall be so designed that no
unreasonable difficulty or inconvenience will be entailed in
making necessary maneuvers for parking and removing a vehicle.
Maneuvers shall not entail driving over any other required
parking space. The layout of parking areas shall conform to the
minimum dimensions for spaces and access ways.
(f) Each parking facility shall be so designed that ingress or egress to
a parking space entails no backing maneuver across a sidewalk or
established footway, nor a backing maneuver into or from the
public right-of-way.
(g) Neither the turnaround diameter of a cul-de-sac or a rotary nor
the turn-slot or a T-type or L-type cut-de-sac shall be used for the
parking of vehicles.
(h) In a multifamily residential subdivision, no parking area shall
exceed one hundred eight (108) feet in length, and no portion of a
motor vehicle shall be closer than twenty (20) feet from the rightof-
way line of a public street.
(i) Any fixture used to illuminate any off-street parking area shall be
so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjacent residential
sites, institutional sites and public roads.
(j) Off-street parking facilities of five (5) cars or more shall be
screened by a wall, fence or compact planting when adjoining the
side or rear lot line. Screening shall be at least three and one-half
(3 ½) feet high. Screening shall not be placed or maintained as to
constitute a traffic hazard by obstruction of visibility.
K. Entrance from public or private streets shall conform to the following dimensions:
(1) One-way traffic entrances shall be not less than seventeen (17) feet nor
more than twenty-four (24) feet in width.
7429 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
(2) Two-way traffic entrances shall not be less than twenty-four (24) feet nor
more than thirty-five (35) feet in width; such entrances shall be not less
than fifteen (15) feet apart.
(3) Monumental entrances shall be provided with a minimum six-foot-wide
median, and the traffic lanes shall not be less than seventeen (17) feet in
width.
(4) All entrances shall be not less than seven and one-half (7 ½) feet from a
side lot line.
L. Refuse collection.
(1) In a residential subdivision, if refuse is to be collected at points exterior to
a structure, such points shall be shielded from view on three (3) sides by
screening and landscaping and placed on a pad of concrete where
necessary.
(2) In a residential subdivision, if refuse is to be collected at points within a
structure, the marginal notes to the subdivision plan shall so indicate.
(3) In a commercial or industrial subdivision, refuse storage and collection
points shall be housed in containers and shielded from view by screening
and/or landscaping.
(4) The developer shall submit a resume of refuse collection.
M. Street Signs.
(1) Improvements required. The subdivider shall erect, at every intersection, a
street sign or street signs having thereon the names of the intersecting
streets. At intersections where streets cross, there shall be at least two (2)
such street signs, and at the intersections where one (1) street ends or joins
with another street, there shall be at least one (1) such street sign.
(2) Construction standards.
(a) Street nameplates shall be of metal construction; all corners shall
be rounded; the lettering shall be of standard proportions and
spacing in accordance with one (1) of the alphabets used by the
United States Bureau of Public Roads. The plates shall be
horizontal. The lower edge of the nameplate shall be seven (7)
feet above the ground level or curb. The nameplate shall be
attached by rustproof metal fasteners.
7430 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
(b) The standard shall be rustproof metal and shall be of sufficient
length to permit the same to be embedded in the ground a
distance of not less than three (3) feet. The standard shall be
embedded in a concrete base for a depth of not less than three (3)
feet below the surface of the ground and not less than twelve (12)
inches in diameter.
(c) The standard shall be heavy wall pipe not less than two and onehalf
(2 ½) inches in diameter. The pipe shall be capped.
N. Reference monuments.
(1) Permanent reference monuments, of stone or concrete and at least thirty
(30) inches in length and four (4) inches square with suitable center point,
shall be set flush with the finished grade at such locations as may be
required by the Planning Commission and the laws of the State of
Maryland.
(2) Monuments of metal pipe, three-quarters (3/4) inch in diameter and at least
eighteen (18) inches in length, shall be set in place flush with the finished
grade at all intersections of streets; at all intersections of streets and alleys
with subdivision boundary lines; at all points on streets, alleys and
boundary lines where there is a change in direction or curvature; and at all
lot corners.
§74-30. Submission of plans.
Plans, profiles and specifications for the required improvements shall be prepared by
the subdivider and submitted for approval by the appropriate public authorities prior to
construction. Plans and profiles shall be drawn to a horizontal scale of one (1) inch to
one hundred (100) feet or less and a vertical scale of one (1) inch to twenty (20) feet or
less, unless the Engineer shall specify otherwise, and such plans and profiles shall be
sufficiently detailed to show the proposed location, size, type, grade and general design
features of each proposed improvement. The plans, profiles and specifications to be
submitted shall include the following:
A. The plans and profiles of each street, showing proposed grades and street
intersection elevations.
B. Cross sections of proposed streets, showing the width of roadways, present and
proposed grade lines and the location and size of utility mains, taken at intervals of
not more than one hundred (100) feet along each street center line if required by
the Engineer. Such cross sections shall extend laterally grade, except that in no
case shall less than the full width of the street right-of-way be shown.
7431 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
C. The plans and profiles of proposed sanitary sewers and storm drains, with
proposed grades and pipe sizes indicated.
D. The plans of the proposed water distribution system, showing pipe sizes and the
locations of all valves and fire hydrants.
E. A site plan of proposed street trees and other landscaping improvements.
F. Written specifications for all proposed improvements.
§74-31. Inspection and approval of improvements.
A. All construction work on improvements required herein shall be subject to
inspection and approval by the Engineer, Health Officer and other authorized
public officials, during and upon completion of such construction work. Upon the
completion of each improvement, the subdivider shall furnish the appropriate
official with accurate and detailed engineering drawings of the improvements as it
was actually constructed.
B. The final plat of the subdivision shall not be approved by the Planning Commission
until all required improvements shall have been satisfactorily completed and
approved as being in compliance herewith, or satisfactory bond posted in lieu of
such completion. No such bond shall be released until all improvements secured
by such bond shall have been completed and approved as being in compliance
herewith; provided, however, that a partial release may be approved for such
improvements as may have been completed and approved by appropriate officials.
C. Street acceptance.
(1) Approval of the final plat by the Planning Commission shall not be deemed
to constitute or affect an acceptance by the public of the dedication of any
street or other proposed public way or public grounds shown on said plat.
Perryville shall have no obligation to accept and to make public any street
in a subdivision unless:
(a) All required improvements shown on the approved final plat have
been constructed in conformity with the required standards and
specifications; or
(b) A petition signed by the owners of at least fifty percent (50%) of
the frontage of the street in question, requesting that the street be
taken over and made public, is filed with the Town
Commissioners of Perryville, and it is established by the
governing body that there is a need for the street to be taken over
and made public.
7432 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
(3) The Town of Perryville shall have no responsibility with respect to any
street within a subdivision, notwithstanding the use of such street by the
public, unless the street is accepted by ordinance or resolution of the Town
Commissioners of Perryville.
§74-32. Sediment control.
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed as relieving any person or corporation of
the Perryville Sediment Control Ordinance.6
B. All subdivision applications must incorporate a sediment control plan prior to final
approval of the plat.
§74-33. Critical areas. [Added 5-26-87]
In addition to the other provisions of the Town Zoning Chapter7 and subdivision
regulations, the following will apply to all subdivision of land located within the Town of
Perryville critical area:
A. Where a tract of land bordering tidal water, tidal wetlands or tributary streams in
the critical area is to be subdivided and is not in a Buffer exemption area, a Buffer
of at least one hundred (100) feet shall be established in natural vegetation (except
areas of the Buffer which are planted in vegetation where necessary to protect,
stabilize or enhance the shoreline). No development, including septic systems,
impervious surfaces, parking areas, roads or structures, are permitted in the Buffer.
However, approved development or expansion of a water-dependent facilities, as
defined in the Town of Perryville Zoning Chapter, are excepted from these Buffer
provisions.
B. If the lot ownership extends to the water, wetlands or streambed, then the Buffer
shall be included in the required setback distance for building on that lot, except in
the case of water-dependent facilities. Where the Buffer is to be owned and
maintained by a homeowners’ or similar appropriate organization, the required
setback distance shall be measured from the property line separating that lot from
the designated Buffer. This Buffer, when not included in the lots, may be included
in the calculating gross density.
_________________________
6 Editor’s Note: See Chapter 71, Soil erosion and sediment control.
7 Editor’s Note: See Zoning Ordinance No. 2005-1 adopted 1-20-2005.
7433 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
C. The Buffer will be expanded to include contiguous sensitive areas. This expansion
will occur whenever new land development or other land-disturbing activities,
such as clearing natural vegetation for agriculture or mining, are proposed. The
expanded Buffer must be shown on plans required for such development or
activities. “Sensitive areas” are defined as follows: hydric soils and soils with
hydric properties as designated by the Soil Conservation Service; highly erodible
soils with a K value greater than thirty-five hundredths (0.35); and steep slopes
greater than fifteen percent (15%). The Buffer shall be expanded according to the
following rules:
(1) The Buffer shall be expanded four (4) feet for every percent of slope or to
the top of the slope, whichever is greater, but in no case more than ten (10)
feet beyond the top of the slope greater than fifteen percent (15%).
(2) The Buffer shall be expanded from one hundred (100) feet to the upland
limit of adjacent hydric soils, soils with hydric properties and erodible
soils, whichever is less.
(3) All subdivisions in the Perryville critical area shall be subject to the habitat
protection criteria and guidelines prescribed in the Town of Perryville
critical area program.
(4) The subdivider shall be required to identify storm water management
practices appropriate to site development which achieve the following
standards:
(a) In areas designated Intensely Developed Area on the Town of
Perryville Official Critical Area Map, the subdivider shall
demonstrate that the best management practices for storm water
assure a ten-percent reduction of predevelopment pollutant
loadings (see Storm water Management Chapter8 for computation
methodology). If these practices do not reduce pollutant loadings
by at least ten percent (10%) below the level of pollution on the
site prior to development, then offsets shall be provided. In the
case of new development, offsets as determined by the Planning
Commission shall be provided that produce pollutant loadings
equivalent to at least ten percent (10%) of the predevelopment
levels.
_________________________
8 Editor’s Note: See Chapter 73, Stormwater Management.
7434 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
(b) The subdivision shall be designed to assure those features or
resources identified as habitat protection areas are afforded
protection as prescribed in the habitat protection element of the
Town of Perryville critical area program.
(5) In Limited Development Areas (LDA’s), roads, bridges and utilities
serving lots shall be located to avoid disturbances to habitat protection
areas. When no alternative exists and such infrastructure must cross or be
located in habitat protection area, the developer shall demonstrate how
impacts to habitats have been minimized and that no feasible alternative
location of such infrastructure exists.
(6) In Limited Development Areas (LDA’s), all roads, bridges, lots or other
development which cross or are located adjacent to tributary streams in the
critical area shall:
(a) Not be located in the Buffer and designed in a manner to reduce
increases in flood frequency and severity.
(b) Provide for the retention of natural streambed substrate.
(c) Minimize adverse impacts to water quality and storm water
runoff.
(d) Retain existing tree canopy so as to maintain stream temperature
within the normal variation.
(7) Lots and open space areas shall be located and designed to provide for
maintenance of existing site wildlife and plant habitats and continuity with
those on adjacent sites. Existing wildlife corridors shall be identified on
proposed development plats. When wildlife corridors exist or are
proposed, they shall include any existing habitat protection areas and
connect large forested areas on or adjacent to the site.
(8) Impervious surfaces in subdivisions located in Limited Development
Areas (LDA) of the Town of Perryville critical area shall be limited to
fifteen percent (15%) of the gross site area proposed for development,
except that impervious surfaces on any lot not exceeding one (1) acre in
size in a subdivision approved after June 1, 1986, may be up to twenty-five
percent (25%) of the lot.
(9) Development on slopes greater than fifteen percent (15%) shall be
prohibited unless such development is demonstrated to be the only
effective way to maintain or improve slope stability.
7435 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
(10)No clearing or grading is permitted in the Buffer nor on steep slopes and
hydric or highly erodible soils for other than agricultural practices not
involving the clearing of natural vegetation in the Buffer, or commercial
forestry practices in the Buffer between March 1 and June 15.
(11)Land to be subdivided shall be designed and improved in reasonable
conformity with existing topography, in order to minimize grading and cut
and fill, and to retain, insofar as possible, the natural contours, minimize
storm water runoff and conserve the natural cover and soil. No soil, sand
or gravel shall be removed from any lots shown on any subdivision plat,
except in accordance with the provisions of the sediment control plan
approved by the Soil Conservation District Board.
(12)Subdivision and development in the Town of Perryville critical area are
encouraged to increase natural vegetation on the development site.
(13)Subdivisions located in Limited Development Areas (LDA’s) and
Resource Conservation Areas (RCA’s) are required to meet the following
minimum standards for forest and developed woodlands. Forest and
developed woodlands as defined by the Town of Perryville critical area
program shall be created or protected in accordance with the following:
(a) When no forest exists on the site, at least fifteen percent (15%) of
the gross site area shall be afforested. The location of the
afforested area should be designed to reinforce protection to site
habitats or provide connections between forested areas when they
are present on adjacent sites.
(b) When forests or developed woodland exists on the site and
proposed development requires the cutting or clearing of trees,
areas proposed for clearing shall be identified on the proposed
development plan. The developer shall submit plans for
development and areas to be cleared to the Maryland Forest, Park
and Wildlife service for comments and recommendations and
shall transmit comments to the Town of Perryville Planning and
Zoning Office. A grading permit shall be obtained prior to any
clearing or cutting associated with proposed development. In
addition, cutting or clearing which is associated with
development shall be subject to the following limits and
replacement conditions:
(1) All forests cleared or developed shall be replaced on
not less than an equal-area basis, either on the site or on
another site approved by the Planning Commission, except
that if clearing on a fully forested lot is limited to a
development pad of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or
7436 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
less and cleared areas are reforested to the extent possible,
the forest shall be considered a developed woodland and no
replacement shall be required.
(2) No more than twenty percent (20%) of the forested or
developed woodland within the site proposed for
development may be removed [except as provided for in
Subsection C(13)(b)[3] and [4] below], and the remaining
eighty percent (80%) shall be maintained as forest cover
through the use of appropriate instruments (e.g., recorded
restrictive covenants). Removal of forest or developed
woodland cover in the Buffer is prohibited.
(3) Clearing of forest or developed woodlands up to
twenty percent (20%) shall be replaced on an area basis of
one to one (1:1). A developer may propose clearing up to
thirty percent (30%) of the forest or developed woodland
on a site, but the trees removed in excess of twenty percent
(20%) must be replaced at the rate of one and five-tenths
(1.5) times the amount removed either on the site or on
another site approved by the Planning Commission.
(4) If more than thirty percent (30%) of the forest on a
site is cleared, the forest is required to be replanted at three
(3) times the total extent of area of the cleared forest.
(5) If the cutting of forests occurs before a grading permit
is obtained, the forest is required to be replanted according
to the requirements in Subsection C(13)(b)[4] above.
(6) All reforestation and/or afforestation shall be included
in a planting plan.
ARTICLE VIII
Final Plat
§74-34. General requirements.
The final plat of the subdivision shall comply with the following general requirements
with regard to style and content:
A. It shall be drawn in black India ink on tracing linen or dimensionally stable plastic
film and shall comply with the applicable provisions of the laws of the State of
Maryland relative to the making of plats.
7437 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
B. It shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor, preferably at a scale of one (1)
inch to one hundred (100) feet, but in any case at a scale not less than one (1) inch
to two hundred (200) feet, and it shall be drawn on sheets not less than eight by
twelve (8 x 12) inches and not more than twenty-four by thirty (24 x 30) inches in
size, including a margin of one-half (1/2) inch outside ruled border lines.
C. All dimensions and bearings of lines and all areas shall be based upon a field
survey of sufficient accuracy and detail that the data shown thereon may be
reproduced on the ground. All distances and the length of all lines shall be given
to the nearest hundredth of a foot. Bearings of all lines shall be referenced to the
same azimuth and coordinate system as shown on the plat of the official town
controls. Additions to existing subdivisions shall conform to the azimuth and
coordinate system of the original subdivision. All bearings shall be given to the
nearest minute, and all areas shall be given to the nearest square foot.
§74-35. Information to be shown.
The final plat shall be legibly and accurately drawn and shall show the following
information:
A. The name under which the subdivision is to be recorded and the subdivision’s
location.
B. The scale, date, North point and small-scale key map showing the general location
of the subdivision in relation to its surroundings.
C. The distances and bearings for all the boundary lines of the subdivision.
D. The locations and descriptions of all permanent survey monuments, with
coordinates of all monuments referenced to the town controls as specified above.
E. The names and locations of adjacent subdivisions and the location of adjoining
parcels of unplatted land, with the names of the owners of record.
F. The locations, dimensions and names of all streets and alleys within and adjoining
the subdivision, with the lengths and bearings of tangents, the lengths of arcs and
radii, internal angles, points of curvature and any other necessary engineering data.
G. The locations, dimensions and bearings of all lot lines and the areas of lots or
parcels sufficient to check compliance with zoning and health regulations.
H. Building lines along all streets, dimensioned to street lines.
I. Blocks lettered in alphabetical order, with the lots within each block numbered in
numerical order.
7438 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
J. The locations, dimensions and purposes of all crosswalk ways, easements and
other public ways.
K. The locations, dimensions and purposes of any other property offered for
dedication or to be reserved for acquisition for public use or to be reserved by deed
covenant for the common use of property owners in the subdivision.
§74-36. Certificates and supporting statements to be included.
Accompanying the final plat and made a part thereof shall be the following certificates
and statements:
A. A notarized owner’s certificate, acknowledging ownership of the property and
agreeing to the subdivision thereof as shown on the plat and signed by the owner
or owners and any lien holders.
B. A notarized owner’s statement of dedication, offering all streets, alleys and other
public ways and public grounds for dedication, and constituting an irrevocable
offer to dedicate for a period of not less than five (5) years from the date of filing
the final plat with the Planning Commission.
C. Certificate of the surveyor that the final plat, as shown, is a correct representation
of the survey as made, that all monuments indicated thereon exist and are correctly
shown, and that the plat complies with all requirements of this chapter and other
applicable laws and regulations.
D. A brief summary of deed restrictions applicable within the subdivision, including
any trust agreements for the operation and maintenance by the property owners in
the subdivision of any sewage disposal system, water supply system, park area or
other physical facility which is of common use or benefit but which is not to be
held in public ownership.
E. Certificate of approval by the Health Officer of the means of providing water
supply and sewage disposal services for the subdivision.
F. Certificate of approval by the Town Engineer that all specifications established by
the developer are in accordance with town specifications and desires.
G. Certificate of approval by the Sediment Control Officer that the proposed
subdivision is in conformance with the Sediment Control Chapter.9
H. Certificate of approval by the Planning Commission, ready for signature and in a
form acceptable to the Planning Commission.
________________________
9 Editor’s Note: See Chapter 71, Soil Erosion and Sediment Control.
7439 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
ARTICLE IX
Miscellaneous Provisions
§74-37. Modifications and exceptions.
A. Modification for unusual conditions. Where, in the case of a particular proposed
subdivision, it can be shown that strict compliance with the requirements of this
chapter would result in extraordinary hardship to the subdivider because of
unusual topography or other conditions which are not self-inflicted, or that these
conditions would result in inhibiting the achievement of the objectives of these
regulations, the Planning Commission may vary, modify or waive the
requirements so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest
secured; provided, however, that such variance, modification or waiver will not
have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter or being
contrary to the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan for the Town. In
no case shall any variation, modification or waiver be more than a minimum
easing of the requirements, and in no instance shall it result in any conflict with
the proposals of the adopted transportation plan for the Town or the applicable
zoning regulations.
B. Exceptions for residential planned unit development. Where land within the
incorporated territory of Perryville is proposed for development in accordance
with the provisions of the Perryville Zoning Chapter10 pertaining to the
establishment of planned unit development, the requirements and conditions for
approval as set forth in that chapter shall prevail in the case of any conflict with
these regulations; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be
construed as permitting any exception from the requirements of these regulations
with regard to the design, arrangement or improvement of streets and highways
within any proposed planned unit development.
C. Approval of modifications and exceptions. Variances, modifications and waivers
from the requirements of this chapter shall be granted only by the affirmative vote
of three-fourths (3/4) of the members of the Planning Commission. In granting
variances, modifications and waivers, the Planning Commission may require such
conditions as will, in its judgment, substantially secure the objectives of the
requirements so varied, modified or waived.
________________________
10 Editor’s Note: See Zoning Ordinance No. 2005-1 adopted 1-20-2005.
7440 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
§74-38. Amendments.
A. The Town Commissioners may, from time to time, amend, supplement or change,
by ordinance, the regulations herein established. Any such amendment or change
may be initiated by resolution of the Town Commissioners or by motion of the
Planning Commission. Before taking action on any proposed amendment or
change, the Town Commissioners shall submit the same to the Planning
Commission for its recommendations and report. Failure of the Planning
Commission to report within sixty (60) days after its first meeting subsequent to
the proposal being referred shall be deemed approval by the Planning
Commission.
B. The Planning Commission may hold a public hearing on any proposed amendment
or change before submitting its report to the Town Commissioners. Notice of such
public hearing before the Planning Commission shall be given at least fifteen (15)
days prior to the hearing by publishing the time, the place and the nature of the
hearing in a newspaper having general circulation in the Town. The published
notice shall contain reference to the place or places within the town where the full
text of the proposed amendment or change may be examined.
C. Before approving any proposed amendment or change, the Town Commissioners
shall hold a public hearing thereon, notice of said hearing to be accomplished by
publication in a newspaper as prescribed above.
§74-39. Violations and penalties.
A. Whoever, being the owner or agent of the owner of any land located within the
jurisdiction of these regulations, knowingly, or with intent to defraud, transfers or
sells or agrees to sell or negotiates to sell any land by reference to, or exhibition
of, or by other use of a plat of land subdivision, before such plat has been
approved by the Planning Commission and recorded or filed in the office of the
Clerk of the Circuit Court, shall forfeit and pay a civil penalty of not less than two
hundred dollars ($200.) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.) in the
discretion of the Court, for each lot or parcel so transferred or sold or agreed or
negotiated to be sold, and the description of such lot or parcel by metes and
bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of
selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties or from
the remedies herein provided. The Town Commissioners may enjoin such transfer
or sale or agreement by action for injunction brought in any court of equity
jurisdiction, or may recover the said penalty by civil action in any court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Every act or omission in violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
herein. Where such an act or omission is of a continuing nature, each and every
day during which such an act or omission continues shall be deemed a separate
misdemeanor.
7441 4 - 25 - 89
Perryville Code – Chapter 74 Subdivision of Land
74 42 4 - 25 - 89
§74-40. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved or any officer, department, board or bureau of the Town affected
by any decision of the Planning Commission may, within thirty (30) days after the
decision appealed from, file a notice of appeal with the Circuit Court. Upon the hearing
of such appeal, the decision of the Planning Commission shall be presumed by the Court
to be proper and to best serve the public interest. The burden of proof shall be upon the
appellant or appellants to show that the decision appealed from was against the public
interest and that the Planning Commission’s discretion, in rendering its decision, was not
honestly and fairly exercised, or that such decision was arbitrary or procured by fraud or
unsupported by any substantial evidence or was unreasonable, or that such decision was
beyond the powers of said Planning Commission and was illegal. The Court shall have
the power to affirm, modify or reverse, in whole or in part, any decision appealed from
and may remand any case for the entering of a proper order or for further proceedings, as
the Court shall determine.
§74-41. Fees. [Amended 4-6-99 by Ord. No. 99-3, Amended 4-7-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-4]
A. All developers/property owners shall be responsible for the payment of all
application, review and inspections fees and costs for all site plan and subdivision
plan (Plan) submitted to the Town for review and approval.
B. Should the costs to the Town for the processing of the application, review and/or
inspection of the Plan, including but not limited to the costs of engineering, staff
time for review and inspection, and legal reviews, exceed the application, review
and/or inspections fees previously paid, the developer/property owner shall be
required to pay unto the Town all additional costs/fees incurred prior to receiving
any approval. Upon successful final inspection and payment of all final invoices
for the Town engineer, inspection fees, staff time and legal review, any balance
remaining on the account of the developer/property owner for additional costs/fees
paid shall be returned. There shall be no refund of any portion of the initial
application, review and/or inspection fees paid as established by Resolution.
C. All application, review and inspection fees and costs shall be established by the
Mayor and Commissioners by resolution.
Perryville Code – Chapter 75 Vehicles, Recreational and Commercial
Chapter 75
VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL AND COMMERCIAL
§ 75-1. Definitions.
§ 75-2. Unlawful actions.
§ 75-3. Impoundment.
§ 75-4. Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Commissioners of the Town of Perryville 11-3-87
as Ord. No. 87-3. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property nuisances – See Chapter 64.
Vehicle Repairs – See Chapter 76.
Vehicles and traffic – See Chapter 77.
Unlicensed or unregistered vehicles – See Chapter 78.
§ 75-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE- Any motor vehicle, trailer, tractor, truck or van
designed and/or used for commercial, industrial or agricultural purposes.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE- Any motor vehicle or trailer designed and used
as a travel trailer, camper, motor home, tent trailer, boat, boat trailer, snowmobile,
snowmobile trailer, car trailer, motorcycle or motorcycle trailer.
§ 75-2. Unlawful actions.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, corporation or other entity to leave
parked on any public property under the control, ownership or domain of the Town of
Perryville, including any public streets, sidewalks, parking lots or alleys within the Town
of Perryville, any recreational vehicle or any commercial vehicle.
7501 2 - 25 - 88
Perryville Code – Chapter 75 Vehicles, Recreational and Commercial
75 02 2 - 25 - 88
§ 75-3. Impoundment.
Any law enforcement officer is hereby vested with the authority to impound any
vehicle parked in violation of the preceding section. A vehicle so impounded shall be
kept at a place to be designated by the Commissioners of Perryville or its authorized
representative. Within twenty-four (24) hours after removal of such vehicle, written
notice thereof shall be sent to the owner thereof (if known) at his last known address. The
vehicle may be released to the owner upon payment of storage, towing and other charges
of impoundment, in addition to any fine and/or court costs imposed for violation of this
chapter.
§ 75-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction
and shall be subject to a fine of fifty dollars ($50) for each violation. Each day that a
person fails to move a vehicle parked in violation of this chapter, after being notified to
do so by a law enforcement or town official, shall be a separate violation of this chapter
and a separate infraction.
Perryville Code – Chapter 76 Vehicle Repairs
Chapter 76
VEHICLE REPAIRS
§ 76-1. Purpose.
§ 76-2. Definitions.
§ 76-3. Unlawful actions.
§ 76-4. Violations and penalties.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Commissioners of the Town of Perryville 5-1-84
as Ord. No. 84-2. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic – See Chapter 77.
Unlicensed or unregistered vehicles – See Chapter 78.
§ 76-1. Purpose.
The Commissioners of Perryville, having determined that numerous types of
automotive repairs are taking place on public roads, streets and ways within residential
areas of the Town of Perryville, and desiring to provide limitations as to the types of
repairs being performed in those areas, do hereby enact this chapter to the end that said
repairs may be defined and limited as to the extent and scope of same within residential
and commercial areas.
§ 76-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings hereafter
stated:
CENTRAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT- Any area lying within the Incorporated
Town limits of the Town of Perryville being designated on the Zoning Map as C-
1.
PUBLIC WAY- Any street, lane, highway or other thoroughfare owned by the
state or local government or maintained by public funds and lying within the
Town of Perryville, irrespective of whether there is actual maintenance thereof
by the State of Maryland, Cecil County or the Town of Perryville, or a private
person or organization.
7601 8 - 25 - 84
Perryville Code – Chapter 76 Vehicle Repairs
76 02 8 - 25 - 84
RESIDENTIAL AREA – Any area lying within the Incorporated Town limits of
the Town of Perryville being designated on the Zoning Map as R-1, R-2 and R-3.
§ 76-3. Unlawful actions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to perform on any type of vehicle within a
residential or central commercial area, either on a public way or in a front yard, any
repairs to said vehicle other than those of a minor nature, such as changing spark plugs,
oil and filter, lubrication of vehicle, replacement of defective parts such as starters, etc.,
and other such repairs that are normally designated as routine maintenance and taking
less than eight (8) hours to perform. Prohibited repairs shall include major engine
overhauls, changing of engines, body work of any kind, painting of vehicles or parts
thereof, and other types of repair generally known as major repairs and taking place over
a period of more than eight (8) hours.
§ 76-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of the above violation shall be deemed guilty of a municipal
infraction and shall be fined fifty dollars ($50.) for each offense.
Perryville Code – Chapter 77 Vehicles and Traffic
77 01
CHAPTER 77
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
ARTICLE I
Snow Emergency Plan
§ 77-1. Definitions.
§ 77-2. Designation of snow emergency routes; signs.
§ 77-3. Declaration of snow emergency; duration.
§ 77-4. Phase 1 of plan.
§ 77-5. Phase 2 of plan.
§ 77-6. Violations and penalties.
ARTICLE II
Operation of Motor Vehicles
§ 77-7. Restrictions.
§ 77-8. Violations and penalties.
ARTICLE III
Truck Travel Limitations
§ 77-9. Limitation on Truck Travel
§ 77-10. Designation of Truck Routes
§ 77-11. Penalties
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Commissioners of the Town of Perryville: Art. I,
3-6-79 as Ord. No. 1-79 Sections 77-1 thru 77-6; Art. II, 3-28-60 as Ord. No. 5.
Sections 77-7 and 77-8 amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I. Art. III 1-5-16 as Ord. No. 15-17 Sections 77-9 thru 77-11, other
amendments noted where applicable.]
Perryville Code – Chapter 77 Vehicles and Traffic
77 02
General References
Snow and ice removal – See Chapter 69.
Unlicensed or unregistered vehicles – See Chapter 78.
ARTICLE I
Snow Emergency Plan
[Adopted 3-6-79 as Ord. No. 1-79]
§ 77-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms have the meanings indicated:
SNOW TIRES- Tires that are in a good state of repair, and:
A. 1Are normally designated by the manufacturer as snow tires; or
B. Have antiskid patterns cut into the treaded surfaces to form bars, buttons
or blocks especially designed to give effective traction on snow or icecovered
highways.
§ 77-2. Designation of snow emergency routes; signs.
The Commissioners of the Town of Perryville may designate, as they deem
appropriate, any town street as snow emergency route.² When a street is so designated,
appropriate signs indicating this designation shall be placed along said street.
§ 77-3. Declaration of snow emergency; duration.
The President of the Commissioners of Perryville or his representative may declare a
snow emergency for all snow emergency routes as a whole or for any one (1) or more
snow emergency routes, as he deems necessary. The snow emergency shall continue into
effect until the President or his representative declares it to be no longer necessary. The
President or his representative may declare which phase of the snow emergency plan, as
defined below, shall be placed into effect and which phase of the plan shall be removed
from effect as he deems necessary.
________________________
1 Editor’s Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
2 Editor’s Note: The following is the text of a resolution adopted 3-6-79, designating certain streets as
snow emergency routes:
“BE IT RESOLVED by the Commissioners of Perryville that the following streets shall be designated as
snow emergency routes within the Town of Perryville from and after the date of this Resolution:
Susquehanna Avenue
Otsego Street from Aiken Avenue to Front Street
Perryville Code – Chapter 77 Vehicles and Traffic
77 03
Broad Street
Aiken Avenue
Cedar Corner Road
AND BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED “that each snow emergency route as designated above shall be
posted with appropriate signs indicating said street is a snow emergency route with at least one sign posted
at each end of each street designated as a snow emergency route.”
§ 77-4. Phase 1 of plan.
If the President or his representative declares Phase 1 of the snow emergency plan to
be in effect, a person may not drive or attempt to drive a motor vehicle, other than a
motorcycle, on any street that is designated and appropriately posted as a snow
emergency route and for which a snow emergency has been declared and is in effect,
unless the vehicle is equipped with chains or snow tires on at least one (1) wheel at each
end of a drive axle.
§ 77-5. Phase 2 of plan.
If the President or his representative declares Phase 2 of the snow emergency plan to
be in effect, a person may not park a vehicle on any street that is designated and
appropriately posted as a snow emergency and for which a snow emergency has been
declared and is in effect. The State Police or the police of any political subdivision of the
State of Maryland which has jurisdiction in the Town of Perryville may have any vehicle
parked in violation of this subsection towed from the highway at the owner’s expense.
§ 77-6. Violations and penalties.³
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be guilty of an infraction and shall be subject to a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.) for
the first offense and fifty dollars ($50.) for each subsequent offense.
ARTICLE II
Operation of Motor Vehicles
[Adopted 3-28-60 as Ord. No. 5]
§ 77-7. Restrictions.
A. It shall be unlawful for anyone to operate a motor vehicle on any of the streets
within the corporate limits of said town at a speed in excess of twenty-five (25)
miles per hour.
B. It shall be unlawful for anyone operating a motor vehicle within the corporate
limits of said town of the Town of Perryville not to come to a full stop at all
Perryville Code – Chapter 77 Vehicles and Traffic
77 04
intersections at which stop signs have been erected by the Commissioners of
Perryville.
C. It shall be unlawful for anyone to operate a motor vehicle on any of the streets
within the corporate limits of said town in a careless and reckless manner, and any
motor vehicle being so operated that its tires squeal when turning a corner or any
motor vehicle being operated so that it causes excessive and unreasonable noises
as a result of cutouts and the like and any motor vehicle being operated at a speed
greater than the speed limit fixed by the Commissioners of Perryville or the motor
vehicle laws of the State of Maryland or any motor vehicle engaged in a race with
another motor vehicle upon the streets of said town shall be deemed to be operated
in a careless and reckless manner.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to leave parked overnight
on any of the streets of said town a tractor-trailer or any part thereof.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to park any motor vehicle
on the sidewalks of said town.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to park any motor vehicle
opposite a yellow line painted upon the sidewalks or curb within the town by
authority of the commissioners of said town.
G. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to double-park any motor
vehicle on the streets of said town.
H. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to park a motor vehicle
within fifteen (15) feet of a fireplug or within fifteen (15) feet of a corner or
intersection of streets in said town.
I. It shall be unlawful to park in a handicapped zone. [Amended 3-6-1990 by Ord.
No. 90-3].
J. It shall be unlawful for commercial patrons to park in designated residential zones.
[Amended 3-6-1990 by Ord. No. 90-3]
K. It shall be unlawful to park on any street so as to block entrance to or access from
public or private drives or driveways. If access is blocked for more than fifteen
(15) minutes the vehicle may be towed at the owner’s expense. [Added 3-6-1990
by Ord. No. 90-3; Amended 5-5-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-5]
L. It shall be unlawful to park further than twelve (12) inches, or outside designated
parking lines, from any curb or from the edge of the pavement of any paved street.
[Added 3-6-1990 by Ord. No. 90-3; Amended 5-5-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-5]
Perryville Code – Chapter 77 Vehicles and Traffic
77 05
M. It shall be unlawful to park in any area where a sign designates said area to be a
no-parking zone. [Added 3-6-1990 by Ord. No. 90-3]
N. It shall be unlawful to park on the side of any street facing in a direction opposite
to the direction traffic travels on the side of the street upon which the vehicle is
parked. [Added 3-6-1900 by Ord. No. 90-3]
O. It shall be unlawful to park in any designated fire lane. Fire lanes may be
designated by the Mayor and Commissioners of the Town of Perryville by
resolution. Upon creation of a fire lane, said area shall be marked by appropriate
signs. [Added 6-4-1991 by Ord. No. 91-3]
§ 77-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-6-1990 by Ord. No. 90-3; Amended 3-
1-97 by Ord. 97-1; Amended 5-5-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-5]
All fines and penalties for violations of any provisions of this Chapter shall be
established by the Mayor and Commissioners by resolution.
In the event any person, firm, or corporation shall fail to timely pay the fines
enumerated herein notice of such non-payment shall be forwarded to the Maryland
Department of Motor Vehicles and a “flag” will be placed on the registration of the
vehicle preventing renewal of registration.
Any person, firm, or corporation issued a citation for violation of any provision hereof
may elect to stand trail by notifying the Town of Perryville in writing of the person’s
intent to stand trail. Written notice shall be given to the Town at least five (5) days prior
to the date payment is due as provided herein. Notice to the Town shall include the name
of the person, firm or corporation, address, phone number, and ticket number.
ARTICLE III
Truck Travel Limitations
[Adopted 1-5-2016 by Ord. 2015-17, adding Article III. Truck Travel Limitations
Sections 77-9 through 77-11]
§ 77-9. Limitation on Truck Travel
A. For purposes of this article a truck is a motor vehicle that has a gross vehicle weight
more than 23,000 pounds.
B. A person may not operate a truck on Otsego Street and Aiken Avenue Extended in
the Town of Perryville except if the truck is:
1. An emergency vehicle providing emergency service to person or property within
Perryville Code – Chapter 77 Vehicles and Traffic
77 06
the Town of Perryville;
2. Engaged in the repair, construction or maintenance of roads or utilities in the
Town of Perryville;
3. Providing trash or refuse collection services to residents or businesses in the
Town of Perryville;
4. Making a pick-up, delivery or service call, or engaging in construction activities,
to a residence or business on Otsego Street or on a street that feeds into Otsego
Street; or
5. Making a pick-up, delivery or service call, or engaging in construction
activities, to a residence on Aiken Avenue Extended or on a street that feeds
into Aiken Avenue Extended.
C. The Town Administrator shall provide for the erection and maintenance of signs
along Otsego Street and Aiken Avenue Extended giving notice of the truck travel
restrictions of this section.
§ 77-10. Designation of Truck Routes.
The following streets are the designated truck routes within the Town of Perryville:
A. U.S. ROUTE 40;
B. MARYLAND ROUTE 222;
C. COUDON BOULEVARD;
D. BROAD STREET;
E. MARYLAND ROUTE 7;
F. MARION TAPP PARKWAY UP TO THE ENTRANCE TO THE
VETERANS ADMINISTRATION PROPERTY; AND
G. MARYLAND ROUTE 327.
§ 77-11. Penalties.
A person who operates a truck in violation of section 77-9 is guilty of a
misdemeanor and subject to a fine in the amount of $100 for the first offense, $250
for the second offense, and $500 for the third and each subsequent offense.
Perryville Code – Chapter 78 Vehicles, Unlicensed or Unregistered
Chapter 78
VEHICLES, UNLICENSED OR UNREGISTERED
§78-1. Leaving of vehicles on public property unlawful.
§78-2. Enforcement
§78-3. Violations and penalties
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Commissioners of the Town of Perryville 3-5-85
as Ord. No. 85-3.1 Amendments noted where applicable.]
General References
Property maintenance – See Chapter 63.
Repair of vehicles – See Chapter 76.
Vehicles and traffic – See Chapter 77.
§78-1. Leaving of vehicles on public property unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, corporation or other entity to leave
parked on public property under the control, ownership or domain of the Town of
Perryville, including any public streets, any motor vehicle with expired license tags, any
unregistered vehicle or any vehicle in such a state of disrepair as to be incapable of legal
operation upon the highway of the State of Maryland.
§78-2. Enforcement
Any law enforcement officer is hereby vested with the authority to impound any
vehicle parked in violation of the preceding section. A vehicle so impounded shall be
kept at a place to be designated by the Commissioners of Perryville, or their authorized
representative. Within twenty-four hours after removal of such vehicle, written notice
thereof shall be sent to the owner thereof (if known) at the last known address, of storage,
towing, and other charges of impoundment, in addition to any fine and/or court costs
imposed for violation of this chapter.
1 Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 78, Vehicles, Unlicensed or Unregistered, adopted
8-5-69 as Ord. No. 107, as amended.
7801 9 - 25 - 85
Perryville Code – Chapter 78 Vehicles, Unlicensed or Unregistered
78 02 9 - 25 - 85
§78-3. Violations and penalties
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of infraction, and
shall be subject to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.) for each violation of this chapter, after
being notified to do so by a law enforcement official, shall be separate violation of this
chapter and separate infraction.
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8201
Chapter 82
WATER AND SEWERS
ARTICLE I
Transitional Provisions; Charges; Disposition of Revenue
§ 82-1. Transitional provisions.
§ 82-2. Imposition of charges; collection.
§ 82-3. Disposition of revenue.
ARTICLE II
Rules and Regulations
§ 82-4. Compliance required; enforcement.
§ 82-5. Definitions.
§ 82-6. Water system.
§ 82-7. Sewer system.
ARTICLE III
Wastewater Pretreatment
§ 82-8. General provisions.
§ 82-9. Discharge regulations.
§ 82-10. Charges and fees.
§ 82-11. Users required to obtain permit.
§ 82-12. Enforcement.
§ 82-13. Civil and criminal penalties.
§ 82-14. Severability.
§ 82-15. Repealer.
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8202
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Commissioners of the Town of Perryville 12-21-
71 as Ord. No. 109. Section 82-5 and 82-8G amended at time of adoption of Code;
see Chapter 1, General Provisions, Art. I. Other amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction – See Chapter 32.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse – See Chapter 50.
ARTICLE I
Transitional Provisions; Charges; Disposition of Revenue
§ 82-1. Transitional provisions.
The water connection and service charges heretofore imposed shall be superseded by
the schedule of water connection and usage charges set forth in § 82-2 hereof. The sewer
connection, sewer upkeep and sewer service charges, including the classification and
subclassification of consumers, heretofore imposed and collected by the Town pursuant
to Section 8 of an ordinance dated June 4, 1963, are hereby superseded by the
corresponding sewer connection and usage charges imposed by § 82-2 hereof. The new
rates and charges shall begin and be payable for all connection, all available facilities and
all usage of said water and sewer systems during the first full quarter-annual period
following the quarter-annual period in which this chapter shall be declared to be effective
and shall be payable for and at the end of each quarter-annual period thereafter. Sewer
service charges at preexisting rates which would normally be billed at the beginning of
said quarter-annual period shall be discontinued. Nothing herein contained shall be
construed to relieve any person or property owner from liability for water and sewer
service billed to consumers at the rates prevailing in the billing periods to the billing
period in which the rates hereby adopted shall become effective, and nothing herein
contained shall be construed to modify or impair the power of the Town to collect and
enforce the payment of water and sewer service bills which are or may become
delinquent as of or after the said effective date.1
________________________
1 Editor’s Note: This chapter took effect upon adoption 12-21-71.
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8203
§ 82-2. Imposition of charges; collection. [Amended 11-7-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-
3]
For the benefit derived from and the use of the water and sewer systems of the Town,
the following connection and service charges are hereby imposed. In computing the
aforesaid charges, a separate charge shall be assessed to each separately owned
commercial, industrial, or residential unit, regardless of how many physical connections
to the Town system(s) are made; as well as to separate commercial, industrial or
residential unit with a 5/8 inch water meter connection regardless of how owned. In
applying this language to residential units, each apartment when appropriate and each
condominium shall be considered a separate unit. In applying this language to a multibusiness
commercial or industrial property when appropriate, the number of businesses
operating under separate names shall be used in determining the number of units to be
billed. If a property contains both residential and business uses, each separate residential
unit and each separate business shall be billed separately.
A. Connections charges.
(1) A water connection charge and a sewer connection charge are hereby
imposed with respect to each property hereafter connected to the water and
sewer systems of the Town, said charges to be in lieu of any charge to
defray the cost of house connection to the property line for water service,
water meter installation and the construction of suitable taps to the sewer
line. The Supervisor shall determine the size of water meter to be
installed, and the water and sewer connection charges for each such
property shall thereupon be imposed in accordance with the following
schedule. When establishing said water and sewer connection charges, the
Board of Commissioners may consider anticipated funds needed so as to
provide adequate funding for expansion of the water and/or sewer systems
necessitated by the growth in the number of users to the system. All such
water and sewer connection charges shall be paid prior to the issuance of
any building permit, zoning certificate and/or zoning occupancy permit,
unless the Mayor and Commissioners direct otherwise. [Amended 1-7-
1992 by Ord. No. 91-7]
(2) With respect to any property heretofore connected to the water system for
which no water meter has been installed, the Supervisor shall cause a
meter of appropriate size, in accordance with the following schedule, to be
installed and shall fix and determine the water connection charge in
accordance with said schedule, subject to a credit of one hundred twenty
dollars ($120.) for connection charges previously paid.
(3) With respect to any property heretofore connected to one (1) of said
systems, but not to the other, a connection charge shall be paid in
accordance with the following schedule for the system to which
connection is made.
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8204
(4) It shall be the duty of the owner of every improved property in the Town
which is not connected to both the water and sewer systems, or to one (1)
of them, to apply to the Town for the appropriate connection within ninety
(90) days of the passage of this chapter as to existing facilities and within
ninety (90) days of issuance of notice from the Town, in writing or by
publication, that such service or facility is available, and such property
owner shall pay to the Town the appropriate connection charge at the time
a permit based on such application is issued.
(5) [Amended 2-5-1985 by Ord. No. 85-2; 3-1-1988 by Ord. No. 88-1; 6-4-
1991 by Ord. No. 91-4; 4-6-1999 by Ord. No. 99-2; 1-9-2001 by 2000-
09, 6-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-01] There is hereby adopted the
following schedule of water and sewer connection charges:
Connection Charge Schedule*
(one-time)
Size of Water Sewer
Water Meter Connection Connection
(inches) Charge Charge
5/8 $ 5,000.00 $ 5,000.00
3/4 6,750.00 6,750.00
1 11,250.00 11,250.00
1-1/2 22,500.00 22,500.00
2 36,000.00 36,000.00
*The connection fees listed above are considered to be the minimum. Connection
fees shall be determined based on the actual amount of water used, as specified by
the Town Engineer.
(6) With respect to each property, the Supervisor shall determine the size of
meter required in accordance with guides and standards furnished him by
the consulting engineers of the Town. If, in any instance, he is uncertain
as to the size of meter required, he shall obtain a written recommendation
from the consulting engineers before making his decision. If, in any case,
it is determined that a meter larger than a two-inch meter is required, the
connection charges for both the water and the sewer systems shall be
determined by resolution of the Town, after receipt of a recommendation
from the Supervisor. At the same time, the minimum usage rate for any
such property shall be similarly determined.
(7) In the event the Supervisor determines that the size of the water meter
required in accordance with guides and standards for sufficient water
supply to a residence with an automatic fire sprinkler system is larger than
would have been necessary solely because of the installation of an
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8205
automatic fire sprinkler system in accordance with the Interior Automatic
Fire Sprinkler Ordinance, the connection charge and water and sewer
usage rate schedule for such property shall be calculated on the size of the
water meter necessary absent the automatic fire sprinkler system.
[Amended 5-1-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-3]
(8) In addition to the Sewer Connection Charge set forth in subsection A(5)
above, prior to connecting to the Town of Perryville sewer collection and
treatment system, the property owner or applicant for connection shall also
pay to the Town a Sewer Facilities Fee as set by Resolution of the Mayor
and Commissioners of the Town of Perryville, which fee, initially, shall be
One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.) per dwelling unit (or per building if not a
building comprised of one or more dwelling units), but which fee may
increase or decrease in the future pursuant to Resolution of the Mayor and
Commissioners of the Town of Perryville. [Amended 7-5-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-4]
B. [Amended 5-4-76; 6-4-80 by Ord. No. 80-1; 6-14-83 by Ord. No. 83-3; 11-4-86
by Ord. No. 86-21; 6-26-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-02; 6-6-2006 by Res. No. 2006-
6; 8-4-2009 by Res. No. 2009-17; 2-12-2014 by Res. No. 2014-06, 2-7-17 Res.
2017-02] Usage charges. For the service of the water and sewer system of the
Town, there are hereby fixed quarterly water and sewer usage charges calculated
on the basis of the volume of water consumed by each connected property in each
quarter annual period. With respect to each property for which a meter is not
installed, the fixed charges shall be the charges for flat rate service shown on the
following schedule. With respect to each property for which a meter is provided,
there is hereby fixed a minimum charge based on the size of the meter and
additional charges based on consumption of water in excess of a fixed number of
gallons. The Supervisor shall cause each meter to be read at the end of each
quarterannual period, and the quarterly charges for each metered property shall
thereupon be determined in accordance with the following schedule. In the event
any meter shall become defective or inoperable during any such period, so that the
volume of consumption cannot be accurately determined, the water and sewer
usage charges for such quarter shall be fixed by averaging the charges for the
property to which such meter is connected for the four (4) preceding quarterly
periods. With respect to each property which shall be connected to the sewer
system of the Town but not to the water system of the Town, the flat rate sewer
charge in the following schedule shall apply. The resulting figure shall be the
quarterly usage charge for any such property. There is hereby adopted the
following water and sewer usage rate schedule for determining the quarterly water
and sewer bills payable for each property connected to said systems:
The usage rates charged to the Perry Point Veterans Administration Medical Center shall
be as separately negotiated between the Town and the Veterans Administration. The
Mayor and Commissioners may amend the Water and Sewer Usage Rate Schedule by
resolution.
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8206
(1) [Added 2-3-87 by Ord. No. 87-1] When BOD, suspended solids or
phosphorus concentrations from any user exceed the maximum allowable
limits for these pollutants in domestic, commercial or industrial sewage, a
surcharge shall be levied against said user. The surcharge for each
contaminant shall be established pursuant to the following formulas:
(a) BOD surcharge = unit cost x user’s excessive concentration (mg/1) x
user’s volume (million gallons) x 8.34 (lb./gal.) ÷ total quarterly
volume (million gallons) x maximum allowable concentration
(mg/1) x 8.34 (lb./gal.).
(b) SS surcharge = unit cost ($/lb.) x user’s excessive concentration
(mg/1) x user’s volume (million gallons) x 8.34 (lb./gal.). Unit cost
($/lb.) = 0.50 x quarterly O & M costs ($) ÷ total quarterly volume
(million gallons) x maximum allowable concentration (mg/1) x 8.34
(lb./gal.).
(c) Phosphorus surcharge = unit cost ($/lb.) x user’s excessive
concentration (mg/1) x user’s volume (million gallons) x 8.34
(lb./gal.). Unit cost ($/lb.) = 0.01 x quarterly O & M costs x
maximum allowable concentration (mg/1) x 8.34 (lb./gal.).
(2) If more than one (1) element or contaminant exceeds allowable discharge
concentrations, the surcharge for each element or contaminant shall be
added together, and the sum of said surcharges shall be the total surcharge
assessed to said user. [Added 2-3-87 by Ord. No. 87-1]
(3) [Added 2-3-87 by Ord. No. 87-1] The maximum allowable limits
(pollutant concentrations) are the following:
(a) Biochemical oxygen demand: two hundred twenty (220) milligrams
per liter.
(b) Suspended solids: two hundred fifty (250) milligrams per liter.
(c) Phosphorus: ten (10) milligrams per liter.
EXAMPLE: Determine BOD surcharge for a user having a BOD
concentration of four hundred (400) milligrams per liter, quarterly flow
of two million (2,000,000) gallons. Assume quarterly O & M expense
of forth thousand dollars ($40,000.) and quarterly flow at WWTP of
seventy-five (75) million gallons.
Unit Cost = 0.35 x $40,000.00 = $0.10/lb.
75 x 220 x 8.34
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8207
BOD surcharge = 0.10 x 180 x 2.00 x 8.34 = $300.00/quarter.
C. Extension beyond service area.
(1) In the event the owner or owners of one (1) or more properties in the
Town, so located that water and sewer service is not available, shall
petition or request the Town to extend service to such property or
properties. The Town Commissioners, if they find the requested
extensions to be feasible, shall instruct the consulting engineers promptly
to furnish an estimate of the cost of constructing any such extensions,
including the cost of any easements required and a separate estimate of the
cost of preparing plans, specifications and drawings therefore. The
Supervisor shall inform said owner or owners of said cost estimates. Upon
payment to the Town by any such property owner or owners of the amount
necessary to defray the estimated cost of said improvements, the Town
Commissioners shall instruct the consulting engineers to proceed
therewith. Upon completion of any extensions, the property owner(s) shall
be charged or credited the difference between the estimated cost and actual
cost. Service shall be provided upon payment by the owner or owners of
the properties to be served of the connection charges prescribed in
Subsection B, above. Thereafter each such property served shall be liable
for the usage charges prescribed in Subsection B, above. If additional
connections to said extensions are made by property owners who did not
contribute to the cost thereof, said property owners requesting connection
to the extension shall be assessed a proportional amount of the cost of the
said extension. Said assessed amount shall be credited to the property
owner or owners who originally contributed to said extension until said
contributions have been fully received by property owner or owners,
without interest, or for a period not exceeding five (5) years, whichever is
less.
(2) In the event the applicant for any such extensions shall be a person
proposing to subdivide property and construct improvements thereon for
resale, the procedure hereinabove set forth governing the construction of
such extensions shall apply, except as follows:
(a) Said person shall have the option to construct said extensions at
his own expense in accordance with plans and specifications
prepared by or under the supervision of the consulting engineers,
or he may elect to have said extensions constructed by the Town,
as above provided, upon depositing with the Town, first, the cost
of plans and specifications and, thereafter, the full amount of the
estimated construction cost or the construction cost determined
after receipt of bids.
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8208
(b) The improvements constructed on each lot shall be connected to
said extensions upon payment by said person or his vendee of the
connection charges prescribed in Subsection A, above.
Notwithstanding any other language to the contrary, no building
permit, zoning certificate or zoning occupancy permit shall be
issued by the Town before all applicable water and sewer
connection charges have been paid to the Town, unless the Mayor
and Commissioners direct otherwise. [Amended 1-7-1992 by
Ord. No. 91-7]
(c) Upon the sale or other transfer of each said improved parcel, the
purchaser shall become liable for the usage charges prescribed in
Subsection B, above.
D. Service beyond corporate limits. With respect to all water and sewer service
provided to properties beyond the corporate limits of the Town, the water and
sewer connection charges shall be the same as those prescribed in Subsection A,
above, but the quarterly water and sewer usage charges shall be determined by
multiplying the rates prescribed in Subsection B above by the figure two (2).
E. Charges for special consumers.
(1) In any case where the supervisor shall advise that a water meter larger than
a two-inch water meter must be installed in order to provide service for a
particular property, the Town Commissioners shall, by resolution,
establish special water and sewer connection charges for such property and
may establish a special schedule of usage charges applicable to said
property. At the time of issuance of a building permit the connection
charge so established shall be paid. Any special usage charge established
shall be billed and paid in the same manner as hereinabove established.
[Amended 7-1-2000]
(2) With respect to sewer service furnished the Perry Point Hospital of the
United States Veterans Administration, the provisions of Section 5 of an
ordinance of the Commissioners of Perryville, dated June 4, 1963,
governing the metering of sewage flow and charges for sewage treatment
shall continue to apply; provided, however, that the Town Commissioners
may, by resolution, amend said Section 5, thereby substituting other
arrangements or agreements with said Veterans Administration covering
the charge for said sewer service or for water service, if ultimately
furnished, as may be compensatory for the service furnished.
(3) Whenever a special water meter reading has been requested, a fee of Fifty
Dollars ($50.) shall be paid to the Town, which fee may be increased or
decreased by a Resolution of the Mayor and Commissioners, prior to said
reading being conducted. If the purpose of the reading is to check the
accuracy of the meter because of questions concerning prior readings, and
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8209
if it is determined that the prior meter readings were inaccurate and/or that
the meter was operating improperly, the Town Administrator shall have
the authority to refund the special meter reading fee. [Amended 6-26-2000
by Ord. No. 2000-04]
(4) Any other special connection or usage charges or any agreements
approved pursuant to this subsection shall be committed to writing and,
when approved by resolution as aforesaid, shall be treated as an
amendment of this section and treated in all respects as part hereof.
F. Notice of new construction.
(1) Whenever the Town shall construct water or sewer lines in any street, lane
or alley not theretofore served, then, at least thirty (30) days prior to the
date when any such water or sewer line is scheduled for construction, the
Town shall give written notice to the owner or owners of all properties
abutting any such street, lane or alley that it will install, as part of such
construction, a water house connection and a sewer tap for each improved
property and that each such owner or owners of improved properties will
be required to connect to said water and sewer lines within six (6) months
after said lines are placed in service, paying the connection charges
specified in Subsection A, above.
(2) Said notice shall further state that no house connections or sewer taps will
be constructed for unimproved properties abutting any such street, lane or
alley, unless the owner or owners of such properties shall specifically
request the same within thirty (30) days after the mailing of said notice.
Any such house connection or sewer tap requested at the time of
construction or thereafter shall be installed, but only after payment of the
connection charges prescribed in Subsection A, above.
G. Collection of water and sewer charges. [Amended 9-7-1999 by Ord. No. 99-6]
(1) The charges for shutting off or disconnecting water service shall be Thirty-
Five Dollars ($35.00) which shall be added to the delinquent usage bill and
to the lien thereof. No such reconnection shall be made until said
delinquent usage charge plus said charges for disconnection shall first be
paid. The owner of any property for which water service is disconnected
shall thereafter be liable for the minimum usage charge. Water service
shall be disconnected if a bill has not been paid within thirty (30) days. A
late notice shall be sent advising said property owner that disconnection
shall occur within twenty (20) days if the water and sewer bill has not been
paid in full. In addition to the above, interest shall accrue on the
outstanding balance of the water and sewer bill at the rate of five percent
(5%) per annum for any amounts not paid within thirty (30) days of
billing.
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8210
(2) In any case where an unexplained delinquency shall continue for thirty
(30) days after mailing of any quarterly bill, the Supervisor shall shut off
or disconnect water service to the property with respect to which such
delinquency exists, but no such termination of service shall in any manner
impair the lien for such delinquent charges hereby imposed.
(3) The charges for shutting off or disconnecting water service shall be Thirty-
Five Dollars ($35.) which shall be added to the delinquent usage bill and to
the lien thereof. No such reconnection shall be made until said delinquent
usage charge plus said charges for disconnection shall first be paid. The
owner of any property for which water service is disconnected shall
thereafter be liable for the minimum usage charge. Water service shall be
disconnected if a bill has not been paid within thirty (30) days. A late
notice shall be sent advising said property owner that disconnection shall
occur within twenty (20) days if the water and sewer bill has not been paid
in full. In addition to the above, interest shall accrue on the outstanding
balance of the water and sewer bill at the rate of five percent (5%) per
annum for any amounts not paid within thirty (30) days of billing.
[Amended 9-7-1999 by Ord. No. 99-06]
H. Penalty for failure to connect. Failure of the owner or owners of improved
properties abutting any street, lane or alley in which any water or sewer line is
installed and ready for service to connect to said lines after receipt of the notice
provided for in Subsection F, above, with respect to new lines or, after receipt of
special notice, with respect to existing lines, shall constitute a misdemeanor,
punishable at the instance of the Town in accordance with the provisions of the
Town Charter relating to violation of ordinances.2
I. Minimal charge for water without meter connection. Whenever a property is
connected to the municipal water system of the Town of Perryville without the
installation of a water meter, and has been issued a building permit by the Town of
Perryville, a minimal charge of Sixty-Five Dollars ($65.) per month for water
consumption shall be assessed to said property for each month that the property is
connected to the municipal water system without a meter. Notwithstanding the
aforegoing, if the Town determines that water usage would render a bill in excess
of the minimal charge of Sixty-Five Dollars ($65.) per month based upon the
water rate schedule of the Town and the amount of water determined to be used by
the property, a water bill shall be assessed to the property owner in the amount
which is based upon the amount of water used and the water rate schedule as set
forth in this Ordinance. [Amended 12-5-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-6]
J. Adjustment of Charges for Inadvertent Outside Leakage.
[Amended 10-24-2011 by Ord. 2011-2, Amended 1-9-2001 by Ord. 2000-
08, Amended 5-23-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-2]
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8211
(1) Whenever a water and sewer bill for a property in any quarter reflects water
usage in excess of three hundred percent (300%) of the average water usage
for the previous four (4) quarters, and the property owner and/or occupant has
not through his own negligence and/or deliberate action caused the excessive
use of water, the Town Administrator, or his designee, may adjust the water
and sewer amounts of the bill to an amount equivalent to a bill for the average
water usage for the previous four (4) billing quarters, provided that
documentation of the leak and repair is provided by the property owner and/or
occupant.
(2) Whenever a water and sewer bill for a property has excessive water usage that
meets the above criteria but is less than three hundred percent (300%) of the
average usage for the previous four (4) quarters, the Town Administrator, or
his designee, may adjust the sewer amount of said bill to an amount equivalent
to the sewer amount of a bill for the average usage for the previous four (4)
billing quarters, provided that documentation of the leak and repair is
provided by the property owner and/or occupant.
(3) In addition to the criteria for an adjustment set forth in paragraphs 1 and 2 of
this subsection, a person may not receive an adjustment of the water or sewer
amounts of the bill (I) if that person or property has received an adjustment
within the past 36 months, (II) if all or a portion of the charge for excess water
usage has been reimbursed under a policy of insurance; or (III) if a property
owner had not rectified, within 30 days from the date that the town mails
written notice of the leak to the property owner, the leak giving rise to the
excessive water usage. [Amended 5-7-2019 by Ord. 2019-08]
(4) The maximum adjustment amount that may be approved by the Town
Administrator or his designee is One Thousand Five Hundred Dollars
($1,500.). The Town Administrator or designee must deny any requested
adjustment over One Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($1,500.)
(5) A person dissatisfied with a decision of the Town Administrator or designee
to deny, in whole or part, a request for an adjustment under this section may
appeal the decision to the Mayor and Commissioners. An appeal must be
made to the Mayor and Commissioners in writing within ten days of the
decision of the Town Administrator or designee. The written notice of appeal
must state the reasons why the decision appealed from was incorrect or such
other reasons why an adjustment should be made under the circumstances
presented, and must be accompanied by all documentation that supports the
appeal. An appeal that is timely filed and accompanied by all supporting
documentation will be scheduled for discussion and consideration by the
Mayor and Commissioners. A person who files a notice of appeal must attend
all meetings at which the Mayor and Commissioners discuss and consider the
appeal. The Mayor and Commissioners may reverse or modify the decision of
the Town Administrator or designee if the Mayor and Commissioners
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8212
determine that the decision appealed from was incorrect or other reasons are
presented why an adjustment should be made under the circumstances
presented.
§ 82-3. Disposition of revenue.
All revenues derived by the Town from the charges imposed by § 82-2 of this chapter,
shall be credited by the Town Treasurer, as received, to the following funds, and
disbursements from said funds shall be made only for the purposes herein specified.
Three (3) separate funds are hereby established, as follows:
A. Construction fund. All revenues realized by the Town from the collection of water
and sewer connection charges shall be deposited in and credited to this fund. In
addition, there shall be credited to this fund any surplus or excess proceeds from
the sale of bonds or other obligations by the Town after completion of the work for
which said bonds or other obligations are issued. There shall also be credited to
and deposited in this fund any sums paid to the Town by property owners for
construction of water and sewer line extensions, pursuant to § 82-2C, above.
Disbursements from this fund shall be made only for the purchase and installation
of water meters, the expenses incurred by the Town for making connections with
its water and sewer lines and the cost of constructing extensions authorized in §
82-2C, above, together with the cost of plans, specifications and drawings for such
extensions. If, at any time, there shall be a balance in the construction fund not
committed to any of the foregoing purposes, the Town may authorize the use of all
or any part of said balance for capital improvements to said water and sewer
systems, including extension of lines and replacement of worn-out or exhausted
lines and equipment.
B. Revenue fund.
(1) All revenues realized by the Town from the collection of water and sewer
usage charges shall be credited to and deposited in this fund as received.
There shall be disbursed from this fund all expenses of operation,
maintenance and repair of the water and sewer systems of the Town,
including a reasonable proportion of the salary of the Supervisor and of all
operating personnel. In addition, there shall be disbursed from this fund a
proper sum for credit to the general fund of the Town to cover overhead
expense incurred by the Town for services and facilities provided the
Water and Sewer Department by other Town employees. All balances in
said revenue fund not required for the foregoing purposes or to create a
reasonable reserve to cover the same shall be withdrawn from the revenue
fund at semiannual intervals and credited to the debt service fund.
(2) There shall be an annual and separate budget for the Water and Sewer
Department as part of the annual budget of the Town, and disbursements
shall be made from said revenue fund within the limits prescribed by said
budget, unless the Town shall, by special resolution, authorize increased or
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8213
different expenditures or disbursements. If, at any time, the revenues
deposited to the credit of the revenue fund shall be insufficient to meet the
foregoing disbursements and to make payments to the debt service fund
sufficient to meet the requirements of said fund, the Town shall
immediately request the consulting engineers to propose a revised
schedule of water and sewer usage charges which will produce sufficient
revenue to make up any such deficiency. Within sixty (60) days after
receipt of such schedule, the Town Commissioners shall adopt the same in
lieu of the schedule prescribed in § 82-2 of this chapter, with such
modifications as they may deem necessary or appropriate.
C. Debt service fund.
(1) As provided in Subsection B, above, all revenues credited to the revenue
fund not required for the purposes stated in said subsection shall be
transferred at semiannual intervals to the debt service fund. Moneys
credited to the debt service fund shall be used solely for the purposes
herein specified and not for any other purpose. The Town Treasurer shall
pay from the debt service fund the amounts necessary to meet the principal
and interest maturities of all outstanding bonds, notes or other obligations
of the Town, issued or incurred for construction, improvement, extension
or replacement of the water and sewer systems. Such payments are to be
made as and when said principal and interest obligations are due and
payable. Such payments shall be made to the paying agent or its successor
named in the ordinance authorizing any such bonds, in the amounts agreed
upon with said paying agent as being due and payable. With respect to
any such obligation, payable directly by the Town, the Town Treasurer
may make payment directly to the obligee upon receipt of
acknowledgment of such payment.
(2) The debt service fund is hereby unconditionally pledged to the payment of
the above described obligations and the interest thereon and, except as
provided below, shall not be diverted to or used for any other purpose.
Any such diversion or other use shall constitute a breach of public trust on
the part of the official or officials of the Town who shall make or permit
the same.
(3) In the event that, at the end of any fiscal year of the Town, the balance in
the debt service fund shall be sufficient to meet all principal and interest
payments on the bonds, notes or other obligations above described during
the first six (6) months of the next succeeding fiscal year, the difference
between said balance and said debt service requirement may, by resolution
of the Town Commissioners, be transferred to the construction fund for
expenditure exclusively on the water and sewer projects for which said
fund is hereby established.
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8214
(4) If, at any time, the moneys to the credit of the debt service fund shall be
insufficient to provide for payment of the obligations to which said fund is
pledged, as such obligations become due and payable, the Town
Commissioners may transfer to the debt service fund from the general fund
of the Town such amount or amounts as may be necessary to make up any
such deficiency. Any such transfer shall be treated as an indebtedness of
the water and sewer systems, subordinate, however, to the bonds, notes or
other obligations to which said debt service fund is pledged, and shall be
repayable in whole or in part only after the current debt service
requirements of said bonds, notes or other obligations have been paid or
fully provided for.
ARTICLE II
Rules and Regulations
§ 82-4. Compliance required; enforcement.
The following separate rules and regulations are hereby adopted for the administration
of the water and sewer systems of the Town. Such rules and regulations shall have the
force of law, shall be binding on the owner or occupant of each property connected or to
be connected to said systems and shall be enforceable by the Supervisor. Any violation
of any of said rules and regulations by any such owner or occupant shall constitute a
misdemeanor, punishable as hereinabove provided. In addition, the Town shall have the
right to compel compliance with said rules and regulations by any such owner or
occupant in a civil proceeding in any court of law having jurisdiction, but no such civil
proceeding shall constitute a waiver by the Town of its right of criminal prosecution for
the same violation. Any person using or proposing to use said water and sewer systems,
who is dissatisfied with any decision of the Supervisor under said rules and regulations,
shall have the right to a hearing before the Town Commissioners, and the decision of the
Town Commissioners at said hearing shall be final.
§ 82-5. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Article the following words shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONSUMER – The owner and the occupant of any property using or proposing
to use either or both of said systems.
SUPERVISOR – The Commissioner of Water and Sewer or his designee.1
TOWN – The Supervisor and any agent or employee of the town responsible for
administrating the water and sewer systems of the Town.
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8215
§ 82-6. Water system.
The following rules and regulations shall govern the use of the water system:
A. Responsibility of Town. The Town shall not be responsible for the condition,
maintenance or repair of any piping, apparatus, appliance or equipment, except the
meter belonging to the Town, as may be installed on the consumer’s property or
on his side of the point of delivery of water to such consumer. However, prior to
rendering service or at any time thereafter upon reasonable notice, the Town may
inspect such facilities and, as a condition to the rendering or continuance of
service, may require such improvement, repair or replacement of such facilities as
may be deemed necessary for the proper operation and maintenance of said water
system.
B. Liability for charges. The title owner of each property connected to the water
system shall be primarily responsible for all charges imposed by the Town.
However, at the written request of any such owner, the Town will bill the occupant
or tenant of any such property for usage charges but such action shall not relieve
the owner of his obligation to pay any such bill which may be delinquent.
C. Temporary service. Any person applying for temporary service shall be liable for
the full cost of making the necessary connection and, prior to such connection,
shall deposit in advance with the Town an amount equal to the estimate by the
Town of such cost. Said person shall also deposit in advance an amount equal to
the estimated usage charge for a period of three (3) months from the date of such
connection. Both deposits shall be treated as credits against the final charge for
said service and an appropriate adjustment of charges and credits shall be made
upon discontinuance of service. It shall be unlawful to connect any water line to
the Town water system or to use the Town water system in any fashion, or to draw
any water from the Town water system, without obtaining an appropriate permit
from the Town of Perryville for either temporary service or permanent service.
[Amended 3-2-1999 by Ord. No. 99-01]
D. Cross connections. Connection of the water supply of the Town with any service
pipe connected to any private source of water supply is hereby prohibited, nor
shall the water system of the Town be connected in any manner with any vat, tank
or other apparatus which contains or may contain any other liquid or chemicals.
E. Access to premises. Employees of the Town, with proper identification, shall have
the right to enter upon the premises of any consumer at any time during ordinary
business hours for the purpose of reading the meter or examining, testing,
changing or moving any water equipment, motors, apparatus or piping of the
Town or measuring the consumer’s water demand.
F. Discontinuance, disconnection or reduction of service.
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8216
(1) Water service to a particular property will be discontinued by the Town at
the request of the consumer only if such consumer demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the Supervisor that the improvements on said property
connected to the water system are to be demolished or so altered as to
require a different connection on completion of alterations. Upon such
request, the Supervisor may, in his discretion, order a complete
disconnection of service. In either event he shall determine that liability of
the consumer for water usage charges to the date of discontinuance,
including disconnection charge of fifteen dollars ($15.), and shall bill the
consumer for the amount so determined, which bill shall be due and
payable on presentation.
(2) The Town shall have the unconditional right to disconnect or discontinue
water service for any property, after giving the consumer not less than five
(5) days’ written notice of its intention so to do, if the Supervisor shall find
that the consumer has on his premises any water piping, connection,
apparatus or device which prevents the water meter or meters on such
premises from registering or recording properly all water used on such
property or which enables the consumer to obtain or use any water without
such use having been registered or recorded properly by a town meter, or if
any consumer shall fail or refuse to observe, fulfill or comply faithfully
with the requirements of the Supervisor concerning the consumer’s piping,
fixtures or equipment.
(3) The Town may also discontinue service if it shall find that any meter,
equipment or other facility of the Town installed on a consumer’s property
has in any manner been damaged by said consumer or by any person for
whom said consumer is responsible. In such instances, water service shall
not be resumed until said consumer shall pay to the Town the estimated
cost for restoring all damaged meters, equipment and facilities.
(4) As hereinabove provided, the Town may discontinue or disconnect water
service of any consumer who shall be delinquent in the payment of water
and sewer usage charges.
(5) The Town reserves the right to discontinue or interrupt water service to
one (1) or more consumers whenever, in its judgment, such discontinuance
or interruption shall be necessary for the purpose of working on the
distribution system or the water supply or filtration equipment, or
whenever it shall be necessary for the Town to make repairs, extensions or
replacements to the water system. In the event any such interruption or
discontinuance is known or planned in advance, the Town shall give
affected consumers at least forty-eight (48) hours’ notice thereof, either by
publication or by posting printed placards in the areas affected. In the
event such interruption or discontinuance is due to an unforeseen
emergency, no advance notice thereof shall be necessary. The Town shall
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8217
not be liable to any consumer for any damages of any kind or nature
whatsoever resulting from such required interruption or discontinuance.
(6) In order to maintain proper and sufficient pressures in the water
distribution system, the Supervisor shall have the right, at all times, to
determine, limit and regulate in a reasonable and nondiscriminatory
manner the maximum amounts of water any consumer may use.
(7) [Added 10/10/17 by Emergency Ord. No. 17-20]
In the event of an operational failure in the Town’s water production,
treatment or distribution system that reduces the amount of water available
for use by water system consumers, in consultation with the Town’s Water
Plant Superintendent, the Mayor of the Town of Perryville, or in the
Mayor’s absence or unavailability, the commissioner having the most
seniority of all other Commissioners and being available to act, may
declare a water system emergency and impose reasonable mandatory
water conservation restrictions that prohibit nonessential uses of water
until normal water system operations are restored. Nonessential uses of
water include, but are not limited to:
(a) The use of hoses, sprinklers, or other means for sprinkling or
watering shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, plants, gardens,
flowers or other vegetation.
(b) The use of water for washing automobiles, trucks, trailers, or
other types of mobile equipment.
(c) Washing of streets, driveways, parking lots, office buildings,
and exterior of homes, sidewalks or other outside surfaces.
(d) The use of water from fire hydrants for construction purposes
and water main flushing. Public notice of a declaration of a
water system emergency and water conservation restrictions
shall be given by posting the notice on the Town’s internet
website, delivering the notice to representatives of the media
who regularly cover town government matters, and all other
available media. A notice shall include the penalties for
violation of mandatory water conservation restrictions.
G. Responsibilities of consumers and of the Town.
(1) Each consumer shall be solely responsible for the condition and
maintenance of all privately owned piping, appliances, equipment or
apparatus on the property of such consumer which involves the use of
water on such property.
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8218
(2) Each consumer shall also be responsible for notifying the Supervisor
immediately of any change in connected load or in water equipment on the
consumer’s premises which might affect the size of the meter for such
premises or the water service to such consumer or to any other consumer of
the Town.
(3) Each consumer shall also promptly notify the Town of any observed or
suspected defect in, or condition of, the portion of the water system of the
Town abutting or located on such consumer’s property, which affects or
might affect water service or which might be dangerous to persons or
property or to the public health.
(4) With respect to water supply, the responsibility of the Town shall be
limited to furnishing each consumer an adequate supply of treated water,
subject to the right of discontinuance set forth in Subsection F, above. As
stated in said subsection, the Town shall not be responsible for any damage
occasioned by interruption to said service, nor shall the Town be
responsible for damages caused by turbid water which may result from the
cleaning of pipes, reservoirs or standpipes or the opening or closing of any
gates or hydrants. The Town shall not be responsible for any injury or
damage resulting from the manner in which water is used on the
consumer’s property.
(5) With respect to equipment, the responsibility of the Town shall be limited
to the proper maintenance and operation of the portions of the water
system located on public property or in any public way and to the provision
for each consumer of an operating water meter and a service connection
from the distribution system of the Town to the point of delivery of water
to the consumer, which point shall be considered the connection located at
or near the consumer’s property line or on the consumer’s property.
(6) With respect both to water service and to maintenance and operation of the
water system owned by the Town, the Town shall not be liable for the
negligence or willful misconduct of any employee of the Town unless such
negligence or misconduct shall occur while said employee is engaged in
the performance of duties properly delegated to him by the Town.
(7) Each consumer shall comply with all water conservation restrictions
imposed by the Mayor or senior available Commissioner during a water
system emergency. Violation of a water conservation restriction will result
in a warning, second offense is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine in the
amount of $150, $300 for a third offense and $500 for a fourth and
subsequent offenses. Each day that a violation continues is a separate
offense. Violations of mandatory water restrictions also may be enforced
as provided in § 82-6 of this code. [Added 10/10/17 by Emergency Ord.
No. 17-20]
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8219
H. Service connections.
(1) The Town shall provide a service connection for each improved property at
a point along the frontage of such property abutting the street, lane or alley
in which a water main lies. The size of the street service or house
connection shall be determined by the Supervisor on the basis of the
estimated volume of water to be used by each consumer on the property for
which the connection is provided.
(2) After construction of a service connection, any change in the location thereof
or in the size thereof shall be made by the Town at the expense of the
consumer. Maintenance of all service connections to the property line shall
be the responsibility of the Town which shall bear the full cost of such
maintenance.
(3) Consumers shall be responsible for paying the cost of all service pipes from
the service connection to and in the improvement on each property to be
served. The Supervisor shall determine the quality of pipes to be used so
that the same will withstand anticipated water pressures. Such service pipes
shall be laid on the property of each consumer at such depth and in such
location as to connect with the service connection provided by the Town.
(4) Service pipes within and outside buildings shall be so located as to achieve
maximum protection from freezing.
(5) No attachment to a consumer’s service pipe shall be made between the meter
and the water main of the Town.
(6) Each consumer’s service pipes shall be maintained by such consumer in
good condition and free of leaks, at his expense. Each such service pipe
shall have placed thereon a cutoff immediately inside the building or
foundation wall at the place of entry.
(7) A separate service pipe shall extend to each separate permanent building
even though there may be two (2) buildings on the same property under a
single ownership. A separate service pipe shall be provided for each
semidetached building separated from its connecting building by a loadbearing
partition.
I. Private fire service connections.
(1) Before any property owner shall install any private fire protection or
sprinkler system in any building, which system is to be connected to the
water system of the Town, he shall submit his proposal to the Supervisor
who is hereby empowered to require compliance with reasonable guides
and standards as to the installation of said system and the connection
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8220
thereof with the water system of the Town. Each such system may be
separately connected and metered and the property owner shall bear the
cost thereof.
(2) Approval of a connection for a private fire protection system shall not be
deemed to constitute a guaranty by the Town that requisite water pressure
will be maintained by the Town at all times or that the water main to which
said system is connected will be of sufficient capacity at all times to meet
the demands of said system. However, the Supervisor may, in his
discretion, refuse to permit any such connection if, in his judgment, the
water system of the Town at the location in question is inadequate to meet
the requirements of any such system.
J. Water meters.
(1) All connections made to the water system after the date of this chapter
shall be metered.
(2) Meters shall be installed by the Town on all existing connections as
promptly as possible after the date of this chapter.
(3) The size of each meter shall be determined by the Supervisor, based on
stated flow requirements of each consumer.
(4) All meters shall be furnished, installed, maintained and removed by the
Town at its expense and shall remain its property at all times. However,
each consumer shall be responsible for the cost of change in location or
size of the meter requested by such consumer.
(5) In addition, each consumer shall be liable to the Town for any damage to a
meter caused by the negligence or willful act of such consumer, which
shall include abuse or misuse thereof. Every property owner on whose
property a meter is located shall be responsible to the Town for the
protection and safekeeping of said meter from willful or negligent damage
by such owner, his agents, employees or tenants.
(6) Every consumer shall have the right to demand that the meter on his
property be tested for accuracy, at the expense of the Town, at least once
in each twelve-month period. More frequent tests may be requested, but
the same shall be at the expense of the consumer if the meter tested is
found to be accurate within the limits of plus or minus two percent (2%).
The Town may, at its own expense, remove any meter for routine tests,
repairs or replacement at any time. If, after any test by the Town, it is
found that a water meter has an average error of more than plus or minus
two percent (2%), such meter shall be promptly corrected or replaced by
the Town. An appropriate correction in the water bills of the consumer
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8221
affected, based on the percentage of error, shall be made for the two (2)
quarterly billing periods preceding the period in which such test is made.
If, upon any such test, it shall be found that said meter has not registered at
all, the consumer affected shall be liable for water service on the flat rate
basis prescribed by § 82-2B of this chapter for the quarterly billing period
in which such error shall be detected.
K. Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants may be installed by the Town and connected to the
water system at such locations as shall be determined by the Supervisor, in his
discretion. No consumer shall have the right to demand the installation of a fire
hydrant at any location.
§ 82-7. Sewer system.
The following rules and regulations shall govern the use of the sewer system:
A. Applicability of rules and regulations for water system. The provisions of § 82-
6A, B, G and H of the rules and regulations for the water system shall, to the
extent applicable, control the relations between consumers and the Town with
respect to the sewer system, with appropriate changes in reference.
B. Connection required.
(1) The owner or owners of every property in the Town improved with a
structure used or usable for human habitation or occupancy shall connect
said structure to the sewer system of the Town, if there shall exist a public
sewer main in a street, lane or alley abutting said property or if such a
main shall at any time hereafter be so constructed. Prior to the time each
new connection is made, said owner or owners shall pay to the Town the
appropriate sewer connection charge specified in § 82-2 of this chapter.
The owner or owners of every such improved property which is not
connected to an existing sewer in a street, lane or alley abutting said
property and the owner or owners of every such improved property
abutting a street, lane or alley in which a public sewer is hereafter laid
shall make such connection at his or their own expense at the point and in
the manner specified by the Supervisor. Every such connection to an
existing sewer shall be made within ninety (90) days of the date of passage
of this chapter, unless extended by the Supervisor for good cause shown,
and every such connection to a new sewer shall be made within ninety (90)
days of the issuance of notice by the Supervisor to said owner or owners
advising that said sewer is available for service. Any existing toilet or
other facilities installed in a structure to be connected to the sewer system
of the Town, any such facilities to be installed at the time of such
connection and any such facilities installed after connection, including all
vents, traps and related fixtures, shall be of a type and construction
approved by the Supervisor. After such connection, every such facility
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8222
shall discharge only into said sewer system and, unless special approval is
granted by the Supervisor with respect to particular types of waste
material, no private or separate system of disposal of sewage and wastes
shall be maintained for any such facilities.
(2) After any such connection is completed and in operation, any septic tanks,
cesspools, privies and related private sewage disposal systems shall be
destroyed and abandoned by the owner or owners of the property
connected and said cesspools and septic tanks shall be cleaned of sludge
and filled with bank-run gravel or other approved material. The work shall
be so performed that the abandoned facility will not thereafter constitute a
hazard to the public health or to the safety of any person coming on the
property for any reason.
(3) Prior to requiring any such connection, the Town will provide, at the
lowest elevation along the property line of each abutting property, a
separate pipe emptying into the sewer main, to which the building sewer
shall be connected. The dimensions of said pipes may vary, in the
judgment of the Supervisor, depending on the volume of sewage to be
discharged from each property.
C. Private facilities.
(1) No privy or similar contrivance for the surface reception of sewage or
human excretion shall be constructed or maintained in the Town, whether
or not a public sewer main is available for appropriate connection.
However, the Supervisor may grant approval for the temporary use of
portable toilets equipped with self-contained waste holding tanks on
construction sites or at places of large public gatherings where existing
sanitary facilities are inadequate, provided that the method of emptying
said holding tanks shall be as specified by the Supervisor in advance of
such use.
(2) A private sewage disposal system may be continued or hereafter
constructed on any property in the Town if a public sewer is not located in
a street, lane or alley on which said property abuts. Every existing private
system shall be subject to inspection by the Supervisor and, upon receipt
of notice from the Supervisor specifying the failure of any such system to
conform to the requirements of the Health Officer of Cecil County or the
applicable regulations of the State Department of Health of Maryland, the
property owner or owners notified shall promptly make such repairs,
alterations or additions as shall bring such system into compliance. Before
construction of any new private disposal system, the plans therefore shall
be submitted to the Supervisor for his examination and no such
construction shall be undertaken until said plans have been approved by
the Supervisor, as submitted or as modified pursuant to his demand. In
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8223
each instance, the Supervisor shall make his decision within thirty (30)
days of such submission. If the Supervisor shall disapprove any such
plans, his decision shall be subject to review by the Town Commissioners
on petition of the affected property owner or owners filed within thirty
(30) days of such decision. Failure of the Supervisor to act within the time
herein specified shall be deemed a disapproval of the plans submitted.
However, the Supervisor may withhold his approval of construction of any
private sewage disposal system if he shall find that the sewer system of the
Town will be extended to provide service to the property affected within
not more than six (6) months from such date of submission and, in such
case, he may authorize such temporary facilities as may be necessary.
Such finding shall not be subject to review.
(3) No private sewage disposal system, whether now or hereafter constructed,
shall be deemed to confer on the owner or owners thereof any vested right
to the continuance thereof and every such system shall be promptly
abandoned as required by Subsection B, above, when service by the sewer
system of the Town becomes available.
D. Building sewers.
(1) No building sewer or sewer line extension connecting a building drain on a
property with the sewer system of the Town shall be constructed by the
owner or owners of any such property, or by any other person, without the
prior written approval of the Supervisor. Without such approval, no
person shall make any connection to, opening in or use of the sewer
system of the Town.
(2) The Supervisor shall determine the size of each building sewer to be
installed, depending on the volume and type of sewage to be carried
thereby. In addition, both before and during construction, the Supervisor
shall be satisfied that the slope, alignment and construction materials, as
well as the method of excavating, placing of pipe, jointing, testing and
trench backfilling all comply with applicable plumbing codes of Cecil
County and with appropriate specifications and manuals of the American
Society for Testing and Materials and the Federal Water Quality
Administration. He shall see that all connections are made gastight and
watertight and that no drains or downspouts carrying surface runoff or
groundwater are connected to the building sewer.
(3) Wherever possible, the Supervisor shall require that a building sewer be
brought to a building at an elevation below the basement floor so as to
permit gravity flow, but where this shall not be possible, he shall require
that sewage carried by the building drain be lifted by an approved means
for discharge into the building sewer.
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8224
(4) A final inspection of each building sewer shall be made by the Supervisor
before trench backfilling, and, upon such inspection, he may require such
additional work as may be necessary to meet the foregoing requirements.
(5) The Supervisor shall require that all excavations for a building sewer be
adequately guarded and illuminated during the construction period and that
all damage to a sidewalk or public way or to a public sewer main be fully
repaired and restored. Existing building sewers meeting the requirements
of this subsection may, with the approval of the Supervisor, be used for a
new structure replacing the structure connected to said sewer. The
Supervisor may permit a single building sewer to serve two (2) adjacent
structures where he shall find that construction of a separate building
sewer for each structure is not possible or feasible. In such case, however,
a separate connection and sewer usage charge shall be imposed for each
structure.
(6) Each building sewer shall be constructed, as aforesaid, and thereafter
maintained, at the sole cost and expense of the owner or owners of the
property connected.
E. Limitations on use of sewer system.
(1) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to
any public sewer. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage, including
industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters, shall be discharged
to natural outlets approved by the Supervisor.
(2) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
(a) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
(b) Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids,
liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any
sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in the
receiving waters of the Town’s sewage treatment plant, including
but not limited to cyanides in excess of two (2) milligrams per
liter as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.
(c) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five point five (5.5)
or having any other corrosive property capable of causing
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8225
damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the
sewage works.
(d) Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference
with the proper operation of the sewage works, such as but not
limited to ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass,
rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole
blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper
dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by
garbage grinders.
(3) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the sewer system
the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes unless the
Supervisor finds that because of the quantities of subject wastes in relation
to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the
sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage
treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment
plant and other pertinent factors, such wastes will not harm either the
sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on
the receiving watercourse or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public
property or constitute a nuisance. The substances prohibited are:
(a) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one
hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150º F.) [sixty-five degrees
centigrade (65º C.)].
(b) Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) milligrams per
liter or containing substances which may solidify or become
viscous at temperatures between thirty-two and one hundred fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (32º and 150º F.) [zero and sixty-five degrees
centigrade (0º and 65º C.)].
(c) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded by a garbage
grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower
[zero point seventy-six (0.76) metric] or greater.
(d) Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron-pickling wastes
or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
(e) Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc
and similar objectionable or toxic substances, or wastes exerting
an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such
material received in the composite sewage at the sewage
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8226
treatment works exceeds the limits established by the Supervisor
for such materials.
(f) Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odorproducing
substances in such concentrations exceeding limits
which may be established by the Supervisor as necessary, after
treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of
the state, federal or other public agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge of such sewage to the received waters.
(g) Any radioactive wastes or isotypes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Supervisor
in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
(h) Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of nine point five
(9.5).
(i) Materials which exert or cause:
[1] Unusual concentrations on inert suspended solids (such as,
but not limited to, fuller’s earth, lime slurries and lime
residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to,
sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
[2] Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye
wastes and vegetable tanning solutions).
[3] Unusual biochemical oxygen demands, chemical oxygen
demands or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to
constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works.
[4] Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes
constituting slugs, as defined by the Supervisor.
(j) Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable
to treatment to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent
cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters.
F. Special powers of municipal supervisor.
(1) If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to
the sewer system, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in Subsection E, above, the Supervisor may:
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8227
(a) Reject the wastes; or
(b) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the sewer system; or
(c) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and
(d) Require, with the approval of the Town Commissioners, payment
of an additional sewer usage charge to cover the added cost of
handling and treating the wastes.
(2) If the Supervisor permits the pretreatment of equalization of waste flows,
the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to
his review and approval in accordance with the requirements of all
applicable laws. Such pretreatment plants and equipment shall be
continuously maintained in satisfactory operating condition by the
consumer.
(3) Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when required by the
Supervisor for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in
excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful
ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the City
Engineer and shall be so located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection.
(4) When required by the Supervisor, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in
the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of
the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely
located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Supervisor. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense
and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all time.
(5) All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes referred to in Subsection E and this Subsection F shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American
Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole
provided or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the
event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall
be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to
the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be
carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8228
constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of
hazards to life, limb and property.
ARTICLE III
Wastewater Pretreatment [Added 9-3-85 by Ord. No. 85-51]
§ 82-8. General provisions.
A. Purpose and policy.
(1) This Article sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect
contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for the
Town of Perryville and enables the Town to comply with all applicable
state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the
General Pretreatment Regulations promulgated pursuant thereto (40 CFR
Part 403).
(2) The objectives of this Article are to:
(a) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the
system or contaminate the resulting sludge.
(b) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will pass through the system,
inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or
otherwise be incompatible with the system.
(c) Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and
sludges from the system.
(d) Provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the municipal
wastewater system.
(3) This Article provides for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors
to the municipal wastewater system through the issuance of permits to
certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general
requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement
activities, requires user reporting, assumes that existing customer’s
capacity will not be preempted and provides for the setting of fees for the
equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established
herein.
(4) This Article shall apply to the Town of Perryville and to persons outside
the Town who are, by contract or agreement with the Town, users of the
Town POTW.
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8229
B. Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following
terms and phrases, as used in this Article, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated:
ACT or THE ACT – The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
“Clean Water Act,” as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF USER – An “authorized representative
of a user” may be:
(1) A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president if the
industrial user is a corporation.
(2) A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or
proprietorship, respectively.
(3) A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above if such
representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from
which the discharge into the POTW originates.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) – The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure for five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20º C.) expressed in
terms of weight and concentration [milligrams per liter (mg/l)].
BUILDING SEWER – A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a
user to the POTW.
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS – National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
or Pretreatment Standard. See definition of “National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards.”
COMMISSIONERS (TOWN COMMISSIONERS) – The Board of
Commissioners of the Town of Perryville.
COOLING WATER – The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration or to which the only pollutant added is heat.
DIRECT DISCHARGE – The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater
directly to the waters of the State of Maryland.
DOMESTIC WASTEWATER – The liquid wastes originating from private
residences and containing those pollutant concentrations that are normally
associated with household activities.
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8230
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA – The United States
Environmental Protection Agency, or, where appropriate, the term may also be
used as a designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized official of
said Agency.
GRAB SAMPLE – A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time
basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of
time.
HOLDING TANK WASTE – Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE – The discharge or the introduction of nondomestic
pollutants from any source regulated under Section 307(b) or (c) of the Act (33
U.S.C. § 1317) into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the
system).
INDUSTRIAL USER – A person who is engaged in manufacturing or commerce,
or a member of any class of significant producers of pollutants identified under
rules or regulations adopted by the state or EPA.
INTERFERENCE – Any inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment
processes or operations which causes a violation of any requirement of the
POTW’s NPDES permit or prevents the POTW from using the sewage sludge or
disposing of such sludge under any state or federal law or regulation.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or
PRETREATMENT STANDARD – Any regulation containing pollutant discharge
limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the
Act (33 U.S.C. § 1347) which applies to a specific category of industrial users.
NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE
DISCHARGE STANDARD – Any regulation developed under the authority of
Section 307 (b) of the Act and 40 CFR 403.5.
NONDOMESTIC WASTEWATER – The liquid wastes originating from
establishments engaged in some form of business, commercial or industrial
activity.
NPDES or STATE DISCHARGE PERMIT – A permit issued pursuant to Section
402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S. C. § 1342) or Title 9,
Sections 9-323 and 9-324, of the Health-Environmental Article of the Annotated
Code of Maryland.
PERSON – Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8231
any other legal entity or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The
masculine gender shall include the feminine, and the singular shall include the
plural where indicated by the context.
pH – The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen
ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. It indicates the intensity of acidity
and alkalinity on a scale running from zero (0) to fourteen (14). [A pH of seven
point zero represent alkalinity and below seven point zero (7.0) represent acidity.]
POLLUTANT – Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar
dirt and industrial, municipal, commercial and agricultural waste or any other
contaminant.
POLLUTION – The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological and radiological integrity of water.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT – That portion of the POTW designed to provide
treatment to wastewater.
PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT – The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or
otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration
can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or other means,
except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS – Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard imposed on an industrial user by the EPA, state or POTW.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) – Any devices and
systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal
sewage and industrial waste (as defined by Section 212 of the Act). The systems
include sewers, pipes and equipment used to convey wastewater to the treatment
facility. The term also includes the agency or person authorized to operate such
facilities in accordance with the county plan approved in accordance with
Maryland Health-Environmental Article, Title 9, Subtitle 5.
SIGNIFICANT USER – Any user of the Town’s wastewater disposal system
who:
(1) Has a discharge flow of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons or more per
average workday;
(2) Has an average of wastewater flow greater than five percent (5%) of the flow
in the Town’s wastewater treatment system;
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8232
(3) Has in its wastes toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to Section 307 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act or state law or regulation; or
(4) Is found by the POTW or Maryland Office of Environmental Programs to
have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other
contribution industries, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of
sludge, the system’s effluent discharge quality or air emissions generated by
the system.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) – A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive
Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972.
STATE – The State of Maryland.
STORMWATER – Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom.
SUPERINTENDENT – The person designated by the Town to supervise the
operation of the publicly owned treatment works and who is charged with certain
duties and responsibilities by this Article, or his duly authorized representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS – The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of
or is suspended in water, wastewater or other liquids and which is removable by
laboratory filtering.
TOWN – The Town of Perryville, an incorporated municipality of the State of
Maryland, or, where appropriate to the context, the Commissioners of Perryville.
TOXIC POLLUTANT – Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as
toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA under Section 307(a) of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act or other federal statutes or in regulations
promulgated by the Maryland Office of Environmental programs under state law.
USER – Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of
wastewater into the Town’s POTW.
WASTEWATER – The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes
from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions,
whether treated or untreated.
WASTEWATER CONTRIBUTION PERMIT – As set forth in § 82-112 of this
Article.
WATERS OF THE STATE:
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8233
(1) Both surface and underground waters within the boundaries of this state
subject to its jurisdiction, including that part of the Atlantic Ocean within the
boundaries of this state, the Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries, and all
ponds, lakes, rivers, streams, public ditches, tax ditches and public drainage
systems within this state, other than those designed and used to collect,
convey or dispose of sanitary sewage; and
(2) The floodplain of free-flowing waters determined by the Department of
Natural Resources on the basis of one-hundred-year flood frequency.
C. Word usage. “Shall” is mandatory; “may” is permissive.
D. Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
(1) BOD: biochemical oxygen demand.
(2) CFR: Code of Federal Regulations.
(3) COD: chemical oxygen demand.
(4) EPA: Environmental Protection Agency.
(5) l: liter.
(6) mg: milligrams.
(7) mg/l: milligrams per liter.
(8) NPDES: National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
(9) POTW: publicly owned treatment works.
(10)SIC: standard industrial classification.
(11)SWDA: Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
(12)U.S.C.: United States Code.
(13)TSS: total suspended solids.
§ 82-9. Discharge regulations.
A. General discharge prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to be
contributed, directly or indirectly, to a POTW any pollutant or wastewater which
will cause interference with the operation or performance of the POTW. These
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8234
general prohibitions apply to all users of a POTW whether or not the user is
subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements. A user may
not contribute the following substances to any POTW:
(1) Any substances which by reason of their nature or quantity may cause fire
or explosion or be injurious to the POTW or to the operation of the
POTW.
(2) Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a
sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment
facilities, such as, but not limited to, grease, garbage with particles greater
than one-half (1/2) inch in any dimension or any material which can be
disposed of as trash.
(3) Any wastewater having a pH less than five point zero (5.0) or greater than
nine point zero (9.0).
(4) Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants which may cause interference
with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals or pass through the POTW and pollute the waters of the state.
(5) Any substance which may create a public nuisance, cause hazard to life or
prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair.
(6) Any wastewater having a temperature greater than one hundred thirty
degrees Fahrenheit (130º F.) [forty degrees centigrade (55º C.)].
(7) Any heat sufficient to raise the temperature of the wastewaters at the
POTW treatment facility above one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit (104º
F.) [forty degrees centigrade (40º C.)].
(8) Any slug load or release rate of pollutants, including oxygen demanding
pollutants, which may cause interference with the POTW.
B. Pretreatment and federal categorical pretreatment standards. Industrial users shall
provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this Article
and shall achieve compliance with all federal categorical pretreatment standards
within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations.
C. Specific pollutant limitations. No person shall discharge wastewater containing
concentrations of the following elements or materials in excess of:
(1) Two hundred twenty (220) mg/l BOD5.
(2) Two hundred fifty (250) mg/l TSS.
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8235
D. State requirements. State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply
in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and
limitations or those in this Article.
E. Town’s right of revision. The Town reserves the right to establish by ordinance
more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater
disposal systems if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives of this Article.
F. Excessive discharges. No user shall ever increase the use of process water or in
any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the
federal categorical pretreatment standards or to achieve compliance with this
Article.
G. Spill prevention plans.
(1) Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited
materials or other materials which may interfere with the POTW by
developing spill prevention plans. Facilities necessary to implement these
plans shall be provided and maintained at the owner’s or user’s own cost
and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures
to provide this protection shall be submitted to the Town for review and
shall be approved by the Town before construction of the facility. All
existing significant users shall complete such a plan. No significant user
who commences contribution to the POTW after the effective date of this
Article shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until spill
prevention plans have been approved by the Town. Review and approval
of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user from the
responsibility to modify the user’s facility as necessary to meet the
requirements of this Article. Industrial users that store hazardous
substances shall not contribute to the POTW after the effective date of this
Article unless a spill prevention plan has been approved by the Town.
Approval of such plans shall not relieve the industrial user from complying
with all other laws and regulations governing the use, storage and
transportation of hazardous substances.
H. Notification.
(1) In the case of any discharge in violation of this Article or permit
conditions, the industrial user shall immediately notify the POTW of the
discharge by telephone. The notification shall include:
(a) The location of the discharge.
(b) The type of waste, including concentration and volume.
(c) Any corrective actions taken by the user.
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8236
(2) Within five (5) days following such a discharge, the user shall submit a
written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures that
will be taken by the user to prevent similar future discharges.
(3) Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or
other liability resulting from the discharge, nor shall such notification
relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be
imposed under this Article or other applicable state or federal law.
I. Employee training. The industrial user shall permanently post a notice in a
prominent place advising all employees of who to call in the event of a dangerous
discharge for which notification is required. Employees shall advise all employees
who may cause or be injured by such a discharge of the emergency notification
procedure.
J. Records.
(1) Users shall retain and make available upon request of authorized
representatives of the POTW, the state or the EPA all records required to
be collected by the user pursuant to this Article.
(2) These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years
after their collection.
(3) This period shall be extended during any litigation concerning compliance
with this Article or permit conditions.
K. Analytical requirements. All analyses, including sampling techniques, submitted
in support of any application, report or evidence or required by any permit or order
shall be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA.
§ 82-10. Charges and fees.
A. The Commissioners may adopt by resolution charges and fees which may include:
(1) Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the Town’s
pretreatment program.
(2) Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures.
(3) Fees for reviewing spill prevention plans and construction.
(4) Fees for permit applications.
(5) Fees for filing appeals.
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8237
(6) Fees for consistent removal (by the Town) of pollutants otherwise subject
to federal pretreatment standards.
(7) Other fees as the Town may deem necessary to carry out the requirements
contained herein.
B. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this Article and are separate
from all other fees chargeable by the Town.
§ 82-11. Users required to obtain permit.
A. Wastewater discharges. It shall be unlawful to discharge without a permit to any
natural outlet within the Town or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Town
and/or to the POTW any wastewater except as authorized by the Commissioners in
accordance with the provisions of this Article.
B. Wastewater contribution permits.
(1) The following industrial users are required to apply for a wastewater
contribution permit:
(a) Any user whose discharge would be in violation of § 82-9A(4) if
they had no permit.
(b) Any significant industrial user.
(c) Any user subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard.
(d) Any user required by state pretreatment requirements to obtain a
permit.
(e) Any user providing pretreatment.
(f) Any other user directed by the POTW to apply for a permit.
(2) Existing users required by Subsection B(1)(a) to obtain a permit must
apply for a wastewater contribution permit within ninety (90) days of the
effective date of this Article.
(3) New sources required by Subsection B(1)(a) to obtain a permit must apply
for and receive a wastewater contribution permit prior to discharging
pollutants into the POTW. A “new source” is considered any source the
construction of which is commenced after the publication of proposed
regulations prescribing a categorical pretreatment standard which will be
applicable to such source. See Section 307(c) of 33 U.S.C. § 1347.
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8238
(4) Any user not required to obtain a permit for existing discharges must apply
for and receive a wastewater contribution permit prior to changing the
user’s discharge in such a manner that the resulting discharge would
require a permit.
C. Permit application. Users required to obtain a wastewater contribution permit
shall complete and file with the Town an application in the form prescribed by the
Town accompanied by a fee as set by resolution of the Commissioners. In support
of the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for
evaluation, the following information:
(1) Name, address and location of contributing plant or facility.
(2) Standard industrial classification (SIC) number according to the Standard
Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended.
(3) Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including but not limited to
those mentioned in § 82-9, as determined by a reliable analytical
laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
procedures established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act
and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as amended.
(4) Time and duration of contribution.
(5) Average daily and thirty-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including
daily, monthly and seasonal variations if any.
(6) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show
all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by the size, location and
elevation.
(7) Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises,
including all materials which are or could be discharged.
(8) The nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharges which are
limited by any national categorical pretreatment standard or any
pretreatment requirement and a statement regarding whether or not the
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional
pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment
standards.
(9) If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will be
required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by
which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion
date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8239
for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall
apply to this schedule:
(a) The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events
leading to the construction and operation of additional
pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable
pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for
major components, commencing construction, completing
construction, etc.).
(b) No increment referred to in Subsection C(9) shall exceed nine (9)
months.
(c) Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the
schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a
progress report to the Superintendent, including, as a minimum,
whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be
met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to
comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay and
the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the
schedule established. In no event shall more than nine (9)
months elapse between such progress reports to the Town.
(10)Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of
production.
(11)Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per
day).
(12)Number and type of employees and hours of operation of plant and
proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system.
(13)Name and address of the individual(s) authorized to accept service of
process or other notice in behalf of the applicant.
(14)Any other information as may be deemed by the Town to be necessary to
evaluate the permit application.
D. Wastewater contribution permit required. After one hundred eighty (180) days
from the effective date of this Article, it shall be unlawful for a user subject to a
national categorical pretreatment standard or other significant industrial user or
any other user directed to apply for a permit by the Town to discharge wastewater
into the POTW except in accordance with the terms and conditions of a
wastewater contribution permit.
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8240
E. Permit conditions. Wastewater contribution permits shall be expressly subject to
all provisions of this Article and all other applicable regulations, user charges and
fees established by the Town. Permits may contain the following:
(1) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to
be discharged to the POTW.
(2) Effluent limitations on the average and maximum wastewater constituents
and characteristics.
(3) Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization.
(4) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling
facilities.
(5) Requirements and specifications for monitoring programs, which may
include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and
standards for tests and reporting schedule.
(6) Compliance schedules.
(7) Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports;
these reports include any reporting requirements contained in a national
categorical standard or pretreatment requirement.
(8) Requirements for collecting, retaining and providing access to plant
records relating to the user’s discharge.
(9) Requirements for notification to the Town on any new introduction of
wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or
character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the
wastewater treatment system.
(10)Requirements for notification of spills.
(11)Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Town to ensure compliance
with this Article.
F. Basis for effluent limitations.
(1) Effluent limitations shall be based upon the more stringent of the
following:
(a) National categorical pretreatment standards;
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8241
(b) State pretreatment requirements; or
(c) Local limitations calculated by mass balance or other valid
scientific method necessary to protect the POTW from materials
described in § 82-9.
(2) The POTW may exempt a user from local limitations as long as the POTW
does not violate the applicable NPDES or state discharge permit.
G. Periodic compliance reports. Any user subject to a national categorical
pretreatment standard shall submit to the Town a semiannual report indicating the
nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge by such standards. The
specific standards or the POTW itself may require this report to be filed more
frequently. In addition, this report shall include a report of all daily flows which,
during the reporting period, exceeded the average daily flow in the permit.
H. Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period not to exceed
five (5) years. The user shall apply for permit re-issuance a minimum of one
hundred eighty (180) days prior to the expiration of the user’s existing permit.
I. Permit modifications.
(1) Within nine (9) months of the promulgation of a national categorical
pretreatment standard or pretreatment requirement or such shorter time as
specified within the standard or requirement, the wastewater contribution
permits of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require
compliance with such standard within the time prescribed by such
standard. The user shall reapply for a wastewater contribution permit
within one hundred eighty (180) days after the promulgation of the
pretreatment standard.
(2) A user must reapply for a permit whenever the mass loading of pollutants
contained in the permitted discharge exceeds the average daily quantity
applied for by greater than ten percent (10%).
(3) A user may reapply for a wastewater contribution permit whenever the
user believes that some of the permit requirements no longer apply.
J. Permit transfer. Wastewater contribution permits are issued to a specific user for a
specific operation. A wastewater contribution permit shall not be reassigned or
transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises or a new or
changed operation without the approval of the Town.
K. Monitoring.
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8242
(1) Users shall provide and maintain at their own expense, in safe and proper
condition, facilities to allow the authorized representatives of the POTW,
EPA or the state to inspect, sample or measure flows from wastewater
subject to this Article.
(2) There shall be ample room in or near such facilities to follow accurate
sampling and preparation of samples for analysis.
(3) If locating such facilities on a user’s property would be impractical, the
user may apply to the POTW for a right-of-way or for permission to
construct on public property.
(4) Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and
monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the Town’s
requirements and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications. Construction shall be completed within ninety (90) days
following written notification to proceed by the Town.
L. Right of entry. Representatives of the POTW, the state and EPA, upon showing
proper identification, shall have the right to enter and inspect the premises of any
user who may be subject to the requirements of this Article. Industrial users
required to obtain wastewater contribution permits shall allow authorized
representatives of the POTW, state and EPA access at all reasonable times to all
premises for the purpose of inspecting, sampling, examining records or copying
records in the performance of their duties. Authorized representatives of the
POTW, state and EPA shall have the right to place on the user’s property such
devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and monitoring. Where a user has
security or safety measures in force which would require clearance, training or
wearing of special protective gear, the user shall make necessary arrangements, at
its own expense, to enable authorized representatives of the POTW, state and EPA
to enter and inspect the premises as guaranteed by this subsection.
M. Confidential information.
(1) Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from
inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agencies
without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Town that the release of such
information would divulge information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user.
(2) When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report
which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made
available for inspection except upon written request by the state or EPA
for uses related to this Article. Confidential portions of a report shall be
available for use by the state or EPA in judicial review or enforcement
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8243
proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater
constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential
information. Information accepted by the POTW as confidential shall not
be disclosed unless the user is given a ten-day notification prior thereto.
§ 82-12. Enforcement.
A. Harmful contributions.
(1) The POTW may suspend the wastewater treatment service or a wastewater
contribution permit or cut off the sewer connection when such suspension
or cutoff is necessary, in the opinion of the POTW, in order to stop an
actual or threatened discharge which:
(a) Presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment
to the health or welfare of persons;
(b) Presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment
to the environment;
(c) May cause or actually causes interference with the POTW; or
(d) Causes the POTW to violate any condition of its NPDES or state
discharge permit.
(2) The POTW may reinstate the wastewater contribution permit or the
wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the
noncomplying discharge.
(3) In the event of a suspension or cutoff under this section, within fifteen (15)
days the user shall submit a written report describing the event that caused
the suspension and the measures taken to prevent any recurrence.
B. Revocation of permit. The Town may revoke any wastewater contribution permit
pursuant to the procedures set forth in Subsection C if the Town finds that:
(1) A user has falsified information or records submitted or retained in
accordance with this Article;
(2) A user has violated the conditions of a wastewater contribution permit;
(3) A user has refused right of entry guaranteed by § 82-11L of this Article.
(4) A user has failed to reapply for a permit or to request a required permit
modification when required; or
(5) A user has discharged into the POTW in violation of this Article.
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8244
C. Show cause hearing.
(1) The Town may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized
discharge to enter the POTW to show cause before the Commissioners
why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall
be served on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held
by the Commissioners regarding the violation, the reasons why the action
is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action and directing the user to
show cause before the Commissioners why the proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served
personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at
least ten (10) days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent
or officer of a corporation.
(2) The Commissioners shall conduct the hearing and take the evidence and
may designate any of its members or the Town Administrator or Town
Attorney to issue in the name of the Commissioners notices of hearings
requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of
evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings.
(3) At any hearing held pursuant to this Article, testimony taken must be
under oath and recorded. The transcript, so recorded, will be made
available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon
payment of the cost of same.
(4) After the Commissioners have reviewed the evidence, it may issue an
order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a
specified time period of not less than three (3) days, the sewer service be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related
appurtenances shall have been installed or existing treatment facilities,
devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further
orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued.
(5) Legal action. If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other
wastes into the Town’s wastewater disposal system contrary to the
provisions of this Article, federal or state pretreatment requirements or any
order of the Town, the Town Attorney may commence an action for
appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the Circuit Court of this county.
§ 82-13. Civil and criminal penalties.
A. Civil penalties. Any user who is found to have violated an order of the
Commissioners or who negligently failed to comply with any provision of this
Article, and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, shall be
Perryville Code – Chapter 82 Water and Sewers
8245
deemed guilty of an infraction and shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.) for
each initial offense and two hundred dollars ($200.) for every subsequent offense.
Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate
and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the Town may
recover reasonable attorneys’ fees, court costs, court reporters’ fees and other
expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have
violated this Article or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder.
B. Criminal penalties.
(1) Any person who knowingly violates any provision of or fails to perform
any duty imposed by this Article or who knowingly violates any provision
of or fails to perform any duty imposed by a rule, regulation, order or
permit adopted or issued under this Article is guilty of a misdemeanor and,
on conviction, is subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars
($500.) or imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both.
(a) In addition to any criminal penalties imposed on a person
convicted under this subsection, the person may be enjoined from
continuing the violations.
(b) Each day on which a violation occurs is a separate violation
under this subsection.
(2) Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed
or required to be maintained under this Article or any rule, regulation,
order or permit adopted or issued under this Article, or who falsifies,
tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or
method required to be maintained under this Article or any rule,
regulation, order or permit adopted or issued under this Article, shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished
by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.) or by imprisonment
for not more than ninety (90) days, or by both.
§ 82-14. Severability.
If any provision, paragraph, word, section or Article of this Article is invalidated by
any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions, paragraphs, words,
sections and chapters shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect.
§ 82-15. Repealer.
All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or conflicting with any
part of this Article are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency or conflict.
Perryville Code – Chapter 83 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems
Chapter 83
AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS
§ 83-1. Definitions.
§ 83-2. Applicability.
§ 83-3. Exemptions.
§ 83-4. Requirements.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Commissioners of the Town of Perryville 4-3-
2007 as Ord. No. 2007-2. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 83-1. Definitions.
A. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following definitions describe the meaning
of the terms used in this Ordinance:
NEW RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION – shall mean and include singlefamily,
multi-family, and duplex residential dwellings; and, the placement of a
mobile or modular home.
§ 83-2. Applicability.
A. This Ordinance shall apply to every new residence, including single-family, multifamily,
and duplex dwellings, and modular homes, mobile homes, and trailers
constructed within the Town of Perryville on all existing lots and future lots, or
proposed new subdivision, for which a Zoning Certificate has not been issued as
of the effective date hereof, shall have an interior sprinkler system installed. The
requirement for interior sprinkler systems shall not apply to the rebuilding,
refurbishment, renovation or alteration of a residence in existence as of the
effective date hereof unless such existing structure is razed and replaced by a new
principal structure.
B. For purposes of this chapter, placement or erection of modular homes, mobile
homes and trailers, on an existing lot, future lot or proposed new subdivision is
considered new construction and the provisions of this chapter shall apply thereto.
8301 4 - 3 - 2007
Perryville Code – Chapter 83 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems
83 02 4 - 3 - 2007
§ 83-3. Exemptions.
The requirements of this Ordinance shall not apply to accessory or uninhabitable
structures including, but not limited to detached carports, garages, greenhouses, and
sheds.
§ 83-4. Requirements.
A. Every new residential construction on all existing and future lots and new
subdivisions within the Town of Perryville shall be required to install an interior
automatic fire sprinkler system. The interior automatic fire sprinkler system shall
be installed and maintained in accordance with the most recent version of Standard
13D as promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), as may
be modified and adopted by the Maryland State Fire Prevention Code, as amended
from time to time.
B. Interior automatic fire sprinkler systems required pursuant to this Ordinance may
be connected to the domestic water supply supplying the residence in accordance
with Section 82-6 I of the Code of the Town of Perryville, provided the water
supply is of adequate pressure, capacity, and sizing for the combined domestic and
sprinkler system requirements, and proper back flow valves are installed.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 1
CHAPTER 84 ZONING ORDINANCE
PERRYVILLE, MARYLAND
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY ...................................................................................................... 9
Section 1. Short Title ...................................................................................................................................... 9
Section 2. Authority [Amended 1/3/2017 by Ord No. 2016-21] .................................................................... 9
Section 3. Intent [Amended 1/3/2017 by Ord No. 2016-21] ........................................................................... 9
Section 4. Jurisdiction ................................................................................................................................... 10
Section 5. Severability .................................................................................................................................. 10
Section 6. Conformity with Chapter Provisions ........................................................................................... 10
Section 7. Fees .............................................................................................................................................. 11
Section 8. Reserved ...................................................................................................................................... 11
ARTICLE II BASIC DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS ................................................................. 12
Part I Definitions ............................................................................................................................................... 12
Section 9. Definitions of Basic Terms [Amended 2-18-09 by Ord. No. 2009-1; 5-6-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-02; 1/3/2017 by Ord No. 2016-21] ............................................................................................................. 12
Part II Zoning Maps ............................................................................................................................................ 38
Section 10. Official Zoning Maps ................................................................................................................... 39
Section 11. Replacement of Official Zoning Maps ......................................................................................... 40
Section 12. Interpretation ................................................................................................................................ 40
Section 13. Location and Boundaries of Zones .............................................................................................. 41
Section 14. Reserved ...................................................................................................................................... 42
ARTICLE III ADMINISTRATIVE MECHANISMS ..................................................................................... 43
Section 15. Appointment and Terms of Planning Commission Members ...................................................... 43
Section 16. Meetings of the Planning Commission ........................................................................................ 43
Section 17. Quorum and Voting ..................................................................................................................... 44
Section 18. Planning Commission Chairman ................................................................................................. 44
Section 19. Powers and Duties of Planning Commission ............................................................................... 44
Section 20. Advisory Committees .................................................................................................................. 45
Section 21. Appointments and Terms of Board of Appeals ............................................................................ 45
Section 22. Meetings of the Board of Appeals ............................................................................................... 45
Section 23. Quorum ........................................................................................................................................ 46
Section 24. Voting .......................................................................................................................................... 46
Section 25. Board of Appeals Officers ........................................................................................................... 47
Section 26. Powers and Duties of Board of Appeals ...................................................................................... 47
Section 27. Zoning Administrator .................................................................................................................. 47
Section 28. Powers and Duties of the Zoning Administrator .......................................................................... 47
Section 29. Town Commissioners .................................................................................................................. 48
Section 30. Reserved ...................................................................................................................................... 48
ARTICLE IV DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL ............................................................................................... 49
Part I Building and Zoning Permits ................................................................................................................... 49
Section 31. Permits Required.......................................................................................................................... 49
Section 32. Severability .................................................................................................................................. 50
Section 33. Computation of Time ................................................................................................................... 50
Section 34. Permit Application Requirements and Procedures ...................................................................... 50
Section 35. Certificate of Occupancy ............................................................................................................. 53
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 2
Section 36. Inspection And Supervision During Installation .......................................................................... 54
Section 37. As-Built Site Plan ........................................................................................................................ 54
Section 38. No Occupancy, Use, or Sale of Lots Until Requirements Fulfilled ............................................. 55
Section 39. Who May Submit Permit Applications ........................................................................................ 55
Section 40. Applications To Be Complete ...................................................................................................... 55
Section 41. Staff Consultation Before Formal Application ............................................................................ 56
Section 42. Staff Consultation After Application Submitted .......................................................................... 56
Section 43. Authorizing Use or Occupancy Before Completion of Development.......................................... 57
Section 44. Completing Developments in Phases ........................................................................................... 57
Section 45. Expiration Of Permits .................................................................................................................. 57
Section 46. Effect Of Permit On Successors And Assigns ............................................................................. 58
Section 47. Amendments to and Modifications of Permits............................................................................. 59
Section 48. Reconsideration Of Board Action ................................................................................................ 59
Section 49. Maintenance of Common Areas, and Facilities ........................................................................... 60
Section 50. Records of Zoning Administrators ............................................................................................... 60
Section 51. Structures And Uses To Be As Provided In Building Permits, Plans, And Certificates of
Occupancy ..................................................................................................................................................... 60
Part II Special Exception Permits ........................................................................................................................... 60
Section 52. Intent ............................................................................................................................................ 60
Section 53. Initiation of Special Exceptions ................................................................................................... 61
Section 54. Application for Special Exception ............................................................................................... 61
Section 55. Hearing on Application ................................................................................................................ 61
Section 56. Authorization ............................................................................................................................... 61
Section 57. Standards...................................................................................................................................... 62
Section 58. Effect of Denial of a Special Exception ....................................................................................... 62
Section 59. Complaints ................................................................................................................................... 63
Section 60. Revocation ................................................................................................................................... 63
Section 61. Standards for Specific Special Exceptions ................................................................................... 63
ARTICLE V APPEALS, VARIANCES, INTERPRETATIONS ..................................................................... 64
Section 62. Appeals [Amended 1/3/2017 by Ord No. 2016-21] ..................................................................... 64
Section 63. Variances ..................................................................................................................................... 64
Section 64. Interpretations .............................................................................................................................. 67
Section 65. Requests To Be Heard Expeditiously .......................................................................................... 67
Section 66. Burden of Proof in Appeals and Variances .................................................................................. 67
Section 67. Board Action on Appeals and Variances ..................................................................................... 68
ARTICLE VI HEARING PROCEDURES FOR APPEALS AND APPLICATIONS ................................. 69
Section 68. Hearing Required on Appeals and Applications .......................................................................... 69
Section 69. Notice of Hearing......................................................................................................................... 69
Section 70. Evidence ...................................................................................................................................... 69
Section 71. Modification of Application at Hearing ....................................................................................... 70
Section 72. Record .......................................................................................................................................... 70
Section 73. Written Decision .......................................................................................................................... 70
ARTICLE VII ENFORCEMENT AND REVIEW ............................................................................................... 71
Section 74. Limits of Authorization ............................................................................................................... 71
Section 75. Complaints Regarding Violations ................................................................................................ 71
Section 76. Persons Liable .............................................................................................................................. 71
Section 77. Procedures Upon Discovery of Violations ................................................................................... 71
Section 78. Penalties and Remedies for Violations [Amended 1/3/2017 by Ord No. 2016-21] ..................... 72
Section 79. Permit Revocation........................................................................................................................ 72
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 3
Section 80. Judicial Review ............................................................................................................................ 73
ARTICLE VIII NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS ........................................................................................... 74
Section 81. Intent ............................................................................................................................................ 74
Section 82. Applicability ................................................................................................................................ 74
Section 83. Definitions ................................................................................................................................... 74
Section 84. Nonconforming Lots of Record ................................................................................................... 75
Section 85. Nonconforming Uses of Land ...................................................................................................... 76
Section 86. Nonconforming Structures ........................................................................................................... 76
Section 87. Nonconforming Uses of Structures .............................................................................................. 76
Section 88. Termination of Certain Nonconformities ..................................................................................... 78
Section 89. Restoration of Unsafe Buildings .................................................................................................. 79
Section 90. Uses Not Considered Nonconforming ......................................................................................... 79
Section 91. Reserved ...................................................................................................................................... 79
ARTICLE IX ZONING DISTRICTS ............................................................................................................... 80
Part I Zoning Districts ....................................................................................................................................... 80
Section 92. Districts Established .................................................................................................................... 80
Section 93. Residential Districts ..................................................................................................................... 80
Section 94. Commercial/Business Districts .................................................................................................... 81
Section 95. Industrial Districts........................................................................................................................ 82
Section 96. Other Districts [Amended 2-18-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-1] ......................................................... 83
Part II Planned Unit Development (PUD) Floating Zone .................................................................................. 84
Section 97. Planned Unit Development in General ........................................................................................ 84
Section 98. PUD Requirements ...................................................................................................................... 84
Section 99. Administrative Procedures ........................................................................................................... 86
Part III Manufactured Home Community District (MHCD) Floating Zone ............................................................ 88
Section 100. Intent of District .......................................................................................................................... 88
Section 101. Administrative Procedures ......................................................................................................... 89
Section 102. Development Standards ............................................................................................................... 91
Section 103. Service buildings and other Community Facilities ...................................................................... 95
Section 104. Community maintenance standards - Responsibilities of Management ...................................... 95
Section 105. Responsibilities of Residents ....................................................................................................... 96
Section 106. Handling of Solid Waste ............................................................................................................. 96
Section 107. Fire Protection ............................................................................................................................. 96
Part IV Mixed Use Development (MUD) Floating Zone ........................................................................................ 97
Section 108. Purpose of the District ................................................................................................................. 97
Section 109. General Criteria ........................................................................................................................... 97
Section 110. Procedure ..................................................................................................................................... 97
Section 111. Criteria ......................................................................................................................................... 97
Section 112. Additional Conditions for Annexation Areas .............................................................................. 98
Section 113. Permitted Uses in the Mixed Use Development Floating Zone [Amended 11-4-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-04] ..................................................................................................................................................... 98
Section 114. Additional Conditions ................................................................................................................. 99
Section 115. Area and Bulk Requirements ...................................................................................................... 99
Section 116. Administrative Procedures .......................................................................................................... 99
Part IV-A. Commercial Entertainment Mixed Use Development (CEMUD) Floating Zone
[Amended 2-18-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-1] ............................................................................................................ 100
Section 116-1. Purpose of the Zone ............................................................................................................... 100
Section 116-2. Intent of the CEMUD Floating Zone. .................................................................................... 100
Section 116-3. CEMUD Floating Zone Approval Process. ............................................................................ 101
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 4
Section 116-4. CEMUD Floating Zone Designation. ..................................................................................... 101
Section 116-5. Criteria for Designation. ......................................................................................................... 101
Section 116-6. CEMUD Floating Zone Development Standards. .................................................................. 102
Section 116-7. Administrative Procedures. .................................................................................................... 104
Section 116-8. Procedures for Amendments to Approved Preliminary and Final Site Plans and General
Development Plan. ............................................................................................................................................. 110
Section 116-9. Conflict With Other Provisions. ............................................................................................... 111
Section 116-10. Permitted Uses in the CEMUD Floating Zone. ...................................................................... 112
Part IV-B. Planned Infill and Redevelopment District (PIRD) Floating Zone [Amended 1/3/2017 by
Ord No. 2016-21] .................................................................................................................................................. 112
Section 116-20. Establishment. .................................................................................................................... 112
Section 116-21. Purpose. .............................................................................................................................. 112
Section 116-22. Planned Infill and Redevelopment District Requirements. ................................................ 113
Section 116-23. Standards for Approval. ..................................................................................................... 114
Section 116-24. Applications for Planned Infill and Redevelopment Districts. ........................................... 115
Section 116-25. Procedure for Approval. ..................................................................................................... 115
Section 116-26. Mayor and Commissioners Authority. ............................................................................... 115
Section 116-27. Site Plan Approval. ............................................................................................................ 116
Section 116-28. Implementation of Approved General Development Plan. ................................................ 116
Section 116-29. Amendments. ..................................................................................................................... 116
Section 116-30. Construction. ...................................................................................................................... 117
Section 116-31. Appeals............................................................................................................................... 117
Part V Critical Area District ................................................................................................................................. 118
Section 117. Purpose ...................................................................................................................................... 118
Section 118. Implementation of the Critical Area Provisions ........................................................................ 118
Section 119. Enforcement .............................................................................................................................. 119
Section 120. Development in the Critical Area Overlay District ................................................................... 119
Section 121. Intensely Developed Areas ........................................................................................................ 121
Section 122. Limited Development Areas ...................................................................................................... 124
Section 123. Resource Conservation Areas .................................................................................................... 129
Section 124. Growth Allocation ..................................................................................................................... 131
Section 125. Grandfathering ........................................................................................................................... 135
Section 126. Intrafamily Transfers ................................................................................................................. 135
Section 127. Variances ................................................................................................................................... 137
Section 128. Critical Area Program Amendments ......................................................................................... 138
Section 129. Water Dependent Facilities ....................................................................................................... 139
Section 130. Structures on Piers ..................................................................................................................... 143
Section 131. Shore Erosion Protection Works ............................................................................................... 144
Section 132. Forest and Woodland Protection ............................................................................................... 145
Section 133. Commercial Timber Harvesting ............................................................................................... 148
Section 134. Agriculture................................................................................................................................ 150
Section 135. Surface Mining in the Critical Area .......................................................................................... 152
Section 136. Natural Parks ............................................................................................................................. 152
Section 137. Habitat Protection ...................................................................................................................... 153
Section 138. The 100-foot Buffer ................................................................................................................... 153
Section 139. Threatened and Endangered Species and Species in Need of Conservation ............................. 162
Section 140. Plant and Wildlife Habitat and Nontidal Wetlands Protection .................................................. 164
Section 141. Anadromous Fish Propagation Waters ...................................................................................... 169
Section 142. Reserved .................................................................................................................................... 170
Section 143. Reserved .................................................................................................................................... 170
Part VI Highway Corridor Overlay District .......................................................................................................... 171
Section 144. Purpose ..................................................................................................................................... 171
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 5
Section 145. Affected Development ............................................................................................................... 171
Section 146. Tree Protection .......................................................................................................................... 172
Section 147. Retention of and/or Creation of a Minimum Visual Buffer along Highway Corridor Right-of-
Ways ................................................................................................................................................... 173
Section 148. Exemptions From Buffer Requirements .................................................................................... 173
Section 149. Permitted Activity in Minimum Visual Buffer .......................................................................... 174
Section 150. Architectural Review ................................................................................................................. 175
Section 151. Waivers of Corridor Requirements ............................................................................................ 179
Section 152. Planning Commission Review................................................................................................... 179
Section 153. Plan Review Procedures of Application for Corridor Review ................................................... 180
ARTICLE X PERMISSIBLE USES ...................................................................................................................... 181
Section 154. Use of the Designations P, PC, SE and SC in the Table of Permissible Uses [Amended 1/3/2017
by Ord No. 2016-21] ......................................................................................................................................... 181
Section 155. Unclassified Uses ...................................................................................................................... 181
Section 156. Board of Appeals Jurisdiction .................................................................................................. 182
Section 157. Permissible Uses and Specific Exclusions ................................................................................ 182
Section 158. No More Than One Principal Structure on a Lot....................................................................... 183
Section 159. Accessory Uses .......................................................................................................................... 183
Section 160. Permissible Uses Not Requiring Permits ................................................................................... 185
Section 161. Permissible Uses Tables ............................................................................................................ 185
ARTICLE XI SUPPLEMENTARY USE REGULATIONS ................................................................................ 186
Section 162. Accessory Uses [Amended 1/3/2017 by Ord No. 2016-21] ...................................................... 186
Section 163. Adult Bookstore, Adult Entertainment Center, Massage and Conversation/Relaxation Parlor . 187
Section 164. Animal Boarding Places, Kennel and Veterinary Hospitals ...................................................... 187
Section 165. Antenna or Tower Greater Than 50 Feet in Height and Associated Substation [Amended
1/3/2017 by Ord No. 2016-21] .......................................................................................................................... 187
Section 166. Antique Shops ........................................................................................................................... 188
Section 167. Art or Cultural Centers [Amended 1/3/2017 by Ord No. 2016-21] ........................................... 189
Section 168. Assisted Living Facilities .......................................................................................................... 189
Section 169. Automobile Filling Stations and Emission Testing Facilities.................................................... 190
Section 170. Automobile, Motorcycle, and Motor Vehicle Repair and Maintenance, not Including Body
Work ................................................................................................................................................... 191
Section 171. Automobile Painting and Body Work ....................................................................................... 192
Section 172. Automobile and Light Truck Storage Lots ................................................................................ 192
Section 173. Automobile, Truck, and Trailer Rentals, Outdoors ................................................................... 193
Section 174. Bed and Breakfasts, Country Inns ............................................................................................. 194
Section 175. Campgrounds and Recreational Vehicle Parks .......................................................................... 194
Section 176. Car washes and Automobile Laundries ..................................................................................... 196
Section 177. Cargo Trailers and Closed-Body Trucks Used As Storage Structures ...................................... 196
Section 178. Cemeteries ................................................................................................................................. 196
Section 179. Construction Trailers, Temporary Storage Trailers, and Temporary Sales Offices ................... 197
Section 181. Drive-in Banks .......................................................................................................................... 199
Section 182. Drive-in/Fast Food Restaurants ................................................................................................. 200
Section 183. Dwelling - Manufactured Home - Double-wide ........................................................................ 201
Section 184. Dwelling - Manufactured Home - Single-wide ......................................................................... 201
Section 185. Education Institutions, Private ................................................................................................... 201
Section 186. Excavation, Borrow Pits, Extraction, Removal of Sand, Gravel or Stone, Stripping of Topsoil .....
................................................................................................................................................. 203
Section 187. Festivals, Events of Public Interest or Special Events, Occasional, Outdoor [Amended 1/3/2017
by Ord No. 2016-21] ......................................................................................................................................... 203
Section 188. Funeral Parlors, Undertaking Establishments, or Mortuaries .................................................... 204
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 6
Section 188.1. Gaming Establishment [Amended 2-18-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-1] ....................................... 205
Section 189. Greenhouses, Commercial Nurseries ........................................................................................ 205
Section 191. Golf Driving Range ................................................................................................................... 206
Section 192. Home-Based Business .............................................................................................................. 207
Section 193. Hospitals, Clinics and Other Medical Treatment Facilities [Amended 1/3/2017 by Ord No.
2016-21] ................................................................................................................................................... 209
Section 194. Hotels and Motels ...................................................................................................................... 212
Section 195. Housing for the Elderly or Handicapped [Amended 1/3/2017 by Ord No. 2016-21] ................ 212
Section 196. Marinas and Yacht Clubs .......................................................................................................... 213
Section 197. Spas and Health Clubs [Amended 1/3/2017 by Ord No. 2016-21] ........................................... 213
Section 198. Reserved .................................................................................................................................... 214
Section 199. Mini-warehouses ....................................................................................................................... 214
Section 200. Neighborhood Motor Vehicle Service Station or Garage ......................................................... 215
Section 201. Nurseries in Residential Districts .............................................................................................. 215
Section 202. Pet Shops ................................................................................................................................... 215
Section 203. Public Utility Buildings and Public Utility Structures ............................................................... 215
Section 204. Recreational Uses ...................................................................................................................... 217
Section 205. Residential Structures - Single-Family Attached and Multiple Units [Amended 9-2-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-2; 11-4-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-04; 1/3/2017 by Ord No. 2016-21] ......................................... 218
Section 206. Restaurants, Standard and Carry-out/Delivery [Amended 1/3/2017 by Ord No. 2016-21] ....... 221
Section 207. Restaurant Accessory Uses [Amended 1/3/2017 by Ord No. 2016-21] .................................... 221
Section 208. Taverns, Bar, Places Serving Alcoholic Beverages [Amended 1/3/2017 by Ord No. 2016-21]222
Section 209. Retail Establishments in a Group of Multiple-family Dwellings .............................................. 223
Section 210. Retail Establishments in an Office Building.............................................................................. 223
Section 211. Satellite Dish Antennas or Receive-only Earth Stations............................................................ 224
Section 212. Shopping Centers and Malls ...................................................................................................... 225
Section 213. Social, Fraternal Clubs and Lodges, Philanthropic Institutions ................................................. 226
Section 214. Development Standards in the TC District ................................................................................ 227
Section 215. Special Development Standards for the NB Neighborhood Commercial District ..................... 231
Section 216. Special Development Standards in the C-2 Commercial District [Amended 1/3/2017 by Ord No.
2016-21] ................................................................................................................................................... 232
Section 217. Special Development Standards in the L-1 Limited Industrial District ..................................... 234
Section 218. Special Development Standards in the L-2 Light Industrial District ......................................... 235
Section 219. Swimming Pools, Commercial .................................................................................................. 235
Section 220. Swimming Pools, Community ................................................................................................... 236
Section 221. Temporary Emergency Construction, or Repair of Residence .................................................. 236
Section 222. Highway Corridor Unified Development [Amended May 6, 2014 Ordinance 2014-02] .......... 237
Section 223. Tattoo Services [Amended 1/3/2017 by Ord No. 2016-21] ......................................................... 240
Section 224. Reserved .................................................................................................................................... 240
Section 225. Reserved .................................................................................................................................... 240
Section 226. Reserved .................................................................................................................................... 240
Section 227. Reserved .................................................................................................................................... 240
Section 228. Reserved .................................................................................................................................... 240
Section 229. Reserved .................................................................................................................................... 240
ARTICLE XII DENSITY AND DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS.................................................................. 241
Section 230. Minimum Lot Size ..................................................................................................................... 241
Section 231. Residential Density .................................................................................................................... 241
Section 232. Minimum Lot Widths ................................................................................................................ 241
Section 233. Building Requirements [Amended 1/3/2017 by Ord No. 2016-21]........................................... 242
Section 234. Building Height Limitations [Amended 11-16-2007 by Res. No. 2007-17] ............................. 247
Section 235. Density on Lots Where Portion Dedicated to the Town ............................................................ 248
Section 236. Reserved ................................................................................................................................... 249
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 7
Section 237. Reserved ................................................................................................................................... 249
Section 238. Schedule of Zone Regulations [Amended 9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-2] ................................ 250
ARTICLE XIII RECREATIONAL FACILITIES AND OPEN SPACE ........................................................... 252
Section 239. Neighborhood Parks Required................................................................................................... 252
Section 240. Neighborhood Parks: Purpose and Standards ............................................................................ 252
Section 241. Provision of Common Open Space ........................................................................................... 253
Section 242. Open Space Requirement - Ownership...................................................................................... 253
Section 243. Management of Common Open Space Property ....................................................................... 254
Section 244. Bond for Improvements ............................................................................................................. 254
Section 245. Homeowners Associations ........................................................................................................ 255
Section 246. Flexibility in Administration Authorized .................................................................................. 255
ARTICLE XIV UTILITIES AND IMPROVEMENTS ....................................................................................... 256
Section 247. Utility Ownership and Easement Rights .................................................................................... 256
Section 248. Underground Utilities ................................................................................................................ 256
Section 249. Utilities To Be Consistent With Internal and External Development ........................................ 256
Section 250. Electric Service .......................................................................................................................... 256
Section 251. Lighting Requirements .............................................................................................................. 257
Section 252. Lighting Standards .................................................................................................................... 257
Section 253. Sites For and Screening of Dumpsters....................................................................................... 258
Section 254. Curbs and Gutters ...................................................................................................................... 259
ARTICLE XV SIGNS [Amended 7-10-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-3] ...................................................................... 260
Section 255. General Regulations .................................................................................................................. 260
Section 256. Permitted Signs and Standards for the R-1, R-2, and R-3 Districts ........................................... 261
Section 257. Permitted Signs and Standards for the NB District ................................................................... 261
Section 258. Permitted Signs and Standards for the TC and RM Districts .................................................... 262
Section 259. Permitted Signs and Standards for the C-2, CM-1 and CM-2 Districts ..................................... 264
Section 260. Permitted Signs and Standards for the L-1 and L-2 Districts .................................................... 264
Section 261. Master Signage Plan .................................................................................................................. 265
Section 262. Signs Excluded From Regulation .............................................................................................. 266
Section 263. Certain Temporary Signs: Permit Exemptions and Additional Regulations [Amended 1/3/2017
by Ord No. 2016-21] ......................................................................................................................................... 267
Section 264. Sign Illumination and Signs Containing Light .......................................................................... 268
Section 265. Location and Height Requirements ........................................................................................... 269
Section 266. Miscellaneous Restrictions and Prohibitions ............................................................................. 269
Section 267. Maintenance of Signs ................................................................................................................ 270
Section 268. Unlawful Cutting of Trees or Shrubs ........................................................................................ 270
Section 269. Non-conforming Signs .............................................................................................................. 271
Section 270. Banners, Pennants and Special Event Signs .............................................................................. 272
Section 271. Permitted Signs and Standards for CEMUD Floating Zone [Amended 2-18-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-1] ............................................................................................................................................... 274
ARTICLE XVI PARKING ..................................................................................................................................... 275
Section 273. Definitions ................................................................................................................................. 275
Section 274. Number of Parking Spaces Required ......................................................................................... 275
Section 275. Flexibility in Administration Required ...................................................................................... 278
Section 276. Parking Space Dimensions ........................................................................................................ 278
Section 277. Required Widths of Parking area Aisles and Driveways ........................................................... 279
Section 278. General Design Requirements ................................................................................................... 279
Section 279. Vehicle Accommodation Area Surfaces .................................................................................... 281
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 8
Section 280. Joint Use of Required Parking Spaces ....................................................................................... 281
Section 281. Satellite Parking ........................................................................................................................ 282
Section 282. Special Provisions For Lots With Existing Buildings ............................................................... 282
Section 283. Loading and Unloading Areas ................................................................................................... 283
Section 284. Parking facilities for the Physically Handicapped ..................................................................... 284
Section 285. Reserved .................................................................................................................................... 285
ARTICLE XVII SCREENING, SHADING, LANDSCAPING and ENVIRONMENTAL STANDARDS .... 286
Part I Buffers .................................................................................................................................................... 286
Section 286. Purpose ...................................................................................................................................... 286
Section 287. Location of Buffer yards ........................................................................................................... 286
Section 288. Determination of Required Buffer yard ..................................................................................... 286
Section 289. Responsibility for Buffer yards ................................................................................................. 287
Section 290. Tables of Required Buffer yards ............................................................................................... 287
Section 291. Buffer yard Requirements ......................................................................................................... 288
Section 292. Buffer yard Use ......................................................................................................................... 288
Section 293. Ownership of Buffer yards ........................................................................................................ 288
Section 294. Buffer yards Which Exceed Minimum Requirements ............................................................... 288
Section 295. Contractual Reduction of Buffer yards ...................................................................................... 289
Part II Shading ..................................................................................................................................................... 289
Section 296. Town Findings and Declaration of Policy: Shade Trees ........................................................... 289
Section 297. Required Trees Along Dedicated Streets ................................................................................... 290
Section 298. Retention and Protection of Large Trees ................................................................................... 290
Part III Landscape Standards ................................................................................................................................ 290
Section 299. Plan Requirements for Landscaping and Screening .................................................................. 290
Section 300. Landscaping Materials ............................................................................................................... 292
Section 301. Shade Trees ............................................................................................................................... 293
Section 302. Understory (Decorative) Trees .................................................................................................. 293
Section 303. Evergreen Trees ......................................................................................................................... 294
Section 304. Shrubs ........................................................................................................................................ 294
Section 305. Alternatives and Additional Landscape Requirements .............................................................. 294
Section 306. Complementary Plantings ......................................................................................................... 295
Part IV Landscaping of Parking Facilities ........................................................................................................... 295
Section 307. Intent .......................................................................................................................................... 295
Section 308. Sites Affected ............................................................................................................................ 295
Section 309. Perimeter Landscaping .............................................................................................................. 296
Section 310. Interior Landscaping for Parking Lots ....................................................................................... 297
Part V Environmental Standards for Sensitive Areas ........................................................................................... 299
Section 311. Environmental Standards ........................................................................................................... 299
ARTICLE XVIII AMENDMENTS ....................................................................................................................... 302
Section 312. Amendments In General ............................................................................................................ 302
Section 313. Initiation of Amendments .......................................................................................................... 302
Section 314. Planning Commission Consideration of Proposed Amendments [Amended 1/3/2017 by Ord No.
2016-21] ................................................................................................................................................... 302
Section 315. Hearing Required; Notice [Amended 1/3/2017 by Ord No. 2016-21] ...................................... 303
Section 316. Mayor and Town Commissioners Action on Amendments ....................................................... 303
Section 317. Amendments for Floating Zones ............................................................................................... 304
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 9
ARTICLE I PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY
Section 1. Short Title
This Chapter shall be known, cited, and referred to as the Town of Perryville Zoning Chapter.
Section 2. Authority [Amended 1/3/2017 by Ord No. 2016-21]
This Chapter is enacted under the authority granted by the General Assembly of Maryland, as provided in
The Land Use Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, as amended.
Section 3. Intent [Amended 1/3/2017 by Ord No. 2016-21]
1. This Chapter is intended to promote the orderly development of the Town of Perryville, Maryland
in accordance with the Perryville Comprehensive Plan or any of the component parts thereof and
in compliance with the Land Use Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, as amended. It is
also the intent of this Chapter that the extent of its applicability shall be automatically changed in
accordance with the provisions hereof or with any provision of State Law which may hereinafter
affect the applicability of this Chapter.
2. The purpose of this Zoning Chapter is to promote the health, safety, order, convenience and
general welfare of the citizens of the Town in accordance with present and future needs as
expressed in the Perryville Comprehensive Plan and to implement the recommendations of the
Perryville Comprehensive Plan. It is the further purpose of this Zoning Chapter to provide for
economic and efficient land development, encourage the most appropriate use of land, provide
convenient and safe movement of people and goods, control the distribution and density of
population to areas where necessary public service can be provided, protect historic and
environmental areas, encourage good civic design, and provide for adequate public utilities,
facilities, and services.
3. The objective of this Chapter is to implement the "Visions" contained in the Maryland Growth
Management, Resource Protection and Economic Development Act, namely:
a. Development is concentrated in suitable areas;
b. Sensitive areas are protected;
c. In rural areas, growth is directed to existing population centers and resource areas are
protected;
d. Stewardship of the Chesapeake Bay and the land is a universal ethic;
e. Conservation of resources, including a reduction in resource consumption, is practiced;
f. Economic growth is encouraged and regulatory mechanisms are streamlined;
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 10
g. Adequate public facilities and infrastructure under the control of the Town are available
or planned in areas where growth is to occur; and
h. Funding mechanisms are addressed to achieve these “Visions.”
4. The regulations and provisions contained in this Zoning Chapter were adopted and became
effective on January 20, 2005.
Section 4. Jurisdiction
1. Except as provided for in Subsection 2 below, this Chapter shall apply to all land, structures and
buildings within the corporate limits of the Town of Perryville, including all submerged lands and
water areas.
2. This Chapter shall not apply to land, structures and buildings owned by or leased solely to the
Federal Government, State of Maryland, Cecil County Commissioners, or the Town of Perryville,
provided that such land, structure or building is used for the sole purpose of providing a public
service or carrying out a legitimate government function.
Section 5. Severability
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Town Commissioners that the sections, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Chapter are severable, and if any such section, paragraph, sentence,
clause, or phrase is declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction
in a valid judgment or decree, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining
sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this Chapter since the same would have been
enacted without the incorporation into this Chapter of such unconstitutional or invalid section, paragraph,
sentence, clause, or phrase.
Section 6. Conformity with Chapter Provisions
The regulations set by this Chapter within each zone shall be minimum regulations and shall apply
uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, except and particularly as hereinafter provided:
1. No building, structure or land shall hereinafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure
or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered
externally, unless in conformity with all the regulations herein specified for the zoning district in
which it is located.
2. No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered to: exceed the height;
accommodate or house a greater number of families; occupy a greater percentage of lot area; or
have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards or other open spaces than herein
required, or in any other manner contrary to the provisions of this Chapter.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 11
3. No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required about or in
connection with any building for the purpose of complying with this Chapter shall be included as
part of a yard, open space or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other
building.
4. No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this Chapter shall be reduced in dimension or
area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective
date of this Chapter shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this Chapter.
5. Roads shall be located to avoid disturbances to habitat protection areas as described in the Town
of Perryville Critical Area Program. When no alternative exists and such infrastructure must
cross or be located in a habitat protection area, the developer shall demonstrate how impacts to
habitats have been minimized and that no feasible alternative location of such infrastructure
exists.
6. It is the intent of this Chapter that it be interpreted as excluding any use that is not expressly
permitted whether as a permitted, accessory, or special exception use.
Section 7. Fees
1. The Town shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses and a collection procedure for
applications for zoning appeal cases, zoning and map amendments, permits, site plans, and other
matters pertaining to this Chapter. Such schedule shall be posted at the Town. The Town
Commissioners may amend the fee schedule by resolution.
2. These fees may include the cost of the consulting services of an independent engineer, architect,
landscape architect, land planner or similar service as may be used to assist the Town in the
review of proposed development and improvement plans.
3. Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on
any application or appeal pertaining to this Chapter.
Section 8. Reserved
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 12
ARTICLE II BASIC DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS
Part I Definitions
Section 9. Definitions of Basic Terms [Amended 2-18-09 by Ord. No. 2009-1; 5-6-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-02; 1/3/2017 by Ord No. 2016-21]
1. Unless otherwise specifically provided, or unless clearly required by the context, the words and
phrases defined in this section shall have the meaning indicated when used in this Chapter.
2. To amplify and clarify all provisions of this Chapter, the following rules shall apply:
a. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words used in the singular
number shall include the plural number, and the plural number shall include the singular
number, unless the obvious construction of the wording indicates otherwise.
b. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
c. The word "may" is permissive.
d. The word "lot" shall include the words "piece", "parcel" and "plots"; the word "building"
includes all other structures of every kind regardless of similarity to buildings; and the
phrase "used for" shall include the phrase "arranged for" and "occupied for".
e. All "measured distances" shall be to the nearest "integral foot". If a fraction is one-half
foot or less, the "integral foot" next above shall be taken.
f. Words and terms not defined herein shall be interpreted in accord with their normal
dictionary meaning and customary usage.
Accessory Building - an accessory building is a subordinate building or a portion of the main building,
the use of which is clearly incidental to or customarily found in connection with, and (except as otherwise
provided in this Chapter) located on the same lot as the main building or principal use of the land.
Accessory Use - an accessory use is one which is clearly incidental to or customarily found in connection
with, and (except as otherwise provided in this Chapter) on the same lot as the principal use of the
premises. When "accessory" is used in the text, it shall have the same meaning as "Accessory Use".
Acre - a commonly referred to measurement of area, which equals 43,560 square feet.
Acreage - A parcel of land, regardless of area, described by metes and bounds, which is not a numbered
lot on any recorded subdivision.
Activity - Any business, industry, trade, occupation, vocation, profession, or other use conducted or
carried on either within a building or covered area, or outdoors on any tract or parcel of land. For zoning
purposes, an activity shall be considered separately from any building or structure in which such activity
may be conducted.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 13
Afforestation - The establishment of a tree crop on an area from which it has always or very long been
absent, or the planting of open areas that are not presently in forest cover.
Agricultural Easement - A non-possessory interest in land which restricts the conversion of use of the
land, preventing non-agricultural uses.
Agriculture - All methods of production and management of livestock, crops, vegetation, and soil. This
includes, but is not limited to, the related activities of tillage, fertilization, pest control, harvesting, and
marketing. It also includes, but is not limited to, the activities of feeding, housing, and maintaining of
animals such as cattle, dairy cows, sheep, goats, hogs, horses, and poultry and handling their by-products.
Alley - a narrow public thoroughfare which provides only a secondary means of access to abutting
properties and is not intended for general traffic circulation.
Alteration - Any change in the total floor area, use adaptability or external appearance of an existing
structure.
Amend or Amendments - Any repeal, modification or addition to a regulation; any new regulation; any
change in the number, shape, boundary or area of a zone; or any repeal or abolition of any map, part
thereof or addition thereto.
Anadromous Fish - Fish that travel upstream (from their primary habitat in the ocean) to freshwater in
order to spawn.
Antenna - Equipment designed to transmit or receive electronic signals.
Apartment - A part of a building containing cooking facilities and separate bathroom facilities consisting
of a room or group of rooms intended, designed, and used as a residence by an individual or a single
family.
Apartment House - same as "Dwelling, Multiple-Family".
Aquaculture - The farming or culturing of fin-fish, shellfish, other aquatic plants or animals, or both, in
lakes, streams, inlets, estuaries, and other natural or artificial water bodies or impoundments. Activities
include the hatching, cultivating, planting, feeding, raising, and harvesting of aquatic plants and animals
and the maintenance and construction of necessary equipment, buildings, and growing areas. Cultivation
methods include, but are not limited to, seed or larvae development and grow-out facilities, fish pens,
shellfish rafts, racks and longlines, seaweed floats and the culture of clams and oysters on tidelands and
sub-tidal areas. For the purpose of this definition, related activities such as wholesale and retail sales,
processing and product storage facilities are not considered aquacultural practices.
Area, Gross - all the area within a development plan or plat including area intended for residential use,
local access streets or alleys, off-street parking spaces, recreation areas, or floodplains.
Assisted Living - A residential facility-based program licensed by the State of Maryland that provides
housing and supportive services, supervision, personalized assistance, heath-related services or a
combination of these services to meet the needs of the residents who are unable to perform, or who need
assistance in performing, the activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living, in a way
that promotes optimum dignity and independence for the residents.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 14
Automobile Filling Station - Any building, structure or area of land used for the retail sale of automobile
fuels, oils, and accessories and where repair service, if any, is incidental.
Banner - Any sign exposed to the weather and which is made from or on cloth or other limp material.
National, state, or municipal flags shall not be considered banners.
Barren Land - Unmanaged land having sparse vegetation.
Base Flood - The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Also
known as the 100-year flood.
Basement - That portion of a building between the floor and ceiling which is wholly or partly below
grade and having more than ½ of its height below grade.
Bed and Breakfast Facility - A building, other than a hotel, motel, rooming house or restaurant,
containing a single dwelling unit, in which rooms are offered to the traveling public for temporary
occupancy not exceeding 30 days at any one visit and where the breakfast meal is provided as a part of
the room rental charge. All such operations shall have a resident family living on the premises and shall
be approved for such use by the Cecil County Health Department and Fire Marshal.
Best Management Practices (BMPs) - Conservation practices or systems of practices and management
measures that control soil loss and reduce water quality degradation caused by nutrients, animal waste,
toxic substances, and sediment. Agricultural BMPs include, but are not limited to, strip cropping,
terracing, contour stripping, grass waterways, animal waste structures, ponds, minimal tillage, grass and
naturally vegetated filter strips, and proper nutrient application measures.
Billboard (See Sign) - A structure on which portrays information which directs attention to a business
commodity, service or entertainment not necessarily related to the other uses permitted on the premises
upon which the structure is located, not including painted walls.
Block Face - One side of a street between two consecutive intersections. For example, a block-face can
be one side of a town block.
Board - The Board of Appeals of the Town of Perryville which is authorized to grant special exceptions
and variances, to hear appeals from administrative decisions and to provide interpretations as provided in
this Chapter.
Bona Fide Intra-family Transfer - A transfer to a member of the owner's immediate family of a portion
of the owner's property for the purpose of establishing a residence for that family member.
Buffer - An area within a property or site, generally adjacent to and parallel with the property line, either
consisting of existing natural vegetation or created by the installation of trees, shrubs, berms, and/or
fences, and designed to limit views and sounds from the development tract to adjacent properties and vice
versa.
Buffer, Critical Area (spelled with a capital B) - A naturally vegetated area or vegetated area established
or managed to protect aquatic, wetland shoreline, and terrestrial environments from man-made
disturbances. In the Critical Area Overlay District, the minimum Buffer is a continuous area located
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 15
immediately landward of tidal waters (measured from the Mean High Water Line), tributary streams in
the Critical Area, and tidal wetlands and has a minimum width of 100 feet.
Buffer Management Plan - A plan designed and intended to describe methods and means used to
achieve and enhance the water quality and habitat functions of the Buffer.
Building - Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the housing or enclosure of
persons or property of any kind.
Building, Accessory - A minor building that is located on the same lot as a principal building and is used
incidentally to a principal building or houses a use incidental to the principal use of the premises.
Building, Floor area of - The total number of square feet area in a building, excluding cellars, uncovered
steps, and uncovered porches, but including the total floor area of accessory buildings on the same lot.
Building, Height of - The vertical distance from the highest point of a structure, excepting chimney or
antenna on a building, to the average ground level of the grade where the walls or other structural
elements intersect the ground.
Building Line - A line beyond which the foundation wall and/or any porch, vestibule, or other portion of
a building shall not project, unless otherwise provided for in this Chapter
Building, Main - any building which is not an accessory building.
Building, Principal - The primary building on a lot or a building that houses a principal use.
Build-to Line - An alignment which dictates the front yard setback from a street or public right-of-way,
to be followed by buildings or structures fronting thereon. The build-to line does not apply to building
projections or recesses.
Casino – A building in which gaming is the predominant activity conducted.
Child Care Center - any place, home, or institution which receives 5 or more children under the age of
14-years, and not of common parentage, for care apart from their natural parents, legal guardians, or
custodians, when received for regular periods of time for compensation provided that this definition shall
not include public or private schools organized, operated, or approved under Maryland laws, custody of
children fixed by a court of competent jurisdiction, children related by blood or marriage within the third
degree to the custodial person, or to churches or other religious or public institutions caring for children
within the institutional building while their parents or legal guardians are attending services, activities, or
meetings. The term includes day nurseries and kindergartens.
Child Care Home - a home for not more than 9 orphaned, abandoned, dependent, abused, or neglected
children, together with not more than 2 adults, who supervise such children, all of whom live together as a
single housekeeping unit.
Child Care Institution - an institutional facility housing more than 9 orphaned, abandoned, dependent,
abused, or neglected children.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 16
Clear-cutting - The removal of the entire stand of trees in one cutting with tree reproduction obtained by
natural seeding from adjacent stands or from trees that were cut, from advanced regeneration or stump
sprouts, or from planting of seeds or seedlings by man.
Clinic – A freestanding health care facility that is not licensed as a hospital, part of a hospital, or nursing
home and is not administratively part of a physician’s or osteopath’s office, but which has a separate staff
functioning under the direction of a clinic administrator or health officer and is organized and operated to
provide ambulatory or outpatient health services licensed under Health and Mental Hygiene.
Clinic Services – Preventative, diagnostic, therapeutic, rehabilitative, or palliative items or services
furnished by or under the direction of a licensed physician in a clinic.
Club, Private - Buildings and facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association, person, or
persons, for social, educational or recreational purpose, but not primarily for profit which accrues to any
individual and not primarily to render a service which is customarily carried on in a business.
Cluster Development - a residential development to which dwelling units are concentrated in a selected
area or selected areas of the development tract so as to provide natural habitat or other open space uses on
the remainder.
Colonial Nesting Water Birds - herons, egrets, terns, and glossy ibis. For the purposes of nesting, these
birds congregate (that is "colonize") in relatively few areas, at which time, the regional populations of
these species are highly susceptible to local disturbances.
Commercial - A type of activity where goods or services are sold or traded with the expectation of profit
or gain.
Commercial Harvesting - a commercial operation that would alter the existing composition or profile, or
both, of a forest, including all commercial cutting operations done by companies and private individuals
for economic gain.
Commission - the Planning Commission of the Town of Perryville.
Commissioners - Mayor and Commissioners of Perryville, Maryland.
Common Area - Any open space, private road or other land, structure or improvement, which is designed
or reserved for the common use or benefit of the owners of two or more lots. "Common area" does not
include any public road or other land, structure or improvement owned by the Town or the State of
Maryland or any other governmental agency.
Community Piers - Boat docking facilities associated with subdivisions and other similar residential
areas, condominiums, and apartments. Private piers are excluded from this definition.
Compatibility - Provision of exemplary site design, architectural design and high quality materials that
are compatible with, and does not negatively alter the character of, the existing neighborhood.
Comprehensive Plan/The Comprehensive Plan of Perryville, Maryland - A document consisting of
written and mapped information, adopted by the Mayor and Town Commissioners, and intended to guide
the physical development of Perryville, including all changes and additions to the plan.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 17
Condominium - A form of ownership consisting of an undivided interest in common with other owners
in a portion of a parcel of real property, together with separate interest in space in a building, such as a
townhouse, apartment or office, established pursuant to Maryland law. A condominium may include, in
addition, a separate interest in other portions of such real property.
Conservation Easement - A non-possessory interest in land that restricts the manner in which the land
may be developed in an effort to conserve natural resources for future use.
Convenience Store - A one-story, retail establishment containing less than 2,000 square feet of gross
floor area that is designed and stocked to sell primarily food, beverages, and other household supplies to
customers who purchase only a relatively few items (in contrast to a "supermarket"). It is designed to
attract and depends upon a large volume of stop-and-go traffic. Illustrative examples of convenience
stores are those operated by the "Fast Fare," "7-11" and "Pantry" chains.
Country Inn - A building containing not more than fifteen (15) individual rooms or suites of rooms for
the purpose of providing overnight lodging facilities not to exceed 30 consecutive days to the general
public for compensation which also offers dining facilities for guests.
Coverage - The percentage of the lot covered by the area of all buildings and structures.
Critical Area - All lands and waters defined in Section 8-1807 of the Natural Resources Article,
Annotated Code of Maryland. They include:
a. All waters and lands under the Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries to the head of tide as indicated
on the State Wetlands Maps, and all State and private wetlands designated under Title 9 of the
Natural Resources Article, Annotated Code of Maryland;
b. All land and water areas within 1,000 feet beyond the landward boundaries of State or private
wetlands and the heads of tides designated under Title 9 of the Natural Resources Article,
Annotated Code of Maryland.
c. Modifications to these areas through inclusions or exclusions proposed by local jurisdictions and
approved by the Critical Areas Commission as specified in Section 8-1807 of the Natural
Resources Article, Annotated Code of Maryland.
Dedication - The transfer of property from private to public ownership as may be required to provide for
the public health, safety, or welfare.
Deed Restriction - A private legal restriction and/or covenant on the use of land, contained within a deed
of property or otherwise formally recorded in the Land Records of Cecil County, Maryland. These
restrictions or covenants are designed to control the use of specific property and enforcement of these is
through private civil action. Deed restrictions are not enforced by the Town of Perryville, unless it is
Perryville, Maryland that records said deed restrictions.
Density - The number of principal dwelling units allowed per acre of gross area of a development. For
purposes of the Chapter, density is determined by dividing the gross site acres by the minimum lot area
per family for each zoning district set forth in the Schedule of Zone Regulations (Section 238).
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 18
Developed Woodlands - Areas one acre or more in size that predominantly contain trees and natural
vegetation and that also include residential, commercial, or industrial structures and uses.
Developer - A person who is responsible for any undertaking that requires a zoning permit, conditionaluse
permit, sign permit, site plan, or subdivision approval.
Development /Development Activities (includes the term "develop") - Any construction,
modification, extension or expansion of buildings or structures; placement of fill or dumping; storage of
materials; land excavation; land clearing; land improvement; or any combination thereof, including the
subdivision of land or action that results in construction, modification, extension or expansion of
buildings or structures; placement of fill or dumping; storage of materials; land excavation; land clearing;
land improvement; or any combination thereof, including the subdivision of land.
Development Envelope - Developed portion of a parcel or tract of land that encompasses all lots,
structures, required buffers exclusive of the tidewater buffer if it is at least 300 feet deep, impervious
surfaces, utilities, storm water management measures, on-site sewage disposal measures, any areas
subject to human use as active recreation areas, and any additional acreage needed to meet the
development requirements of the Perryville Critical Area Program.
District, Zoning - any section of the Town of Perryville within which the zoning regulations are uniform.
Documented Breeding Bird Areas - Forested areas where the occurrence of interior dwelling birds,
during the breeding season, has been demonstrated as a result of on-site surveys using standard biological
survey techniques.
Drinking Places, Alcoholic Beverages – Establishments including bars, taverns, and pubs primarily
engaged in preparing and serving alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption. These establishments may
also provide limited food services.
Driveway - That portion of the vehicle accommodation area that consists of a travel lane bounded on
either side by an area that is not part of the vehicle accommodation area.
Duplex - A two-family residential use in which the dwelling units share a common wall (including
without limitation the wall of an attached garage or porch) and in which each dwelling unit has living
space on the ground floor and a separate, ground floor entrance.
Dwelling - Any building or portion thereof, designed or used for residential purposes, except trailers or
mobile homes.
Dwelling, Attached - A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one or more sides by a party
wall or walls.
Dwelling, Multi-Family - A structure arranged or designed to be occupied by 3 or more families on a
single parcel or on contiguous parcels under the same ownership.
Dwelling, Single-Family - a building designed for or occupied exclusively by one family.
Dwelling Unit – A dwelling unit is a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for at
least one person including permanent provisions for sanitation, cooking, eating, sleeping, and other
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 19
activities routinely associated with daily life. Dwelling unit includes a living quarters for a domestic or
other employee or tenant, an in-law or accessory apartment, a guest house, or caretaker residence.
Ecosystem - A more or less self-contained biological community together with the physical environment
in which the community's organisms occur.
Electronic Message – Computer programmable sign capable of displaying words, symbols, figures, or
picture images that can be altered or rearranged on site or by remote means without altering the face or
surface of the sign.
Emergency Services - Fire, rescue, ambulance and police services including related structures and
activities.
Endangered Species - Any species of fish, wildlife, or plants which have been designated as such by
regulation by the Secretary of the Department of Natural Resources. Designation occurs when the
continued existence of these species as viable components of the State's resources are determined to be in
jeopardy. This includes any species determined to be "endangered" species pursuant to the federal
Endangered Species Act, 16 USC. §1531 et seq., as amended.
Environmental Assessment - A comprehensive report that describes the natural features and
characteristics of a proposed development site, the changes that will occur as the result of proposed
development activities on the site, the anticipated environmental impacts and consequences of the
proposed development, and mitigation measures to be taken to minimize undesirable impacts to the
environment.
Family - One or more persons occupying a single housekeeping unit and using common cooking
facilities, provided that unless all members are related by blood or marriage, no such family shall contain
over 4 persons.
Farm Markets – A public space where fresh farm products from the local area are sold by the producers
who have grown, gathered, raised or caught them.
Farm Products – Fruits, vegetables, mushrooms, herbs, nuts, shell eggs, honey or other bee products,
flowers, nursery stock, livestock food products (including meat, milk, cheese, and other dairy products),
and fish.
Fence or Wall - A barrier, other than natural vegetation, intended to mark a boundary or to enclose an
area to provide screening or privacy.
Fisheries Activities - Commercial water dependent fisheries facilities including structures for the
packing, processing, canning, or freezing of finfish, crustaceans, mollusks, and amphibians and reptiles
and also including related activities such as wholesale and retail sales, product storage facilities, crab
shedding, off-loading docks, shellfish culture operations, and shore-based facilities necessary for
aquaculture operations.
Fishery - A parcel or building where commercial water dependent fishery facilities are located, including
structures for the packing, processing, canning, or freezing of finfish, crustaceans, mollusks, amphibians
and reptiles, including related activities such as wholesale and retail sales, product storage facilities, crab
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 20
shedding, off-loading docks, shellfish culture operations, and shore-based facilities necessary for
aquaculture operations.
Flashing – (verb) to give off light suddenly or in transient bursts; to move with great speed.
Floor Area:
a. Commercial, business and industrial buildings or buildings containing mixed uses: the sum of the
gross horizontal area of the several floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of the
exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating 2 buildings but not including (a) space
providing headroom of less than 7 feet; (b) basement space not used for retailing; (c) uncovered
steps or fire escapes; (d) accessory water towers or cooling towers; (e) accessory off-street
parking spaces; and (f) accessory off-street loading berths.
b. Residential buildings: the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a dwelling
measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls.
Forest - For purposes of administering provisions of this Chapter that regulate in the Critical Area, forest
is defined as biological community dominated by trees and other woody plants covering a land area of
one acre or more. This also includes forests that have been cut but not cleared. In all other cases, the
definition of “forest” is as specified in Article XVII of this Chapter.
Forest Interior Dwelling Birds - Species of birds which require relatively large forested tracts in order to
breed successfully (for example, various species of flycatchers, warblers, vireos, and woodpeckers).
Forest Management - The protection, manipulation, and utilization of the forest to provide multiple
benefits, such as timber harvesting, wildlife habitat, etc.
Forest Practice - The alteration of the forest either through tree removal or replacement in order to
improve the timber, wildlife, recreational, or water quality values.
Freestanding Sign – A sign supported by any structure or support placed in or anchored in the ground
and not attached to any building or structure.
Frontage:
a. Street frontage: all of the property on one side of a street between two intersecting streets
(crossing or terminating), measured along the line of the street, or if the street is dead-ended, then
all of the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the dead-end of the
street.
b. Lot frontage: the distance for which the front boundary line of the lot and the street line or mean
high water mark are coincident.
Gambling Game – Any game played with cards, dice, equipment or a machine, including any
mechanical, electromechanical or electronic device which shall include computers and cashless wagering
systems, for money, credit, or any representative of value, any banking or percentage game, or any other
game or device approved by the State of Maryland including video lottery terminals, but does not include
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 21
games played with cards in private homes or residences in which no person makes money for operating
the game, except as a player.
Gambling Operation – The conduct of authorized gambling games in a casino.
Gaming – To deal, operate, carry on, conduct, maintain or expose or offer for play any gambling game or
gambling operation.
Gaming Establishment – A casino and buildings, facilities, or rooms functionally or physically
connected to a casino, including but not limited to any bar, restaurant, hotel, cocktail lounge, retail
establishment, or arena or any other facility located under the control of a casino licensee or affiliated
company.
Garage or Yard Sale - A public sale conducted by an individual on his or her own premises for the
purpose of selling personal property.
Garden Apartments - Multi-family housing units that may share a common outside access. Ownership is
not a factor in this type of unit, which may be either rental or condominium.
General Development Plan – A type of plan that becomes part of the zoning of a property as provided in
Section 34.2.C. of this Chapter. The plan depicts site characteristics and redevelopment information to
include the location of buildings, uses, roads, easements, parking, landscape, access and provides
guidance for site plans.
Golf Course - An area publicly or privately owned, on which the game of golf is played, containing at
least 9 holes; together with such necessary and usual accessory uses as a club house, caretakers'
dwellings, dining and refreshment facilities, and other such uses, provided that the operation of such
facilities is incidental and subordinate to the operation of a golf course.
Grandfathered - The term describes the status accorded certain properties and development activities
that are of record prior to the date of adoption of this Chapter or provisions of this Chapter.
Grandfathered Parcel/Lot (Critical Area) - A parcel of land or lot that was subdivided into recorded,
legally buildable lots where the subdivision received final approval before December 1, 1985.
Grocery Store/Market – A small retail store containing less than 2500 square feet of gross floor area
that is designed and stocked to sell primarily food, beverages, household items, and excludes alcoholic
beverages. This type of retail store does not provide for the sale of gasoline or other fuel.
Group Home -A facility providing housing facilities and/or rehabilitation in a single family dwelling for
not more than ten (10) persons, including support personnel, for persons who need specialized housing,
treatment and/or counseling service because of delinquency or criminal rehabilitation, such as a criminal
half-way house, current addiction to or illegal use of a controlled substance, or a type of mental illness
that involves behavior related to violent felony crime. Residents are provided service and supervision by
licensed operators in accordance with federal, state and local laws, regulations and requirements.
Treatment and counseling shall be limited to the residents of the dwelling. The residents of a group home
shall not include any person who, during the term of residence at such facility, commits a violent act or
causes substantial physical damage to the property of others, and any such person must be removed from
such facility.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 22
Growth Allocation:
a. An area of land calculated as 5 percent of the total Resource Conservation Area (excluding tidal
wetlands and federally owned land), that may be converted to more intense management areas to
accommodate land development; also
b. An act of the Town Commissioners, approved by the Critical Area Commission, that provides for
conversion of a property or properties located in Resource Conservation Areas (RCAs) and/or
Limited Development Areas (LDAs) in the Critical Area District to another land management
classification that may allow an increase in the permitted density to the level permitted by the
base zoning classification.
Habitat Protection Area (HPA) - The Critical Area Buffer, Threatened and Endangered Species, Plant
and Wildlife Habitats, Anadromous Fish Spawning Propagation Waters and Species in Need of
Conservation, i.e. colonial nesting waters, historic waterfowl staging and concentration areas, habitat of
local significance, as defined in Perryville Critical Area Program.
Handicapped People - People determined to have physical impairments which (a) are expected to be of
long continued and indefinite duration, (b) substantially impede the ability to live independently, and (c)
are of such a nature that the ability to live independently could be improved by more suitable housing
conditions.
Highly Erodible Soils and Erodible Soils - Soils with a slope greater than 15 percent or soils with a "K"
value greater than 0.35 and slopes greater than 5 percent. "K value" means the soil erodibility factor in the
Universal Soil Loss Equation. It is a quantitative value that is experimentally determined.
Highway Corridor Unified Development – The coordinated and integrated development or
redevelopment of multiple lots in the Highway Corridor Overlay District whose lot widths, when
combined, meet or exceed the minimum lot width requirement in the Highway Commercial (C-2) District,
but one or more of which, individually, have less than the minimum required lot width.
Historic Waterfowl Staging and Concentration Area - An area of open water and adjacent marshes
where waterfowl gather during migration and throughout the winter season. These areas are "historic" in
the sense that their location is common knowledge and because these areas have been used regularly
during recent times.
Home Occupation - Any occupation or activity, which is clearly incidental and secondary to use of the
premises for dwelling and, which is carried on wholly within a main building by a member of a family
residing on the premises in connection with which there is no advertising other than an identification sign
of not more than 4 square feet in area, fixed flat to a wall of the building and no other display or storage
of materials or generation of substantial volumes of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or parking demand or
other exterior indication of the home occupation or variation from the residential character of the
building; and in connection with which no person outside the resident family is employed and no
equipment used which creates offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat, or glare. When within
the above requirements, a home occupation includes, but is not limited to the following: (a) art studio; (b)
dressmaking; (c) professional office of a physician, dentist, lawyer, engineer, architect, accountant, salesperson,
real estate agent, insurance agent, or other similar occupation; (d) teaching, with musical
instruction limited to 1 or 2 pupils at a time; however, a home occupation shall not be interpreted to
include tourist homes, animal hospitals, child care centers, tea rooms, or restaurants.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 23
Hotel - A building in which lodging or boarding and lodging are provided for more than 20 persons,
primarily transient, and offered to the public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and
from all rooms is made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours. As
such, it is open to the public as opposed to a boardinghouse, a lodging house, or an apartment house
which are herein separately defined. A hotel may include restaurants, taverns, club rooms, banquet halls,
ballrooms, and meeting rooms.
Hydric Soils - Soils that are wet frequently enough to periodically produce anaerobic conditions, thereby
influencing the species composition or growth, or both, of plants on those soils.
Hydrophytic Vegetation - Those plants cited in "National List of Plant Species That Occur in Wetlands:
Maryland, 1988" which are described as growing in water or on substrate that is at least periodically
deficient in oxygen as a result of excessive water (plants typically found in water habitats).
Illumination - Direct artificial lighting or indirect artificial lighting designed to reflect light from light
sources erected for the purposes of providing light to a sign or other structure.
Immediate Family Member - Father, mother, son, daughter, grandfather, grandmother, grandson,
granddaughter.
Impervious Surface - Any man-made surface that is resistant to the penetration of water. (Note:
Additional information concerning what constitutes an impervious surface can be obtained from the
Town).
Infill - The development of vacant, abandoned, passed over or underutilized land within built-up areas of
Perryville.
Intensely Developed Areas - Areas of at least 20 adjacent acres or the entire upland portion of the
Critical Area within the boundary of a municipality, whichever is less, where residential, commercial,
institutional, and/or industrial developed land uses predominate, and where relatively little natural habitat
occurs. These areas shall have had at least one of the following features as of December 1, 1985:
a. Housing density equal to or greater than 4 dwelling units per acre;
b. Industrial, institutional, or commercial uses are concentrated in the area; or
c. Public sewer and water collection and distribution systems are currently serving the area and
housing density is greater than 3 dwelling units per acre.
Intermediate Care Home - a facility maintained for the purpose of providing accommodations for not
more than 8 occupants needing medical care and supervision at a lower level than that provided in a
nursing care institution but at a higher level than provided in institutions for the handicapped or infirm.
Intermediate Care Institution - an institutional facility maintained for the purpose of providing
accommodations for more than 8 persons needing medical care and supervision at a lower level than that
provided in a nursing care institution but at a higher level than that provided in institutions for the
handicapped or infirm.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 24
Intermittent Stream - A stream in which surface water is absent during part of the year. Intermittent
streams may be found on the most recent U.S.G.S. 7.5 Minute Quadrangle published by the United States,
the Cecil County Soil Survey, or field located. Intermittent streams shall be identified in the field and
accurately drawn on all development plans.
Kennel, Commercial - A commercial operation that (a) provides food and shelter and care of domestic
animals for purposes not primarily related to medical care (a kennel may or may not be run by or
associated with a veterinarian), or (b) engages in the breeding of domestic animals for sale, or (c) any
place where more than two adult domestic animals (over 6 months) are kept for a boarding or other fee, or
(d) any place where more than four (e) adult domestic animals are kept for any purpose.
"K” Value - The soil erodibility factor in the Universal Soil Loss Equation. It is a quantitative value that
is experimentally determined.
Land-Based Aquaculture - The raising of fish or shellfish in any natural or man-made, enclosed or
impounded, water body.
Land Clearing - Any activity that removes the vegetative ground cover.
L.E.D. - Light Emitting Diode – Emits light when a voltage is applied to it and is used especially in
electronic devices.
Limited Development Areas (LDA) - Areas which are currently developed in low or moderate intensity
uses which contain areas of natural plant and animal habitats, and in which the quality of runoff has not
been substantially altered or impaired. These areas shall have had at least one of the following features as
of December 1, 1985:
a. Housing density ranging from one dwelling unit per 5 acres up to 4 dwelling units per acre;
b. Areas not dominated by agriculture, wetland, forest, barren land, surface water, or open space;
c. Areas having public sewer or public water, or both.
d. Areas meeting the definition of Intensely Developed Areas above, less than 20 acres in size.
Loading Space - A space within the main building or on the same lot, providing for the standing, loading
or unloading of trucks.
Lot - An area of land separated from other areas of land by separate description in a recorded deed of
plat.
Lot, Area - The total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot.
Lot, Corner - A lot located at the intersection of 2 or more streets. A lot abutting on a curved street or
streets shall be considered a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot lines
to the foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
Lot, Depth of - The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 25
Lot, Interior - A lot other than a corner lot.
Lot Line - The boundary line of a lot.
Lot of Record - A parcel of land which has been legally recorded in the land records of Cecil County.
Lot, Through - An interior lot having frontage on 2 streets.
Lot Width - The distance between the side lot lines measured at the required front yard line.
Major Site Plan - Any site plan which would include the extension of public water or sewer lines,
placement of roads or installation of any storm water management device.
Manufactured Home - Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or forty body feet or more in length, or,
when erected on site, is three hundred twenty or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent
chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to
the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems
contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of
this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a
certification required by the Secretary and complies with the standards established under USC Title 42,
Chapter 70; and except that such term shall not include any self-propelled recreational vehicle.
Manufactured Home, Double-wide - A manufactured home constructed after July 1, 1976, that meets or
exceeds the construction standards promulgated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development that were in effect at the time of construction.
Manufactured Home, Single-wide - A manufactured home constructed after July 1, 1976, that meets or
exceeds the construction standards promulgated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development that were in effect at the time of construction but that does not satisfy the criteria necessary
to qualify the house as a double-wide manufactured home.
Manufacture, Manufacturing - The process of converting of raw, unfinished materials or products, or
either of them, into articles or substances of different character, or for use for different purpose.
Marina - Any facility for the mooring, berthing, storing, or securing of watercraft, but not including
community piers and other noncommercial boat docking and storage facilities.
Marquee - Any hood, canopy, awning or permanent construction that projects from a wall of a building,
usually above the entrance.
Master Developer – A developer of a site that requires the coordinated efforts of multiple owners and/or
tenants and who is responsible for coordinating the undertakings of zoning, site plan, subdivision,
building permits, sign permits, property improvement, management, and maintenance through means of
binding agreements with the owners and tenants.
Mean High Water Line - The average level of high tides at a given location.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 26
Medical Treatment Facilities – Includes the following: Clinic, Clinic Services, and State Licensed
Medical Clinic. (See definitions for each.)
Minor Site Plan - A drawing and other documents containing the minimum information required for
such plans in Appendix A. A minor site plan must be filed for a single-family dwelling, a two family
residence, any accessory building, an addition or change of a commercial or industrial structure, or for a
special exception use which does not require a building permit.
.
Mobile Home - A dwelling unit that: (i) is not constructed in accordance with the standards set forth in
the town's building code applicable to site-built homes, and (ii) is composed of one or more components,
each of which was substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and designed to be transported to the
home site on its own chassis, and (iii) exceeds 40 feet in length and eight feet in width.
Modular Home - A dwelling unit composed of components substantially assembled in a manufacturing
plant and transported to the building site for final assembly on a permanent foundation. Among other
possibilities, a modular home may consist of two sections transported to the site in a manner similar to a
manufactured home, or a series of panels or room sections transported on a truck and erected or joined
together on the site.
Monument Sign – Any ground sign supported totally with a solid base of masonry, brick, or other
material, which is of a finished or decorative type construction. A permanent ground sign designed so
that the base of the sign face is flush with the supporting base, and the supporting base is flush with the
ground and extends the full width of the sign face. Sign shall include a solid, decorative base and may
include a decorative frame. The base shall be at least as wide as the sign and/or frame and a minimum of
eighteen (18) inches in height. Decorative base and frame materials include stone, brick or stucco. No
support post shall be exposed.
Motel, Motor Court, Motor Hotel, Lodge, or Inn - same as "Hotel" except that the building or
buildings are designed primarily to serve tourists traveling by automobile and that ingress and egress to
rooms need not be through a lobby or offices.
Municipal Infraction – Any violation of this Code, which violation has been specifically declared to be
an infraction. For purposes of the Code, an infraction is a civil offense.
Natural Features - Components and processes present in or produced by nature, including but not
limited to soil types, geology, slopes, vegetation, surface water, drainage patterns, aquifers, recharge
areas, climate, flood plains, aquatic life, and wildlife.
Natural Heritage Area - Any communities of plants or animals which are considered to be among the
best statewide examples of their kind, and are designated by regulation by the Secretary of the
Department of Natural Resources.
Natural Vegetation - Plant communities that develop in the absence of human activities.
Neighborhood Essential Services - Any public utility facility needed to provide basic services such as
water, sewer, telephone, and cable television to the individual users.
Nonconforming Use and Related Definitions - See Article VIII.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 27
Non-point Source Pollution - Pollution generated by diffuse land use activities rather than from an
identifiable or discrete facility. It is conveyed to waterways through natural processes, such as rainfall,
storm runoff, or groundwater seepage rather than by deliberate discharge. Non-point source pollution is
not generally corrected by "end-of-pipe" treatment, but rather, by changes in land management practices.
Nonprofit Organization - Any organization engaging primarily in civic or community services including
Lions, Kiwanis, Rotary, Optimists and organizations of a similar nature which are not operated for profit
and have been granted 501status by the Internal Revenue Service.
Non-renewable Resources - Resources that are not naturally regenerated or renewed.
Non-tidal Wetlands - Means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a
frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a
prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as
hydrophytic vegetation. The determination of whether an area is a nontidal wetland shall be made in
accordance with the publication known as the Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating
Jurisdictional Wetlands, published in 1989 and as may be amended. Nontidal wetlands do not include
tidal wetlands regulated under Title 16 of the Environment Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
Nursing Care Home - A facility maintained for the purpose of providing skilled nursing care and
medical supervision at a lower level than that available in a hospital to not more than 8 persons.
Nursing Care Institution - An institutional facility maintained for the purpose of providing skilled
nursing care and medical supervision at a lower level than that available in a hospital to more than eight
persons.
Office - A building or part thereof, designed, intended or used for the purpose of a profession, the
carrying on of business, the conduct of public administration, or, where not conducted on the site thereof,
the administration of an industry, but shall not include a retail commercial use, industrial use, clinic,
financial institution, or place of amusement or place of assembly.
Offsets - Structures or actions that compensate for undesirable impacts.
Off-Street Parking Area - Space provided for vehicular parking not on a street or roadway.
Open Space - land and water areas retained in an essentially undeveloped state. Open space may include,
but not be limited to, buffers and buffer yards, lawns, decorative planting, walkways, active and passive
recreation areas, children's playgrounds, fountains, swimming pools, wooded areas, and watercourses.
Open space shall not include driveways, parking lots or other vehicular surfaces, any area occupied by a
building, nor areas so located or so small or so circumscribed by buildings, driveways, parking lots, or
drainage areas, as to have no substantial value for the purpose stated in this definition.
Open Water - Tidal waters of the State that do not contain tidal wetlands and/or submerged aquatic
vegetation.
Owner - The person, partnership, corporation, company, or other legal entity holding current legal title to
a lot, tract, or parcel of land.
Parapet - The extension of the main walls of a building above the roof.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 28
Parking Area, Lot, or Structure - A structure, or an off-street area for parking or loading and unloading,
whether required or permitted by this Zoning Chapter, including driveways, access ways, aisles, and
maneuvering areas, but not including any public or private street right-of-way.
Parking Space, Off-street - An all-weather surfaced area not in a street or alley exclusive of driveways,
permanently reserved for the temporary storage of one automobile and connected with a street or alley by
an all-weather surfaced driveway which affords satisfactory ingress and egress for automobiles. At a
minimum each parking space shall measure 9' x 18'.
Pennant - Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not it contains a message of any
kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string. Usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
Perennial Stream - A stream containing surface water throughout an average rainfall year. Perennial
streams may be found on the most recent U.S.G.S. 7.5 Minute Quadrangle published by the United States,
the Cecil County Soil Survey, or field locates. Perennial streams shall be identified in the field and
accurately drawn on all development plans.
Person - An individual, trustee, executor, other fiduciary, corporation firm, partnership, association,
organization, or other entity acting as a unit.
Physiographic Features - The soils, topography, land slope and aspect, and local climate that influence
the form and species composition of plant communities.
Place of Worship - A building or premises where persons regularly assemble for religious worship, and
those accessory activities customarily associated therewith; and where the buildings and premises are
maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship.
Plot - Parcel of land which may include one or more platted lots occupied or intended for occupancy by a
use permitted in this Chapter including one main building together with its accessory buildings; the yard
areas and parking spaces required by the Chapter and having its principal frontage upon a street or upon
an officially approved place.
Port - A facility or area established or designated by the State or local jurisdictions for purposes of
waterborne commerce.
Premises - A lot, together with all buildings and structures thereon.
Private Harvesting - The cutting and removal of trees for personal use.
Private Pier - A privately owned pier that is no more than 6 feet wide.
Producer – Person or entity that raises or produces farm products on land that the person or entity farms
and owns, rents, or leases.
Project Approvals - The approval of development and redevelopment, other than development and
redevelopment by a State or local government agency, in the Chesapeake Bay Critical Area by the
appropriate local approval authority. The term includes approval of subdivision plats, building permits
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 29
and site plans; inclusion of areas within floating zones; issuance of variances, special exceptions, and
conditional use permits.
Property Lines - The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
Pub - An establishment used primarily for the serving of liquor by the drink to the general public, and
where food is regularly served as part of the fare.
Public Utilities - Uses or structures for the public purpose of power transmission and distribution (but not
power generation); fuel transmission and distribution (but not manufacturing or storage); water treatment
and distribution; sewage collection and treatment; telephone service facilities (but not utility truck
terminal facilities); radio and television facilities (not including broadcasting studios); and rail or highway
rights-of-way (not including stations or terminals).
Public Water-Oriented Recreation-Shore - Water dependent recreation facilities or activities provided
by public agencies which are available to the general public.
Public Water and Sewerage Systems - A water or sewerage system owned and operated by a
municipality or county or an authority or owned and operated by the governing body and permitted by the
State of Maryland, and subject to special regulations.
Public Way - Any sidewalk, street, alley, highway, or other public thoroughfare.
Reclamation - The reasonable rehabilitation of disturbed land for useful purposes, and the protection of
the natural resources of adjacent areas, including waterbodies.
Recreation Facility - A place designated and equipped for the conduct of sports, leisure time activities,
and other customary and usual recreational activities.
Redevelopment - The process of developing land that is or has been developed. Construction in
previously developed areas which may include the demolition of existing structures and building new
structures, or the substantial renovation of existing structures. Projects tend to be somewhat larger and
more complex than infill projects. The re-use of previously used, non-agricultural land.
Reforestation - The establishment of a forest through artificial reproduction or natural regeneration.
Regulations - The whole body of regulations, text, charts, tables, diagrams, maps, notations, references,
and symbols, contained or referred to in this Chapter.
Renewable Resource - A resource that can renew or replace itself and, therefore, with proper
management, can be harvested indefinitely.
Residence, Commercial Apartment - A multi-family residence located above the principal commercial
use.
Residence, Multi-Family - A residential use consisting of a building containing three or more dwelling
units. For purposes of this definition, a building includes all dwelling units that are enclosed within that
building or attached to it by a common floor or wall (even the wall of an attached garage or porch) (e.g.
townhouses and apartments).
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 30
Residence, Primary with Accessory Apartment - A residential use having the external appearance of a
single-family residence but in which there is located a second dwelling unit that comprises not more than
25 percent of the gross floor area of the building nor more than a total of 750 square feet.
Resource Conservation Areas (RCA) - Areas characterized by nature- dominated environments (that is,
wetlands, forests, abandoned fields) and resource-utilization activities (that is, agriculture, forestry,
fisheries activities, or aquaculture). These areas shall have had at least one of the following features as of
December 1, 1985:
a. Density is less than one dwelling unit per five 5 acres; or
b. Dominant land use is in agriculture, wetland, forest, barren land, surface water, or open space.
Restaurants:
a. Restaurant, standard-A food serving establishment whose principal business is the sale of food
and the principal method of operation is its service when ordered from a menu to seated
customers at a table, booth or counter inside the establishment. A snack bar or refreshment stand
at a public or nonprofit community swimming pool, playground or park, operated solely for the
convenience of its patrons shall not be considered a restaurant.
b. Restaurant, fast food-an establishment where ready-to-eat food primarily intended for immediate
consumption is available upon a short waiting time and wrapped or presented so that it can
readily be eaten outside or inside the premises.
c. Restaurant, drive-in or drive-thru-any establishment where ready-to-eat food primarily intended
for immediate consumption is available upon a short waiting time and packaged or presented so
that it can be readily eaten inside the premises and whose method of operation is also to serve
customers in motor vehicles either at a drive-thru window or while parked.
Retail Store - Stores selling one kind or various kinds of goods, as distinct from services, such as, but not
limited to, drug stores, grocery stores, department stores, camera shops, book stores, and record shops.
Right-of-Way - A strip of land designated for the use of a road, highway, driveway, alley or walkway, or
for any drainage or public utility purpose or other similar uses.
Riparian Habitat - A habitat that is strongly influenced by water and which occurs adjacent to streams,
shorelines, and wetlands.
Road - All ways used to provide motor vehicle access to (a) 2 or more lots or 2 or more distinct areas or
buildings in unsubdivided developments.
Satellite Dish (Receive-Only Earth Station) - A device or instrument, designed or used for the reception
of television or other electronic communications signal broadcast or relayed from an earth satellite,
typically up to twelve feet in diameter, in the shape of a shallow dish or parabola.
Scrolling – (verb) to cause text or graphics on display screen to move continuously.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 31
Seasonally Flooded Water Regime - A condition where surface water is present for extended periods,
especially early in the growing season, and when surface water is absent, the water table is often near the
land surface.
Selection - The removal of single, scattered, mature trees or other trees from uneven-aged stands by
frequent and periodic cutting operations.
Semi-Public - A use owned or operated by a nonprofit, religious or philanthropic institution and
providing education, cultural, recreational, religious, or similar types of public programs.
Sensitive Areas - Environmental protection areas identified in the Economic Growth, Resource
Protection and Planning Act of 1992 for which special standards, designed to protect these areas from the
adverse effects of development, have been included in this Chapter. These areas include the following:
a. Streams and their buffers;
b. 100-year floodplain;
c. Habitats of threatened and endangered species;
d. Steep slopes; and
e. Any other areas determined by the Town.
Setback - The minimum required distance between the point where any structure or use on a lot meets the
ground surface and any lot line or boundary of a town or State road right-of-way.
Shore Erosion Control Measures - Any number of structural and nonstructural methods or techniques
used to control the erosion of shoreline areas.
Sign - (See Article XV for sign and related definitions)
Significant Shoreline Erosion - An annual rate of erosion of 2 feet or greater.
Site Plan - A drawing or plat which describes and locates required improvements of a development tract
in accordance with the provisions of Article IV and Appendix A.
Soil Conservation and Water Quality Plans - Land-use plans for farms that show farmers how to make
the best possible use of their soil and water resources while protecting and conserving those resources for
the future. It is a document containing a map and related plans that indicate:
a. How the landowner plans to treat a farm unit;
b. Which Best Management Practices the land owner plans to install to treat undesirable conditions;
and
c. The schedule for applying Best Management Practices.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 32
Special Buffer Area - An area officially mapped by the Town and approved by the Critical Area
Commission as a Special Buffer Area, where it has been sufficiently demonstrated that the existing
pattern of residential, industrial commercial, institutional or recreational development in the Critical Area
prevents the Buffer from fulfilling its intended functions for water quality protection and wildlife habitat
conservation.
Special Events - Circuses, fairs, carnivals, festivals, or other types of special events that (a) run for longer
than one day but not longer than two weeks, (b) are intended to or likely to attract substantial crowds, and
(c) are unlike the customary or usual activities generally associated with the property where the special
event is to be located.
Special Exception - Permission by the Board of Appeals to establish a specific use that would not be
appropriate generally or without restriction throughout a zoning district but which if controlled as to
number, area, location, or relation to the neighborhood, would comply with the purpose and intent of this
Chapter. Such uses may be approved within a zoning district if specific provision for such a Special
Exception is made in this Chapter.
Species in Need of Conservation - Those fish and wildlife whose continued existence as part of the
State's resources are in question and which may be designated by regulation by the Secretary of Natural
Resources as in need of conservation pursuant to the requirements of Natural Resources Article, 10-2A-
03 and 4- 2A-03, Annotated Code of Maryland.
Species of Concern - Rare, threatened or endangered species or species in need of conservation.
Spoil Pile - The overburden and reject materials as piled or deposited during surface mining.
State Licensed Medical Clinic – Includes:
a. Freestanding Ambulatory-Care Facility licensed under Title 19, Subtitle 3B, of the Health-
General article of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
b. A Detoxification Facility certified under Title 8, subtitle 4 of the Health-General Article of the
Annotated Code of Maryland; or
c. An Alcohol Abuse and Drug Abuse Treatment Program certified under Title 8, Subtitle 4 of the
Health-General Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
State Tidal Wetland - Any land under the navigable waters of the State below the mean high tide,
affected by the regular rise and fall of the tide. Tidal wetlands of this category which have been
transferred by the State by a valid lease, patent, or grant confirmed by Article 5 of the Maryland
Declaration of Rights are considered "private tidal wetlands" to the extent of the interest transferred.
Steep Slopes - Within the Limited Development Area (LDA) and Resource Conservation Area (RCA)
steep slopes shall mean any slope with a grade of 15 percent or more. Within the Intensely Developed
Area (IDA) and non-critical area portion of the Town, steep slopes shall mean any land area exceeding
forty thousand (40,000) square feet with slope in excess of twenty-five percent (25%).
Storage - The keeping, either indoors (including inside a cargo trailer) or outdoors, of equipment,
vehicles, or supplies used in the conduct of a trade, business, or profession. Storage does not include the
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 33
overnight parking in residential zones of a single vehicle weighing no more than 2.5 tons gross vehicle
weight which, although used primarily for business, trade, or professional purposes, also provides daily
transportation to and from work.
Storm water Management:
a. For quantitative control, a system of vegetative and structural measures that control the increased
volume and rate of surface runoff caused by man-made changes to the land; and
b. For qualitative control, a system of vegetative, structural, and other measures that reduce or
eliminated pollutants that might otherwise be carried by surface runoff.
Story - that portion of a building other than a basement, included between the surface of any floor and the
surface of the floor next above it' or if there be no floor above it, then the space between such floor and
the ceiling next above it.
Street - A public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to property abutting thereon.
Street Line - A dividing line between a lot, trace, or parcel of land and a contiguous street.
Structural Alterations - Any change in the supporting members of a building, including but not limited
to bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the
exterior walls.
Structure - Anything, other than a fence or retaining wall, constructed or erected which requires location
on the ground or attached to something having a location on the ground, including but not limited to
advertising signs, billboards, mobile homes, and pre-fabricated homes. Pre-fabricated homes include
factory pre-assembly of standardized building parts, or the shipment of component building sections for
permanent installation on a site. Prefabricated homes do not include mobile homes in which mobility, or
the ready means of reactivating mobility, remains an integral feature of the trailer.
Substantial Renovation – Improvements to an existing structure involving 500 square feet or more of
existing or new floor area.
Tavern - An establishment used primarily for the serving of liquor by the drink to the general public, and
where food or packaged liquors may be served or sold only as an accessory to the primary use. Also
called a bar or lounge.
Television or Satellite Dish - A device or equipment used for the receiving of television or radio
programming which is a subordinate use or structure customarily incidental to and located upon the same
lot as the main structure, in either a side or rear yard.
Temporary Emergency, Construction or Repair Residence - A residence (which may be a mobile
home) that is (a) located on the same lot as a residence made uninhabitable by fire, flood, or other natural
disaster and occupied by the persons displaced by such disaster, or (b) located on the same lot as a
residence that is under construction and occupied by the persons intending to live in such permanent
residence when the work is completed, or (c) located on a nonresidential construction site and occupied
by persons having construction or security responsibilities over such construction site. These residences
shall be removed from the site within one month of resolution of the situation which prompted their need.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 34
Temporary Structure - Any structure erected for a time of six (6) months or less, consisting of any
material with a running edge of twenty-five (25) feet or more. Temporary structures includes tents with
any running edge of twenty-five (25) feet or more.
Thinning - A forest practice used to accelerate tree growth of quality trees in the shortest interval of time.
Threatened Species - Any species of fish, wildlife, or plants designated as such by regulation by the
Secretary of the Department of Natural Resources which appear likely, within the foreseeable future, to
become endangered, including any species of wildlife or plant determined to be "threatened" species
pursuant to the federal Endangered Species Act, 16 U.S.C., 1531 et seq., as amended.
Tidal Wetlands - All State and private wetlands, marshes, submerged aquatic vegetation, lands, and open
water affected by the daily and periodic rise and fall of the tide within the Chesapeake Bay and its
tributaries, the coastal bays adjacent to Maryland's coastal barrier islands, and the Atlantic Ocean to a
distance of 3 miles offshore of the low water mark.
Topography - The existing configuration of the earth's surface including the relative relief, elevations,
and position of land features.
Town Administrator - The Perryville Town Administrator. Also referred to as “Administrator.”
Town House - A single-family dwelling forming one of a series of three or more attached single-family
dwellings separated from one another by party walls without doors, windows, or other provisions for
human passage or visibility through such walls from basement to roof, and having roofs which may
extend from one such dwelling unit to another.
Town Scale Urban Development – Compact development with a mix of uses, that is designed to allow
people to park and walk from place to place, where buildings are set close to sidewalks and travel ways
and where building facades create interest and access for passers-by.
Tract - A lot (see definition). The term tract is used interchangeably with the term lot, particularly in the
context of subdivisions, where one "tract" is subdivided into several "lots".
Transitional Habitat - A plant community whose species are adapted to the diverse and varying
environmental conditions that occur along the boundary that separates aquatic and terrestrial areas.
Travel Trailer - A structure that (a) is intended to be transported over the streets and highways (either as
a motor vehicle or attached to or hauled by a motor vehicle) and (b) is designed for temporary use as
sleeping quarters but that does not satisfy one or more of the definitional criteria of a mobile home.
Tree - A large, woody plant having one or several self-supporting stems or trunks and numerous branches
that reach a height of at least 20 feet at maturity.
Tributary Streams - Perennial and intermittent streams in the Critical Area that are so noted on the most
recent U.S. Geological Survey 7.5' topographic quadrangle maps (scale 1:24,000) or on more detailed
maps or studies at the discretion of the Town.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 35
Usable Open Space - means open space designed for human activities. Usable open space may include,
but are not limited to plazas, greens, courtyards, streetscapes that are 20’ in width or greater and include
such amenities as seating and lighting, and active recreation areas. Usable open spaces shall not include
unusable areas, including but not limited to steep slopes, environmentally sensitive areas, forest
preservation areas, above grade storm water facilities, landscape buffers and required parking lot
landscaped areas.
Use - When used as a noun, the term means the purpose or activity for which land or any building thereon
is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
Utility Facilities - Community or Regional -all utility facilities other than neighborhood facilities.
Utility Facilities, Neighborhood - Utility facilities that are designed to serve the immediately
surrounding neighborhood and that must, for reasons associated with the purpose of the utility in
question, be located in or near the neighborhood where such facilities are proposed to be located.
Utility Transmission Facilities - Fixed structures that convey or distribute resources, wastes, or both,
including, but not limited to, electric lines, water conduits, and sewer lines.
Variance - A modification only of density, bulk or area requirements in the Perryville Zoning Chapter
where such modifications will not be contrary to the public interest and where owing to conditions
peculiar to the property, and not the results of any action taken by the applicant, a literal enforcement of
the Chapter would result in unnecessary hardship.
Video Lottery Facility – A gambling establishment at which players play video lottery terminals as
authorized by Subtitle 1A of Title 9 of the State Government Article of the Maryland Annotated Code.
Video Lottery Terminal:
A. Any machine or other device that, on insertion of a bill, coin, token, voucher, ticket, coupon, or
similar item, or on payment of any consideration:
(1) Is available to play or simulate the play of any game of chance in which the results, including
the options available to the player, are randomly determined by the machine or other device; and
(2) By the element of chance, may deliver or entitle the player who operates the machine or device
to receive cash, premiums, merchandise, tokens or anything of value, whether the payout is made
automatically from the device or in any other manner.
B. Video Lottery Terminal includes a machine or device:
(1) That does not indirectly dispense money, tokens, or anything of value to winning players; and
(2) Described under paragraph A. of this definition that uses an electronic credit system making
the deposit of bills, coins or token unnecessary.
C. Video Lottery Terminal does not include an authorized slot machine operated by an eligible
organization under Title 12, Subtitle 3 of the Criminal Law Article of the Maryland Annotated
Code.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 36
Warehouse - A structure used for the storage and/or the sale of products at wholesale, and where the sale
of a product at retail is incidental.
Wash Plant - A facility where sand and gravel is washed during processing.
Water-based Aquaculture - The raising of fish and shellfish in any natural, open, free-flowing water
body.
Watercourse - Any natural or artificial stream, river, creek, ditch, channel, canal, conduit, culvert, drain,
waterway, gully, ravine, or wash, in and including any area adjacent thereto which is subject to inundation
by reason of overflow or water.
Water-Dependent Facilities - Structures or works associated with industrial, maritime, recreational,
educational, or fisheries activities which the Town of Perryville has determined require location at or near
the shoreline within the Buffer.
Wholesale - The selling of goods in relatively large quantities and usually at lower prices than at retail,
especially such selling to retailers for resale to consumers.
Wildlife Corridor - A strip of land having vegetation that provides habitat and a safe passageway for
wildlife.
Wooded Area - An area of contiguous wooded vegetation where trees are at a density of at least one sixinch
or greater caliper tree per 325 square feet of land and where the branches and leaves form a
contiguous canopy.
Yard - an open space other than a court, on a lot unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward
except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter (See Figure 1).
Yard, Front - A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines and being the
minimum horizontal distance between the street line or mean high water mark and the main building or
any projection thereof, other than the terraces, or uncovered porches. On corner lots, the front yard shall
be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension. The waterside of
waterfront properties shall be considered the front yard in addition to the normal front yard that extends to
the street line.
Yard, Rear - A yard extending across the rear of the lot between the side lot lines and measured between
the rear lot line and the rear of the main building or any projection other than steps, un-enclosed porches
or entrance-ways.
Yard, Side - A yard between the main building and the side line of the lot and extending from the front
yard to the rear yard and being the minimum horizontal distance between the side lot line and side of the
main buildings or any projections thereof.
Zoning Administrator - The zoning administrative officer or an authorized representative designated by
the Town Commissioners to carry out duties as specified in this Chapter. In the absence of an appointed
Zoning Administrator, these duties are assumed to be the responsibility of either the Town Administrator
or his/her designee.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 37
Zoning Certificate - Document that certifies that the Perryville Planning Commission, or its designated
representative, has approved a proposed use of property as being consistent with the provision of this
Chapter. A zoning certificate may also be referred to as a certificate of approval or zoning permit.
Zoning District - An area within which certain uses of land and structures are permitted and certain
others are prohibited; yards and other open spaces are required; minimum lot areas and dimensions and
other requirements are established.
Zoning Overlay District - A district which is placed over the existing regular or parent zoning because
of siting of a zoning district or imposes additional restrictions, e.g., the Critical Area Overlay District.
Zoning Permit - A written statement issued by the Zoning Administrator or Town Administrator
authorizing buildings, structures, or uses consistent with the terms of this Chapter, and for the purpose of
carrying out and enforcing its provisions.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 38
Figure 1
TYPICAL LOT
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 39
Part II Zoning Maps
Section 10. Official Zoning Maps
1. The incorporated areas of the Town are hereby divided into zones (zoning districts), as shown on
the Official Zoning Maps which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted
by reference and declared to be a part of this Chapter.
2. The Official Zoning Maps shall be identified by the signatures of the Town Commissioners
attested by the Town Administrator, and bearing the seal of the Town under the following words:
"This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Maps referred to in Article II, Section 10 of the
Zoning Chapter of the Town of Perryville, Maryland", together with the date of the adoption of
this Chapter.
3. Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Official Zoning Maps which may from
time to time be made or published, the Official Zoning Maps which shall be located in the Town
Office, shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and water areas,
buildings, and other structures in the Town.
4. Official Critical Area Overlay District Maps
a. Official Critical Area Overlay District Maps have been prepared for the Town of
Perryville and shall be maintained in force as part of the Official Zoning Maps of
Perryville. They shall delineate the extent of the Critical Area Overlay District that shall
correspond to the Chesapeake Bay Critical Area.
b. The Critical Area Overlay District shall include all lands and waters defined in Section 8-
1807 of the Natural Resources Article, Annotated Code of Maryland. They include:
(1) All waters of and lands under the Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries to
the head of tide as indicated on the State wetlands maps, and all State
and private wetlands designated under Title 9 of the Natural Resources
Article, Annotated Code of Maryland.
(2) All lands and water areas within 1,000 feet beyond the landward
boundaries of State or private wetlands and the heads of tides designated
under Title 9 of the Natural Resources Article, Annotated Code of
Maryland; and
(3) Modification to these areas through inclusion or exclusion proposed by
the Town of Perryville and approved by the Critical Area Commission as
specified in Section 8-1807 of the Natural Resources Article, Annotated
Code of Maryland.
c. Within the designated Critical Area all land shall be assigned one of the following land
use management classifications:
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 40
(1) Intensely Developed Area (IDA)
(2) Limited Development Area (LDA)
(3) Resource Conservation Area (RCA)
The land use management classification shall be as designated in the Town of Perryville
Critical Area Program, as amended. The Critical Area Overlay District Maps may be
amended by the Town Commissioners in compliance with amendment provisions in this
Chapter, the Maryland Critical Area Law and Critical Area Criteria.
Section 11. Replacement of Official Zoning Maps
1. In the event that the Official Zoning Maps become damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to
interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the Town Commissioners
may by resolution adopt new Official Zoning Maps which shall supersede the prior Official
Zoning Maps.
2. The new Official Zoning Maps may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior
Official Zoning Maps, but no such corrections shall have the effect of amending the original
zoning Chapter or any subsequent amendment thereof. The Planning Commission shall certify as
to the accuracy of the new Official Zoning Maps and the maps shall be identified by the signature
of the Town Commissioners attested by the Town Administrator, and bearing the seal of the
Town under the following words: "This is to certify that these Official Zoning Maps supersedes
and replaces the Official Zoning Maps adopted (date of adoption of maps being replaced) as part
of the Zoning Chapter of Perryville, Maryland."
Section 12. Interpretation
1. The regulations set by this Chapter within each district shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience,
prosperity, environment and natural resources, and general welfare, and shall apply uniformly to
each class or kind of structure or land except as hereinafter provided.
2. It is not intended by this Zoning Chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any way impair or
interfere with any existing provisions of law, Chapter or resolution, or with any rules, regulations,
or permits previously adopted or issued, or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law
relating the use of buildings or premises, or with any private restrictions placed upon property by
covenant, deed, or recorded plat, provided, however, where this Zoning Chapter imposes a greater
restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the heights or buildings or requires
greater lot areas, larger yards, or other open spaces than are imposed or required by such existing
provisions of law, Chapter, or resolution, or by such rules, regulations, or permits, or by such
private restrictions, the provisions of this Zoning Chapter shall control.
3. Whenever these regulations, subdivision plats, or development plans approved in conformance
with these regulations, are in conflict with other local Chapters, regulations, or laws, the more
restrictive Chapter, regulation, law, plat, or plan shall govern and shall be enforced by appropriate
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 41
local agencies. When subdivision and development plans, approved by the Planning Commission,
contain setback or other features in excess of the minimum Zoning Chapter requirements, such
features as shown on the approved plan shall govern and shall be enforced by the local permit
official. Private deed restrictions or private covenants for a subdivision, which have not been
approved by the Planning Commission and made a part of the approved subdivision plan, do not
fall within the jurisdiction of enforcement by any local agency and cannot be enforced by the
permit official.
4. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this Zoning Chapter shall be deemed to require change in the
plans, construction, or designated use of any building or premises on which an application for a
certificate or permit was filed with the Town prior to the date of adoption of this Chapter or
amendment thereto, providing that the application meets all zoning and other requirements in
effect on the date of said application. The issuance of said certificate or permit shall be valid only
if it is exercised within 180 days from the date of issuance of the certificate or permit.
"Exercised", as set forth in this section, shall mean that binding contracts for the construction of
the main building or other main improvement have been let, or in the absence of contracts, that
the main building or other main improvement is under construction to a substantial degree or that
prerequisite conditions involving substantial investments shall be under contract, in development,
or completed. When construction is not a part of the use, "exercised" shall mean that the use is in
operation in compliance with the conditions as set forth in the permit or certificate.
5. Lots Divided by District Lines
a. Whenever a single lot two acres or less in size is located within two or more different
zoning districts, the district regulations applicable to the district within which the large
portion of the lot lies shall apply to the entire lot.
b. Whenever a single lot greater than two acres in size is located within two or more
different zoning districts, each portion of that lot shall be subject to all the regulations
applicable to the district in which it is located.
Section 13. Location and Boundaries of Zones
1. The location and boundaries of zones established in the districts shall be as shown on the Official
Zoning Maps for the Town of Perryville. This map, sections or portions thereof, together with all
notations, dimensions, designations, references, and other data shown thereon, are made a part of
this Chapter to the same extent as if the information set forth on the map were fully described and
incorporated herein.
2. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any of the zone districts established in this
Chapter, as shown on the Official Zoning Maps, the following rules shall apply:
a. Zone boundary lines are intended to follow street, alley, or lot lines or lines parallel or
perpendicular thereto, unless such zone boundary lines are otherwise identified on the
zoning map;
b. Where zone boundaries are indicated as approximately following street or alley lines or
proposed street lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries;
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 42
c. Where zone boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow lot lines and are
not more than 10 feet distant therefrom, such lot lines shall be such boundaries;
d. In un-subdivided property, or where a zone boundary divides a lot, the location of any
such boundary, unless the same is identified on such maps, shall be determined by the use
of the map scale shown thereon and scaled to the nearest foot.
3. Any area annexed to the Town of Perryville after the date of adoption shall immediately upon
such annexation be automatically classified in the most nearly comparable zone until a zoning
map amendment for such area has been adopted by the Town Commissioners. The Planning
Commission shall recommend to the Town Commissioners appropriate zoning for the annexed
area within 6 months after the effective date of such annexation.
Section 14. Reserved
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 43
ARTICLE III ADMINISTRATIVE MECHANISMS
Section 15. Appointment and Terms of Planning Commission Members
1. There shall be a Planning Commission consisting of six (6) members and one alternate, all of
whom shall be residents of the Town and shall be qualified by knowledge and experience in
matters pertaining to the development of the Town. All six (6) members and the alternate shall be
appointed by the Commissioners. The members shall be appointed to represent as many different
geographical areas of the Town of Perryville as is possible. Members and the alternate shall be
appointed for terms of three (3) years or until their successors are appointed and qualified. The
respective terms of the members and alternates shall be on a staggered basis. Vacancies shall be
filled by appointment by the Town Commissioners for the unexpired term only. Members and
alternates of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
2. One member of the Town Commissioners shall also be an ex-officio, voting member of the
Planning Commission and shall be selected by the Commissioners. The term of this member shall
correspond to his official term as a member of the Commissioners. The term on the Planning
Commission of the member of the Town Commissioners shall cease whenever his or her official
tenure as a member of the Commissioners terminates.
Section 16. Meetings of the Planning Commission
1. The Planning Commission shall establish a regular meeting schedule and shall meet frequently
enough so that it can take action on all complete applications in an expeditious manner. This shall
entail at least one regular meeting each month.
2. The Planning Commission need not conduct its meetings strictly in accordance with the quasijudicial
procedures set forth in Articles IV, V, and VI. However, it shall conduct its meetings so
as to obtain necessary information and to promote the full and free exchange of ideas.
3. Minutes shall be kept of all Planning Commission proceedings.
4. All Planning Commission meetings shall be open to the public, and whenever feasible the
tentative agenda for each commission meeting shall be made available in advance of the meeting.
5. Whenever the Planning Commission is called upon to make recommendations, on any proposal
requiring a public hearing, the Town Administrator shall post on or near the subject property one
or more notices that are sufficiently conspicuous in terms of size, location, and content to provide
reasonably adequate notice to potentially interested persons of the matter that will appear on the
Commission's agenda at a specified date and time. Such notice(s) shall be posted at least two
weeks prior to the meeting at which the matter is to be considered.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 44
Section 17. Quorum and Voting
1. A quorum for the Planning Commission shall consist of a majority of the Commission
membership (excluding vacant seats). A quorum is necessary for the Commission to take official
action.
2. All actions of the Planning Commission shall be taken by majority vote, a quorum being present.
3. A roll call vote shall be taken upon the request of any member.
4. The alternate member shall attend all meetings in order to be fully versed on all applications
before the Planning Commission. When required to achieve a quorum, the alternate may vote on
actions taken by the Planning Commission if the alternate has been present throughout all
deliberations on the application.
5. All advisory members shall have all the privileges of membership except the right to vote.
Section 18. Planning Commission Chairman
1. The Planning Commission shall elect, by the 31st of January each year, a chairman and vicechairman
who shall serve for one year. If the Planning Commission fails to elect a chairman by
the 31st of January each year the Commissioners will appoint a chairman.
2. The chairman and vice-chairman may take part in all deliberations and vote on all issues.
Section 19. Powers and Duties of Planning Commission
1. The Planning Commission may:
a. Make studies and recommend to the Town Commissioners plans, goals, and objectives
relating to the growth, development and redevelopment of the Town.
b. Develop and recommend to the Town Commissioners policies, Chapters, administrative
procedures, and other means for carrying out plans in a coordinated and efficient manner.
c. Make recommendations to the Town Commissioners concerning proposed zoning
amendment requests.
d. Hear and decide applications for land development and approve subdivision plats and site
development plans.
e. Make recommendations to the Board of Appeals on special exceptions.
2. The Planning Commission may adopt rules and regulations governing its procedures and
operations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 45
3. The Planning Commission may delegate authority for review and approval actions to the Town
Administrator as deemed appropriate.
Section 20. Advisory Committees
1. From time to time, the Town Commissioners may appoint one or more individuals to help the
Planning Commission carry out its planning responsibilities with respect to a particular subject
area. By way of illustration, without limitation, the Town Commissioners may appoint advisory
committees to consider the comprehensive development plan, housing plans, economic
development plans, etc.
2. Members of such advisory committees shall sit as non-voting members of the Planning
Commission when such issues are being considered and lend their talents, energies, and expertise
to the planning commission. However, all formal recommendations to the Town Commissioners
shall be made by the Planning Commission.
3. Nothing in this section shall prevent the Town Commissioners from establishing independent
advisory groups, committees, or commissions to make recommendations on any issue directly to
the Town Commissioners.
Section 21. Appointments and Terms of Board of Appeals
1. There shall be a Board of Appeals consisting of five members to be appointed by the
Commissioners. The members shall be individuals who are residents of the Town. No member of
the Board of Appeals shall be a member of the Planning Commission. Appointment shall be for
staggered terms of 3 years. If a vacancy occurs, by resignation or otherwise, among the members
of the Board of Appeals, the Commissioners shall appoint a member for the unexpired term.
Members of the Board shall serve without compensation.
2. The Town Commissioners shall designate one alternate member for the Board of Appeals who
may be empowered to sit on the Board in the absence of member of the Board. If the alternate is
absent, the Commissioners may designate a temporary alternate.
Section 22. Meetings of the Board of Appeals
1. The Board of Appeals shall establish a regular meeting schedule at the direction of the Town
Commissioners and shall meet frequently enough so that it can take action on all complete
applications in an expeditious manner.
2. The Board shall conduct its meetings in accordance with the quasi-judicial procedures set forth in
Articles IV, V, and VI.
3. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public, and whenever feasible the tentative agenda
for each board meeting shall be made available in advance of the meeting.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 46
4. The Board shall keep transcripts of all proceedings and minutes showing the vote of each member
upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, which shall be
immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public record.
Section 23. Quorum
1. A quorum for the Board of Appeals shall consist of a majority of the regular Board membership
(excluding vacant seats) including the alternate. A quorum is necessary for the Board to take
official action.
2. A member who has withdrawn from the meeting without being excused as provided in Section 24
shall be counted as present for purposes of determining whether a quorum is present.
Section 24. Voting
1. The concurring vote of the majority of the Board membership (excluding vacant seats) shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Zoning
Administrator, Planning Commission or Town Administrator, as may be the case, or to decide in
favor of the applicant any matter upon which it is required to pass under any Chapter or to grant
any variance.
2. Once a member is physically present at a Board meeting, any subsequent failure to vote shall be
recorded as an affirmative vote unless the member has been excused in accordance with
Subsection 3. or has been allowed to withdraw from the meeting in accordance with Subsection 4.
3. A member may be excused from voting on a particular issue by majority vote of the remaining
members present under the following circumstances:
a. If the member has a direct financial interest in the outcome of the matter at issue, or
b. If the matter at issue involves the member's own official conduct, or
c. If participation in the matter might violate the letter or spirit of a member's code of
professional responsibility, or
d. If a member has such close personal ties to the applicant that the member cannot
reasonably be expected to exercise sound judgment in the public interest.
4. A member may be allowed to withdraw from the entire remainder of a meeting by majority vote
of the remaining members present for any good and sufficient reason other than the member's
desire to avoid voting on matters to be considered at that meeting.
5. A motion to allow a member to be excused from voting or excused from the remainder of the
meeting is in order only if made by or at the initiative of the member directly affected.
6. A roll call vote shall be taken upon the request of any member.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 47
Section 25. Board of Appeals Officers
1. The Board of Appeals shall annually elect one of its members to serve as chairman by the 31st of
January each year, who will preside over the Board's meetings, and one member vice chairman,
who will preside over the board's meetings in the absence of the chairman. The person so
designated shall serve in this capacity for a term of one year. If the Board of Appeals fails to elect
a chairman by the 31st of January each year the Commissioners will appoint a chairman.
2. The chairman or any member temporarily acting as chairman may administer oaths to witnesses
coming before the Board.
3. The chairman and vice-chairman may take part in all deliberations and vote on all issues.
Section 26. Powers and Duties of Board of Appeals
1. The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide:
a. Appeals from any order, decision, requirement, or interpretation made by the Zoning
Administrator, Planning Commission or Town Administrator, as provided in Section 62.
b. Applications for Special Exception Uses, as provided in Article IV, Part II.
c. Applications for variances as provided in Section 63.
d. Questions involving interpretations of the zoning map, including disputed district
boundary lines and lot lines, as provided in Section 64, and questions involving permitted
uses in a zoning district as provided for in Article IX.
e. Any other matter the Board is required to act upon by any other Town Chapter.
2. The Board may adopt rules and regulations governing its procedures and operations not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter.
Section 27. Zoning Administrator
There is hereby established the Office of Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator is appointed
by the Mayor and confirmed by a majority vote of the Town Commissioners. He may be relieved of his
duties for just cause upon written charges by a majority of the Town Commissioners.
Section 28. Powers and Duties of the Zoning Administrator
1. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to administer and cause the enforcement of the
provisions of this Chapter. All departments, officials, and public employees of Perryville which
are vested with authority to issue permits or licenses shall conform to the provisions of this
Chapter and shall not issue any permit or license for any use, building, structure, or purpose
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 48
which would be in conflict with the provisions of this Chapter. Any permit or license, issued in
conflict with the provisions of this Chapter, shall be null and void. If the Zoning Administrator
finds that any of the provisions of this Chapter are being violated, he shall notify in writing the
person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the
action necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or
structure or of additions, alterations, or structural changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal
work being done, or shall take any other action authorized by this Chapter to insure compliance
with or to prevent violations of its provisions. The Zoning Administrator shall administer this
Chapter on a day-to-day basis as directed by the Town Administrator.
2. The Administrator shall also prepare staff comments on such matters as required by this Chapter
or when so directed by the Mayor and Town Commissioners, Planning Commission, Town
Administrator or Board of Appeals. The Administrator is primarily responsible for insuring that
this work is completed on a timely basis.
3. All powers and duties of the Zoning Administrator may be assumed by the Town Administrator
or his or her designee in his or her absence.
Section 29. Town Commissioners
The Town Commissioners' primary responsibility relative to this Chapter shall be to make final decisions
on zoning amendment petitions, annexations, storm water management waivers and to make such
appointments as identified in this Chapter. In considering proposed changes in the text of this Chapter or
in the zoning map, the Commissioners acts in their legislative capacity and must proceed in accordance
with the requirements of Article XVIII.
Section 30. Reserved
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 49
ARTICLE IV DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL
Part I Building and Zoning Permits
Section 31. Permits Required
1. No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered, or use of
land be changed without a zoning certificate (certificate of approval) therefore, issued by the
Zoning Administrator. No zoning certificate shall be issued except in conformity with the
provisions of this Chapter, except after written order from the Board of Appeals.
2. No building or other structure shall be erected, nor shall any existing building or structure be
moved, added to, enlarged, or structurally altered, and no excavation for any building or other
structure shall begin without the issuance of a Zoning Certificate and a Building Permit.
3. In addition to the building permit and zoning certificate, the following permits may be required
by the Town Administrator and/or Zoning Administrator:
a. Applications Approved by the Board of Appeals. The Zoning Administrator shall issue
permits in conformance with the written authorization of the Board of Appeals
concerning administrative review appeals, special exception permit appeals, dimensional
variance appeals, or other appeals as authorized in this Zoning Chapter.
b. Demolition Permits. No building or other structures shall be razed, demolished, or
removed, either entirely or in part, nor shall any of said activities be commenced, without
a wrecking permit therefore.
c. Grading Permits. As provided in the Perryville Sediment and Erosion Control Chapter.
d. Sign Permits. No sign shall be created, erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered,
nor shall any of said activities be commenced without a sign permit.
e. Subdivision Plat. If the permit involves the subdivision of land, an approved subdivision
plat shall be required as provided in the Perryville Subdivision Regulations.
f. Other Permits. Additional permits, including approvals by other agencies, may be
required to enforce the provisions of this Chapter.
4. Permits are issued under this Chapter only when a review of the application submitted, including
the plans contained therein, indicates that the development will comply with the provisions of this
Chapter if completed as proposed. Such plans and applications as are finally approved are
incorporated into any permit issued, all development shall occur strictly in accordance with such
approved plans and applications.
5. Physical improvements to land to be subdivided shall not be commenced without a signed,
recorded final plat, a Bond, or Letter of Credit and a public works agreement approved by the
Mayor and Commissioners of the Town of Perryville.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 50
6. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to enter at
any reasonable hour any building, structure, or premise in the Town to enforce the provisions of
this Chapter. For this purpose a badge of office for the Zoning Administrator may be adopted and
shall be displayed for the purpose of identification. The assistance and cooperation of sheriffs
and/or police, fire, and health departments and all other Town officials shall be available to the
Administrator as required in the performance of his/her duties.
7. The Planning Commission and/or Town Commissioners may require that the expense of
development and improvement plan review by the Town, including independent engineering
services, be borne by the applicant in addition to any other fees required.
Section 32. Severability
1. Compliance with Other Codes, Statutes, and Regulations. Nothing in this section or other sections
of the Zoning Chapter shall be construed to exempt any applicant for a permit from compliance
with all local, state, and federal codes, statutes, and regulations.
2. Prior Permits. No building permit which was lawfully issued prior to the original effective date of
this Chapter and which is in full force and effect at said date shall be invalidated by the passage
of this Chapter - provided that all such permits shall expire not later than 180 days from the
effective date of this Chapter, unless actual construction shall have begun and continued pursuant
to the terms of said permit.
3. Conflict with Other Permits. Except as provided herein, no permit pertaining to the use of land or
buildings shall be issued by any agency, department or employee unless a Zoning Certificate has
been issued by the Zoning Administrator. Any permit issued in conflict with the provisions of this
Chapter shall be null and void.
Section 33. Computation of Time
1. Unless otherwise specifically provided, the time within which an act is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day. If the last day is a Saturday, Sunday,
or legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven
days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays shall be excluded.
2. Unless otherwise specifically provided, whenever a person has the right or is required to do some
act within a prescribed period after the service of a notice or other paper upon him or her and the
notice or paper is served by mail, 3 days shall be added to the prescribed period.
Section 34. Permit Application Requirements and Procedures
1. All applications for permits shall be accompanied by such plans and information as the Town of
Perryville deems to be necessary to determine compliance and provide for enforcement of this
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 51
Zoning Chapter. The application materials listed in Appendix A shall be the minimum.
Additional information may be required.
2. Site Plans Required:
a. Minor Site Plan. A minor site plan shall be filed for a single-family dwelling, a two
family residence, any accessory building, an addition or change of a commercial or
industrial structure, or for a special exception use which does not require a building
permit.
Upon determination by the Zoning Administrator, in those above cases where a field
inspection indicates that the scope of the proposed building, addition, accessory use, or
special exception is of such a nature that the provisions for the handling of natural and
storm water, sediment control, off-street parking, set-backs, water and sewerage, and
other requirements cannot be adequately addressed with a minor site plan, a major site
plan shall be required.
b. Major Site Plan. All applications for building permits, other than those accompanied by a
minor site plan, or those that are considered minor or major subdivisions (see
definitions), shall be accompanied by a major site plan.
c. General Development Plan (Master Plan)
(1) A general development plan is a site plan by which, at the early stages of
development design, the Planning Commission may consider, approve, or restrict
major aspects of the development without requiring an undue amount of final
design work on the part of the developer. The general development plan is less
detailed and specific than a major site plan in terms of exact arrangement of
buildings, parking areas, open spaces, access points, and any other site design
features. No building permits can be issued based upon a general development
plan.
(2) General development plans shall be required as follows:
(a) All applications for zoning map amendments shall be accompanied by a
general development plan.
(b) General development plans shall be required to permit more than one
principal structure and its accessory structures on a lot or parcel of land.
d. Grading Permits. Requirements for grading permits shall be as required by the Cecil
County Soil Conservation Service.
e. Subdivision Plat. If the permit involves the subdivision of land, an approved subdivision
plat shall be required as provided in Subdivision Regulations.
f. Sign Permits. Requirements for sign permits shall be as provided in Article XV.
g. Transportation Plan
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 52
(1) No building or part of a building shall be permitted to be erected within the lines
of highway, street, or pedestrian route shown on the Town's Transportation Plan
Map.
(2) The owner of the property so affected, however, shall have the right to appeal the
refusal of a building permit to the Board of Appeals, and the Board may grant a
permit to build if it should find, upon the evidence and arguments presented to it
upon such appeal:
(a) That the entire property of the appellant of which the area affected by the
Transportation Plan forms a part, cannot yield a reasonable return to the
owner unless such appeal be granted; and
(b) That balancing the interest of the general public in preserving the
integrity of the plan and the interest of the owner of the property in the
use and benefits of his property, the granting of such permit is required
consideration of reasonable justice and equity.
(3) Before taking any action, the Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing at
which time the parties in interest shall have an opportunity to be heard. In the
event the Board grants a building permit in any such appeal, it shall have the
power to specify the exact location, extent, area, height, duration, and other
details and conditions to govern the building, structure, or part thereof for which
the permit is granted.
h. Storm water Management Plan. A permit may not be issued for any parcel or lot unless a
storm water management plan meeting all the requirements of the Perryville Storm water
Management Chapter has been approved.
i. Forest Conservation. Projects that ultimately require approval of subdivision, sediment
control, site plan approval or grading permits must comply with the requirements of the
Perryville Forest Conservation Chapter.
j. All walls, including retaining walls, shall have plans sealed by a Maryland licensed
architect or engineer. The requirement may be waived by the Planning Commission for
walls less than four (4) feet in height.
3. The following additional requirements shall be applicable to site plans required under this
section:
a. Compliance with applicable established design criteria, construction standards, and
specifications for all improvements as may be required by the Planning Commission and
this Zoning Chapter. The Planning Commission may require that the proposed
development comply with some or all of the applicable design requirements contained in
the Perryville Subdivision Regulations.
b. The zoning certificate and building permit shall not be issued unless and until the
Maryland Department of Transportation has approved the site plan as it relates to access
point design details and parking lot circulation layout on a state highway. The zoning
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 53
certificate and building permit shall not be issued unless and until the Town has approved
the site plan as it relates to access point design details and parking lot circulation layout
on a county road.
c. Other Approvals. If this Zoning Chapter requires approval by another agency of certain
site plan features, such approval shall be obtained prior to issuance of a building permit
or zoning certificate.
d. Development Plan as Site Plan. In any case, where the Planning Commission has
approved a detailed final development plan showing essentially the same information as
required above for the property seeking a zoning certificate and building permit, no
separate site plan shall be required to be prepared. The applicant shall be required to
supply such supplementary information as necessary to comply with all requirements of
this Section.
e. Any or all of the information required for a minor or major site plan may be waived if the
Planning Commission finds that it is not needed to make a determination of zoning
compliance.
f. The basic information required with building permit applications is shown in Appendix
A.
Section 35. Certificate of Occupancy
1. It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or
part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged
in its use or structure until a zoning occupancy permit shall have been issued therefore by the
Zoning Administrator or a designated authority, e.g., the Cecil County Department of Licenses
and Inspection, stating that the proposed use or the building or land conforms to the requirements
of this Chapter.
2. No nonconforming structure or use shall be maintained, renewed, changed or extended until a
zoning occupancy permit shall have been issued by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning
Occupancy permit shall state specifically wherein the nonconforming use differs from the
provisions of this Chapter, provided upon enactment or amendment of this Chapter, owners or
occupants of nonconforming uses or structures shall have three (3) months to apply for zoning
occupancy permits. Failure to make such application within three (3) months shall be presumptive
evidence that the property was conforming at the time of enactment or amendment of this
Chapter.
3. No permit for erection, alteration, moving or repairing of any building shall be issued until an
application has been made for a zoning occupancy permit; the permit shall be issued in
conformity with the provision of this Chapter upon completion of the work.
4. A temporary occupancy permit may be issued by the Zoning Administrator for a period not
exceeding six (6) months during alterations or partial occupancy of a building pending its
completion, provided such temporary permit may require such conditions and safeguards as will
protect the safety of the occupants and the public.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 54
5. The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of all zoning occupancy permits and copies
shall be furnished upon request of any person.
Section 36. Inspection And Supervision During Installation
1. Unless specifically provided in this Chapter, the construction standards for all off-site
improvements and on-site improvements required by this article shall conform to the Town
design and construction standards. Appropriate Town authorities shall approve the plans and
specifications for all required improvements and shall inspect the construction of such
improvements to assure conformity thereto.
2. Inspection during the installation of the off-site improvements shall be made by the department
responsible for such improvements as required to certify compliance with the approved site plan
and applicable standards.
3. The owner shall notify the appropriate Town agencies in writing three (3) days prior to the
beginning of all street, water sewer, or storm sewer work shown to be constructed on approved
plans.
4. The owner shall provide adequate supervision on the site during the installation of all required
improvements and have a responsible superintendent or foreman together with one set of
approved plans, profiles, and specifications available at all times when work is being performed.
5. Upon satisfactory completion of the required improvements and after having received verification
by the appropriate Town approving authorities, the Town Administrator may recommend the
release of any bond which may have been furnished for the guarantee of satisfactory installation
of such improvements of parts thereof. This release shall provide for 10 percent of the total bond
to be retained for a period of 12 months after completion of all work. Bond retention period may
be extended for an additional 12 months if major failures or deficiencies occur as determined by
the Planning Commission. Said retainer shall be for the protection of the Town to cover failures,
discrepancies, etc., in the previously approved improvements.
6. The installation of improvements as required in this article shall in no case serve to bind the
Town to accept such improvement for the maintenance, repair, or operation thereof.
7. The Town Commissioners may require that the expense of independent inspection and
supervision services during installation be borne by the applicant.
Section 37. As-Built Site Plan
Upon satisfactory completion of required improvements as shown on the approved site plan or a section
thereof, the developer shall submit to the Zoning Administrator four (4) copies of the "as built" site plan,
certified by the engineer before occupancy of any building, for the review and approval for conformity
with the approved site plan by the appropriate Town departments (as designated in this section). The
Town Administrator shall not process the occupancy permit until the appropriate "as built" site plan has
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 55
been reviewed and approved by the appropriate agencies. As-built site plan should indicate any deviations
from site improvements shown on final approved site plan.
Section 38. No Occupancy, Use, or Sale of Lots Until Requirements Fulfilled
Issuance of a special exception or zoning certificate authorizes the recipient to commence the activity
resulting in a change in use of the land or (subject to obtaining a building permit) to commence work
designed to construct, erect, move, or substantially alter buildings or other substantial structures or to
make necessary improvements to a subdivision. However, except as otherwise provided in this Chapter,
the intended use may not be commenced, no building may be occupied, and in the case of subdivisions,
no lots may be sold until all of the requirements of this Chapter and all additional requirements imposed
pursuant to the issuance of a special exception permit have been complied with.
Section 39. Who May Submit Permit Applications
1. Applications for zoning certificate, special exception, sign permits, other permits, or minor
subdivision plat approval will be accepted only from persons having the legal authority to take
action in accordance with the permit or the minor subdivision plat approval. By way of
illustration, in general this means that applications should be made by the owners or lessees of
property, or their agents, or persons who have contracted to purchase property contingent upon
their ability to acquire the necessary permits under this Chapter, or the agents of such persons
(who may make application in the name of such owners, lessees, or contract vendees).
2. The Zoning Administrator shall require an applicant to submit evidence of his/her authority to
submit the application in accordance with Subsection 1. whenever there appears to be a
reasonable basis for questioning this authority.
Section 40. Applications To Be Complete
1. All applications for zoning certificate, special exception, sign permits, or other permits must be
complete before the permit-issuing authority is required to consider the application.
2. Subject to Sections 31 and 34, an application is complete when it contains all of the information
that is necessary for the permit-issuing authority to decide whether or not the development, if
completed as proposed, will comply with all of the requirements of this Chapter.
3. In this Chapter, detailed or technical design requirements and construction specifications relating
to various types of improvements (e.g., streets, sidewalks, etc.) are set forth in specifications
adopted by the Town and/or in one or more of the appendices to this Chapter. It is not necessary
that the application contain the type of detailed construction drawings that would be necessary to
determine compliance with these appendices, so long as the plans provide sufficient information
to allow the Planning Commission to evaluate the application in the light of the substantive
requirements set forth in this text of this Chapter.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 56
However, whenever this Chapter requires a certain element of a development to be constructed in
accordance with the detailed requirements set forth in one or more of these appendices, then no
construction work on such element may be commenced until detailed construction drawings have
been submitted to and approved by the Town. Failure to observe this requirement may result in
permit revocation, denial of final subdivision plat approval, or other penalty as provided in
Article VII.
4. The presumption established by this Chapter is that all of the information set forth in the
Appendix A is necessary to satisfy the requirements of this section. However, it is recognized that
each development is unique, and therefore the permit-issuing authority may allow less
information or require more information to be submitted according to the needs of the particular
case. For applications submitted to the Board of Appeals, the applicant may rely in the first
instance on the recommendations of the Zoning Administrator as to whether more or less
information than that set forth in the Appendix A should be submitted.
Section 41. Staff Consultation Before Formal Application
1. To minimize development planning costs, avoid misunderstanding or misinterpretation, and
ensure compliance with the requirements of this Chapter, a pre-application meeting between the
developer and the Planning Commission is encouraged or required as provided in this section.
2. Before submitting an application for a zoning certificate authorizing a development that consists
of or contains a major subdivision, the developer shall submit to the Planning Commission a preapplication
concept plan of such subdivision, drawn approximately to scale (1 inch = 100 feet).
The concept plan shall contain the information set forth in Appendix A. The applicant will be
placed on the agenda for the next available Planning Commission meeting.
Section 42. Staff Consultation After Application Submitted
1. Upon receipt of a formal application for a zoning certificate, or special exception permit, the
Administrator shall review the application and confer with the applicant to ensure that he
understands the Town staff's interpretation of the applicable requirements of this Chapter, that he
has submitted all of the information that he intends to submit, and that the application represents
precisely and completely what he proposes to do.
2. If the application is for a special exception permit, the Administrator shall place the application
on the agenda of the appropriate board when the applicant indicates that the application is as
complete as he intends to make it. However, if the Administrator believes that the application is
incomplete, he shall recommend to the appropriate board that the application be denied on that
basis.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 57
Section 43. Authorizing Use or Occupancy Before Completion of Development
1. In cases when, because of weather conditions or other factors beyond the control of the zoning
certificate recipient (exclusive of financial hardship), it would be unreasonable to require the
zoning certificate recipient to comply with all of the requirements of this Chapter prior to
commencing the intended use of the property or occupying any buildings, the Administrator may
authorize the commencement of the intended use or the occupancy of buildings (insofar as the
requirements of this Chapter are concerned) if the recipient provides a performance bond or other
security satisfactory to the Zoning Administrator to ensure that all of the requirements of this
Chapter will be fulfilled within a reasonable period (not to exceed 12 months) determined by the
Zoning Administrator.
2. With respect to subdivisions in which the developer is selling only undeveloped lots, the Planning
Commission may authorize final plat approval and the sale of lots before all the requirements of
this article are fulfilled if the subdivider provides a performance bond from a local lending source
or other security satisfactory to the Town to ensure that all of these requirements will be fulfilled
within not more than 12 months after final approval.
Section 44. Completing Developments in Phases
1. As a prerequisite to taking advantage of constructing the development in phases, the developer
shall submit plans that clearly show the various phases or stages of the proposed development and
the requirements of this Chapter that will be satisfied with respect to each phase or stage.
2. If a development that is to be built in phases or stages includes improvements that are designed to
relate to, benefit, or be used by the entire development (such as a swimming pool or tennis courts
in a residential development) then, as part of his application for development approval, the
developer shall submit a proposed schedule for completion of such improvements. The schedule
shall relate completion of such improvements to completion of one or more phases or stages of
the entire development. Once a schedule has been approved and made part of the permit by the
Planning Commission, no land may be used, no buildings may be occupied, and no subdivision
lots may be sold except in accordance with the schedule approved.
Section 45. Expiration Of Permits
1. Zoning certificates, building, sign, and other permits shall expire automatically if, within one (1)
year after the issuance of such permits:
a. The use authorized by such permits has not commenced, in circumstances where no
substantial construction, erection, alteration, excavation, demolition, or similar work is
necessary before commencement of such use, or
b. Less than 10 percent of the total cost of all construction, erection, alteration, excavation,
demolition, or similar work on any development authorized by such permits has been
completed on the site. With respect to phased development (see Section 44), this
requirement shall apply only to the first phase.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 58
2. If, after some physical alteration to land or structures begins to take place, such work is
discontinued for a period of 6 months, then the permit authorizing such work shall immediately
expire. However, expiration of the permit shall not affect the provisions of Section 44.
3. The Planning Commission may extend for a period up to six (6) months the date when a permit
would otherwise expire pursuant to Subsections a.or b. if it concludes that (i) the permit has not
yet expired, (ii) the permit recipient has proceeded with due diligence and in good faith, and (iii)
conditions have not changed so substantially as to warrant a new application. Successive
extensions may be granted for periods up to six months upon the same findings. All such
extensions may be granted without resort to the formal processes and fees required for a new
permit.
4. For purposes of this section, the zoning certificate within the jurisdiction of the Board of Appeals
is issued when such board votes to approve the application with or without conditions (written
minutes of such Board action will state conditions in full) and issue the zoning certificate. A
permit within the jurisdiction of the Zoning Administrator is issued when the earlier of the
following takes place:
a. A copy of the fully executed zoning certificate is delivered to the permit recipient, and
delivery is accomplished when the zoning certificate is hand-delivered or mailed to the
permit applicant; or
b. The Zoning Administrator notifies the permit applicant that the applicant has been
approved and that all that remains before a fully executed zoning certificate can be
delivered is for the applicant to take certain specified actions, such as having the permit
executed by the property owner so it can be recorded if required.
5. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of Article VIII, this section shall be applicable to permits
issued prior to the date this section becomes effective.
Section 46. Effect Of Permit On Successors And Assigns
1. Certificates of approval, special exception, sign, and other permits authorize the permittee to
make use of land and structures in a particular way. Such permits are transferable, however, so
long as the land or structures or any portion thereof covered under a permit continues to be used
for the purposes for which the permit was granted, then:
a. No person (including successors or assigns of the person who obtained the permit) may
make use of the land or structures covered under such permit for the purposes authorized
in the permit except in accordance with all the terms and requirements of that permit, and
b. The terms and requirements of the permit apply to and restrict the use of land or
structures covered under the permit, not only with respect to all persons having any
interest in the property at the time the permit was obtained, but also with respect to
persons who subsequently obtain any interest in all or part of the covered property and
wish to use it for or in connection with purposes other than those for which the permit
was originally issued.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 59
2. Whenever a zoning certificate, special exception, or variance permit is issued to authorize
development, nothing authorized by the permit may be done until the record owner of the
property signs a written acknowledgment that the permit has been issued so that the permit may
be recorded in the Perryville Town Hall and indexed under the record owner's name as grantor.
Section 47. Amendments to and Modifications of Permits
1. Insignificant deviations from the permit (including approved plans) issued by the Board of
Appeals or the Administrator are permissible and the Administrator may authorize such
insignificant deviations. A deviation is insignificant if it has no discernible impact on neighboring
properties, the general public, the environment or those intended to occupy or use the proposed
development.
2. Minor design modifications or changes in permits (including approved plans) are permissible
with the approval of the Planning Commission. Such permission may be obtained without a
formal application, public hearing, or payment of any additional fee. For purposes of this section,
minor design modifications or changes are those that have no substantial impact on neighboring
properties, the environment, the general public, or those intended to occupy or use the proposed
development.
3. All other requests for changes in approved plans will be processed as new applications. If such
requests are required to be acted upon by the Board of Appeals, new conditions may be imposed,
but the applicant retains the right to reject such additional conditions by withdrawing his request
for an amendment and may then proceed in accordance with the previously issued permit.
4. The Administrator shall determine whether amendments to and modifications of permits fall
within the categories set forth above in Subsections 1., 2., and 3.
5. A developer requesting approval of changes shall submit a written request for such approval to
the Administrator, and that request shall identify the changes. Approval of all changes must be
given in writing.
Section 48. Reconsideration Of Board Action
1. Whenever the Board of Appeals disapproves an application for a special exception permit or a
variance, on any basis other than the failure of the applicant to submit a complete application,
such action may not be reconsidered by the respective Board for a period of not less than one year
unless the applicant clearly demonstrates that:
a. Circumstances affecting the property that is the subject of the application have
substantially changed, or
b. New information is available that could not with reasonable diligence have been
presented at a previous hearing. A request to be heard on this basis must be filed with the
Administrator within the time period for an appeal to the Court (see Section 80).
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 60
However, such a request does not extend the period within which an appeal must be
taken.
2. Notwithstanding Subsection 1., the Board of Appeals may at any time consider a new application
affecting the same property as an application previously denied. A new application is one that
differs in some substantial way from the one previously considered.
Section 49. Maintenance of Common Areas, and Facilities
The recipient of any zoning certificate, special exception, sign, or other permit, or his successor, shall be
responsible for maintaining all common areas, improvements, or facilities required by this Chapter or any
permit issued in accordance with its provisions, except those areas, improvements, or facilities with
respect to which an offer of dedication to the public has been accepted by the Town. As illustrations, and
without limiting the generality of the foregoing, this means that private roads and parking areas, water and
sewer lines, and recreational facilities must be properly maintained so that they can be used in the manner
intended, and require vegetation and trees used for screening, landscaping, or shading must be replaced if
they die or are destroyed.
Section 50. Records of Zoning Administrators
The Zoning Administrator shall keep records of all zoning certificates issued under this Chapter; maintain
permanent and current records related to the Chapter, including zoning maps, amendments, special
exceptions, variances, appeals, and planned unit development site plans; and make annual reports and
recommendations to the Planning Commission and Town Commissioners on matters pertaining to this
Chapter.
Section 51. Structures And Uses To Be As Provided In Building Permits, Plans, And
Certificates of Occupancy
Building permits or certificates of occupancy issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by
the Town (via the County Building Administrator) authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction
set forth in such permits, plans, and certificates, and no other. The use, arrangement or construction at
variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this Zoning Chapter.
Part II Special Exception Permits
Section 52. Intent
1. The development and execution of this Chapter are based upon the division of the Town into
districts within which the use of land and buildings and the bulk and location of buildings and
structures in relation to the land are substantially uniform. It is recognized, however, that there are
certain uses which, because of their unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified in any
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 61
particular district or districts without consideration in each case of the impact of those uses upon
neighboring land and of the public need for the particular use at the particular location.
2. The intent of this Article is to establish procedures and minimum standards to be used as
guidelines for the consideration and authorization of those uses classified as special exceptions
under the respective District regulations.
3. The granting of a special exception does not exempt the applicant from complying with all other
requirements of this Chapter or of the law.
Section 53. Initiation of Special Exceptions
Any property owner or other person with an enforceable legal interest in a property may file an
application to use such land for one or more of the special exceptions provided in the zoning district in
which the land is located.
Section 54. Application for Special Exception
Such application for special exception shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator or Town
Administrator on a form prescribed by the Planning Commission. The application shall be accompanied
by such plans and/or data as necessary, and shall include a statement in writing by the applicant and
adequate evidence showing that the proposed use will conform to the standards hereinafter set forth. Such
application shall be forwarded from the Zoning Administrator to the Planning Commission for
recommendation to the Board of Appeals for review within 45 days of receipt of the application by the
Zoning Administrator. The Board of Appeals shall, within 60 days of receipt of application from the
Zoning Administrator, render a decision on the application.
Section 55. Hearing on Application
1. The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on each application for a special exception at
such time and place as shall be established by the Board of Appeals. The hearing shall be
conducted and a record of such proceedings shall be preserved in such a manner as the Board of
Appeals shall, by rule, prescribe from time to time.
2. Notice is required as provided in Article VI.
Section 56. Authorization
For each application for a special exception, the Board of Appeals shall normally, within 90 days of
receipt of the application, conduct its public hearing and report its findings and decisions, including the
stipulations or additional conditions and guarantees deemed necessary for the protection of the public
interest.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 62
Section 57. Standards
No special exception shall be approved by the Board of Appeals unless such Board shall find:
1. That the establishment, maintenance, and operation of the special exception will not be
detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, convenience, morals, order or general
welfare.
2. That the special exception will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the
immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair
property values within the neighborhood.
3. That the exterior architectural appeal and functional plan of any proposed structure will not be so
at variance with either the exterior architectural appeal and functional plan of the structures
already constructed or in the course of construction in the immediate neighborhood or the
character of the applicable district, as to cause a substantial depreciation in the property values
within the neighborhood.
4. That adequate utilities, water, sewer or septic system, access roads, storm drainage and/or other
necessary public facilities and improvements have been or are being provided.
5. That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so designed as
to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
6. That the proposed special exception is not contrary to the objectives of the current
Comprehensive Plan for the Town of Perryville.
7. That the special exception shall, in all other respects, conform to the applicable regulations of the
district in which it is located or to the special requirements established for the specific use.
8. Conditions and Guarantees. Prior to the granting of any special exception, the Board of Appeals
shall stipulate such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location, construction,
maintenance and operation of the special exception as is deemed necessary for the protection of
the public interest and to secure compliance with the standards and requirements specified in
Article XII. In all cases in which special exceptions are granted, the Board of Appeals shall
require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions
stipulated in connection therewith are being and will be complied with. Such proof shall be filed
with the board on or before March 15 of each year. The first filing shall not be made unless and
until at least 12 months have elapsed since the date of the grant of the special exception.
Section 58. Effect of Denial of a Special Exception
No application for a special exception (conditional use) which has been denied wholly or in part by the
Board of Appeals shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of said order of denial,
except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of change of conditions found to be valid by the Board of
Appeals.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 63
Section 59. Complaints
Notice of complaints received by any representative of the Town concerning the operation of any special
exceptions shall be transmitted promptly to the Board which shall take appropriate action as provided by
law. The complainant shall be notified of the action taken.
Section 60. Revocation
1. Failure to Comply with Conditions. Whenever the Board shall find, in case of any permit
heretofore or hereafter granted pursuant to the provisions of this Article that any of the terms,
conditions, or restrictions upon which such permit was granted are not being complied with, the
Board is authorized, after due notice to all parties concerned and granting full opportunity for a
public hearing, to suspend or revoke such permit or take other action as it deems necessary to
ensure compliance. The Board is authorized to request and obtain investigations and reports as to
compliance from such Town or state agencies or administrative officers as may be appropriate.
2. Abandonment, etc. Whenever the Board shall determine that a special exception appears to have
been abandoned, that an approved special exception is not initiated within one year after the date
of approval, that its annual proof referred to above has not been filed within 45 days of its due
date, or that all of the terms and conditions of its grant are not being complied with, the
Administrator shall notify the board and the Town attorney's office. Upon receipts of notice of
such determination by the Board, the board shall issue an order to show cause why such special
exception should not be revoked. Notice thereof shall be given to the party to whom the special
exception has been granted and to all parties who would be entitled to receive notice of a new
application for special exception concerning the property. The applicant shall have 60 days from
the date of written notice of expiration to file an appeal of said notice.
Section 61. Standards for Specific Special Exceptions
1. Certain buildings, structures, and uses of land developed as special exceptions are of such
substantially different character from other special exceptions that they require specific and
additional standards to guide the decision of the Board of Appeals. See Article XI for minimum
standards for special exceptions.
2. Whenever deemed appropriate, the Board of Appeals may require the applicant for a special
exception to install a vegetated and/or structural buffer along property lines to protect adjoining
properties from the potential impacts of the special exception use and/or to maintain or enhance
the general visual character of the property and surrounding area. Buffers standards shall be
selected from Appendix B.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 64
ARTICLE V APPEALS, VARIANCES, INTERPRETATIONS
Section 62. Appeals [Amended 1/3/2017 by Ord No. 2016-21]
1. An appeal from any final order or decision of the Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission or
Town Administrator may be taken to the Board of Appeals by any person aggrieved. An appeal is
taken by filing with the Administrator and the Board of Appeals a written notice of appeal
specifying the grounds therefore. A notice of appeal shall be considered filed with the
Administrator and the Board of Appeals when delivered to the Town Administrator, and the date
and time of filing shall be entered on the notice by the Zoning Administrator.
2. An appeal must be filed within 30 days after the date of the decision or order appealed from.
3. Whenever an appeal is filed, the Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Appeals
all the papers constituting the record relating to the action appealed from.
4. An appeal stays all actions by the Administrator seeking enforcement of or compliance with the
order or decision appealed from, unless the Administrator certifies to the Board of Appeals that
(because of facts stated in the certificate) a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life
or property. In that case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the Board of Appeals
or a court, issued on application of the party seeking the stay, for due cause shown, after notice to
the Administrator.
5. The Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm (wholly or partly) or may modify the order,
requirement or decision or determination appealed from and shall make any order, requirement,
decision or determination that in its opinion ought to be made in the case before it. To this end,
the board shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
6. An appeal from any final order or decision of the Planning Commission or Board of Appeals shall
be taken to the Circuit Court in the manner provided by law of Maryland and particularly Titles 4
& 5 of the Land Use Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland. The appeal must be filed within
30 days after the date of the decision or order appealed.
Section 63. Variances
1. An application for a variance shall be submitted to the Board of Appeals by filing a copy of the
application with the Administrator in the Town office. Applications shall be handled in the same
manner as applications for zoning permits and special exceptions in conformity with the
provisions of Sections 39, 40, and 41. When the subject property or structure is located in the
Critical Area, a copy of the application shall be provided to the Critical Area Commission.
2. A variance may be granted by the Board of Appeals if it concludes that strict enforcement of the
Chapter would result in practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships for the applicant and that,
by granting the variance, the spirit of the Chapter will be observed, public safety and welfare
secured, and substantial justice done. It may reach these conclusions if it finds that:
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 65
a. If the applicant complies strictly with the provisions of the Chapter, he can make no
reasonable use of his property,
b. That special conditions or circumstances exist that are unique to the subject property or
structure and that a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter would result in
unwarranted hardship which is not generally shared by owners of property in the same
land use classification.
(1) The hardship of which the applicant complains is one suffered by the applicant
rather than by neighbors or the general public,
(2) The hardship relates to the applicant's land, rather than personal circumstances,
(3) The hardship is unique, or nearly so, rather than one shared by many surrounding
properties,
(4) The hardship is not the result of the applicant's own actions, and
(5) That strict enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter would deprive the
property owner of rights commonly shared by other owners of property in
similar area.
c. That the granting of a variance will not confer upon an applicant any special privilege
that would be denied to other owners of like property and/or structures within the Zoning
District or the Critical Area Overlay District.
d. That the variance request is not based upon conditions or circumstances which
are self-created or self-imposed, nor does the request arise from conditions or
circumstances either permitted or non-conforming which are related to adjacent
parcels.
e. That greater profitability or lack of knowledge of the restrictions shall not be considered
as sufficient cause for a variance.
f. That the proposed variance is consistent with the Town of Perryville Comprehensive
Plan.
g. The variance will neither result in the extension of a nonconforming situation in violation
of Article VIII nor authorize the initiation of a nonconforming use of land.
h. That the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent
of this Chapter and the Town’s Critical Area Program and shall not result in a use not
permitted in the zone in which the property subject to variance is located, and will not be
injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.
3. The following provisions shall apply to requests for a variance in the Critical Area Overlay Zone:
a. The Town shall make findings which demonstrate that the variance request meets the
following standards:
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 66
(1) Special conditions or circumstances exist that are peculiar to the land or structure
involved and that a literal enforcement of provisions and requirements of the
Town's Critical Area Program would result in unwarranted hardship.
(2) A literal interpretation of the provisions of the Critical Area Program and related
Chapters will deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other
properties in similar areas within the Critical Area.
(3) The granting of a variance will not confer upon an applicant any special privilege
that would be denied by the Town Critical Area Program to other lands or
structures within the Critical Area.
(4) The variance request is not based upon conditions or circumstances which are the
result of actions by the applicant, nor does the request arise from any condition
relating to land or building use, either permitted or non-conforming on any
neighboring property.
(5) The granting of a variance shall not adversely affect water quality or adversely
impact fish, wildlife or plant habitat within the Critical Area and the granting of
the variance will be in harmony with the general spirit and intent of the Critical
Area Act and the Town Critical Area Program.
b. Applications for a variance will be made in writing to the Town Board of Appeals with a
copy provided to the Critical Area Commission.
c. Process. After hearing an application for a Critical Area Program variance, the Board of
Appeals shall make findings reflecting analysis of each standard. The Town shall notify
the Critical Area Commission of its findings and decision to grant or deny the variance
request.
d. Conditions and Mitigation. The Board of Appeals may impose conditions on the use or
development of a property which is granted a variance as it may find reasonable to ensure
that the spirit and intent of the Critical Area Program is maintained including, but not
limited to the following:
(1) Impacts resulting from the granting of the variance shall be mitigated by planting
on the site per square foot of the variance granted at no less than a three to one
basis or as recommended by the Town Administrator.
(2) New or expanded structures or impervious surfaces shall be located the greatest
possible distance from mean high water, the landward edge of tidal wetlands,
tributary streams, nontidal wetlands, or steep slopes.
4. In granting variances, the Board of Appeals may impose such reasonable conditions as will
ensure that the use of the property to which the variance applies will be as compatible as
practicable with the surrounding properties. Violations of such conditions, when made part of the
terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Chapter and
punishable under as provided in Article VII.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 67
5. A variance may be issued for an indefinite duration or for a specified duration only.
6. The nature of the variance and any conditions attached to it shall be entered on the face of the
zoning permit, or the zoning permit may simply note the issuance of the variance and refer to the
written record of the variance for further information. All such conditions are enforceable in the
same manner as any other applicable requirement of this Chapter.
Section 64. Interpretations
1. The Board of Appeals is authorized to interpret the zoning map and to pass upon disputed
questions of lot or district boundary lines and similar questions. If such questions arise in the
context of an appeal from a decision of the Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission or Town
Administrator, they shall be handled as provided in Section 12.
2. An application for a map interpretation shall be submitted to the Board of Appeals by filing a
copy of the application with the Administrator in the Town office. The application shall contain
sufficient information to enable the Board to make the necessary interpretation.
3. Interpretations of the location of floodway and floodplain boundary lines may be made by the
Administrator as provided in applicable regulations.
Section 65. Requests To Be Heard Expeditiously
The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide all appeals, variance requests, and requests for interpretations
as expeditiously as possible, consistent with the need to follow regularly established agenda procedures,
provide notice in accordance with Article VI, and obtain the necessary information to make sound
decisions.
Section 66. Burden of Proof in Appeals and Variances
1. When an appeal is taken to the Board of Appeals in accordance with Section 62, the
Administrator shall have the initial burden of presenting to the Board sufficient evidence and
argument to justify the order or decision appealed from. The burden of presenting evidence and
argument to the contrary then shifts to the appellant, who shall also have the burden of
persuasion.
2. The burden of presenting evidence sufficient to allow the Board of Appeals to reach the
conclusions set forth in Subsection 63.2. and 63.3 when located within the Critical Area Overlay
District, as well as the burden of persuasion on those issues, remains with the applicant seeking
the variance.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 68
Section 67. Board Action on Appeals and Variances
1. With respect to appeals, a motion to reverse, affirm, or modify the order, requirement, decision,
or determination appealed from shall include, insofar as practicable, a statement of the specific
reasons or findings of facts that support the motion. If a motion to reverse or modify is not made
or fails to receive the majority vote necessary for adoption, then a motion to uphold the decision
appealed from shall be in order. This motion is adopted as the Board's decision if supported by a
majority of the board's membership (excluding vacant seats).
2. A motion to deny a variance may be made on the basis that any one or more of the seven criteria
set forth in Subsection 63.2., and 63.3 when located within the Critical Area Overlay District, ,
are not satisfied or that the application is incomplete. Insofar as practicable, such a motion shall
include a statement of the specific reasons or findings of fact that support it. This motion is
adopted as the board's decision if supported by a majority of the Board's membership (excluding
vacant seats).
3. Postponement of hearings shall be as follows:
a. Requests for postponement shall be filed in writing with the Town Administrator not less
than 10 days prior to the date of the hearing, and shall be accompanied by a sum of
money sufficient to pay the cost of advertising the postponement and the rescheduled
hearing. The granting of such requests shall be at the discretion of the Chairman of the
Board.
b. Requests for postponement filed later than ten (10) days prior to the date of a scheduled
hearing, shall, in addition to the other requirements set forth in subsection a. above, be
supported by an affidavit of the party making the request or some other creditable person.
The granting of such request shall be at the discretion of the Board in cases of extreme
hardship or upon good cause shown.
c. The Board may, upon its own initiative, postpone a scheduled hearing at any time.
4. The Board may continue a hearing at another time and/or date once such hearing has been started;
however, the Board shall announce the date and hour of continuance of such hearing while in
session.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 69
ARTICLE VI HEARING PROCEDURES FOR APPEALS AND APPLICATIONS
Section 68. Hearing Required on Appeals and Applications
1. Before making a decision on an appeal or an application for a variance, special exception, or a
petition from the Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator to revoke a special exception,
the Board of Appeals shall hold a hearing on the appeal or application.
2. Subject to Subsection 3., the hearing shall be open to the public and all persons interested in the
outcome of the appeal or application shall be given an opportunity to present evidence and
arguments and ask questions of persons who testify.
3. The Board of Appeals may place reasonable and equitable limitations on the presentation of
evidence and arguments and the cross-examination of witnesses so that the matter at issue may be
heard and decided without undue delay.
4. The Board may continue the hearing until a subsequent meeting and may keep the hearing open
to take additional information up to the point a final decision is made. The Board shall announce
the date and hour of continuance of such hearing while in session.
Section 69. Notice of Hearing
The Administrator shall give notice of any hearing required by Section 68 as follows:
1. Notice of the time and place of the public hearing, together with a summary of the proposed
regulation, restriction, or boundary, shall be published in at least 1 newspaper of general
circulation in the jurisdiction once each week for 2 successive weeks, with the first such
publication of notice appearing at least 14 days prior to the hearing.
2. Notice shall be given to the appellant or applicant and any other person who makes a written
request for such notice by mailing to such persons a written notice before the hearing.
3. The notice required by this section shall state the date, time, and place of the hearing, reasonably
identify the lot that is the subject of the application or appeal, and give a brief description of the
action requested or proposed.
Section 70. Evidence
1. The provisions of this section apply to all hearings for which a notice is required by Section 68.
2. All persons who intend to present evidence to the board, rather than arguments only, shall be
sworn.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 70
3. All findings and conclusions necessary to the issuance or denial of the requested permit or appeal
(crucial findings) shall be based upon reliable evidence. Competent evidence (evidence
admissible in a court of law) shall be preferred whenever reasonably available, but in no case may
crucial findings be based solely upon incompetent evidence unless competent evidence is not
reasonably available, the evidence in question appears to be particularly reliable, and the matter at
issue is not seriously disputed.
Section 71. Modification of Application at Hearing
1. In response to questions or comments by persons appearing at the hearing or to suggestions or
recommendations by the Board of Appeals, the applicant may agree to modify his application,
including the plans and specifications submitted.
2. Unless such modifications are so substantial or extensive that the Board cannot reasonably be
expected to perceive the nature and impact of the proposed changes without revised plans before
it, the Board may approve the application with the stipulation that the permit will not be issued
until plans reflecting the agreed upon changes are submitted to the planning staff.
Section 72. Record
1. A tape recording or transcribed record prepared by a legal stenographer shall be made of all
hearings required by Section 79, and such recordings shall be kept for at least two years. Accurate
minutes shall also be kept of all such proceedings, and a transcript will be made.
2. Whenever practicable, all documentary evidence presented at a hearing as well as all other types
of physical evidence shall be made a part of the record of the proceedings and shall be kept by the
Town for at least two years.
Section 73. Written Decision
1. Any decision made by the Board of Appeals regarding an appeal or variance or issuance or
revocation of a special exception shall be reduced to writing and served upon the applicant or
appellant and all other persons who make a written request for a copy.
2. In addition to a statement of the Board's ultimate disposition of the case and any other
information deemed appropriate, the written decision shall state the Board's findings and
conclusions, as well as supporting reasons or facts, whenever this Chapter requires the same as a
prerequisite to taking action.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 71
ARTICLE VII ENFORCEMENT AND REVIEW
Section 74. Limits of Authorization
Zoning certificates of approval, building permits or certificates of occupancy issued on the basis of plans
and applications approved by the Planning Commission authorize only the use, arrangement and
construction set forth in such permits, plans, and certificates, and no other. The use, arrangement, or
construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this Zoning Chapter.
Section 75. Complaints Regarding Violations
Whenever the Zoning Administrator receives a written, signed complaint alleging a violation of this
Chapter, or a verbal complaint (noted in the record of the alleged violation by the Administrator) he shall
investigate the complaint, take whatever action is warranted, and inform the complainant in writing what
actions have been or will be taken.
Section 76. Persons Liable
The owner, tenant, or occupant of any building or land or part thereof and any architect, builder,
contractor, agent, or other person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, or maintains any situation
that is contrary to the requirements of this Chapter may be held responsible for the violation and suffer the
penalties and be subject to the remedies herein provided.
Section 77. Procedures Upon Discovery of Violations
1. If the Administrator finds that any provision of this Chapter is being violated, he shall
immediately (preferably within 30 days) send a written notice to the person responsible for such
violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it.
Additional written notices may be sent at the Administrator's discretion.
2. The final written notice (and the initial written notice may be the final notice) shall state what
action the Administrator intends to take if the violation is not corrected and shall advise that the
Administrator's decision or order may be appealed to the Board of Appeals in accordance with
Section 62.
3. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in cases when delay would seriously threaten the effective
enforcement of this Chapter or pose a danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, the
Administrator may seek enforcement without prior written notice by invoking any of the penalties
or remedies authorized in Section 78.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 72
Section 78. Penalties and Remedies for Violations [Amended 1/3/2017 by Ord No. 2016-21]
1. It shall be considered a municipal infraction for any person or corporation to violate any
provision of this Chapter, or to erect, construct, alter or repair, convert, or maintain any building
or structure, sign, or land in violation of any written statement or plan submitted and approved
hereunder.
2. It shall be considered a municipal infraction for any owner, tenant, or occupant of a building,
structure, sign or land or part thereof, which is in violation of this Chapter, or any architect,
builder, contractor, subcontractor, agent, servant, person or corporation, knowingly to assist or
further the commission of any violation of this Chapter. There shall be a rebuttable presumption
that the defendant was violating the Chapter knowingly.
3. In the event that any person is found to have committed a municipal infraction hereunder, each
infraction shall be punishable by a fine of up to $1,000.00 for each single violation. In addition to
said fine, the Town may request during the adjudication of the infraction that the defendant abate
the violation, or in the alternative to permit the Town to abate the violation at the defendant's
expense. Each day such violation continues shall be a separate offense.
4. The authority for municipal infractions is as provided in Title 6 of the Local Government Article
of the Annotated Code of Maryland and enforcement shall be as provided therein. In addition
and/or in lieu of pursuing a municipal infraction, the Town may seek injunction relief as a means
of enforcing the provisions of this Chapter.
Section 79. Permit Revocation
1. A zoning certificate, sign, or special exception permit may be revoked by the permit-issuing
authority (in accordance with the provisions of this section) if the permit recipient fails to develop
or maintain the property in accordance with the plans submitted, the requirements of this Chapter,
or any additional requirements lawfully imposed by the permit-issuing board.
2. Before a special exception permit may be revoked, all of the notice and hearing and other
requirements of Article VI shall be complied with. The notice shall inform the permit recipient of
the alleged grounds for the revocation.
a. The burden of presenting evidence sufficient to authorize the permit-issuing authority to
conclude that a permit should be revoked for any of the reasons set forth in Subsection 1.
shall be upon the party advocating that position. The burden of persuasion shall also be
upon that party.
b. A motion to revoke a permit shall include, insofar as practicable, a statement of the
specific reasons or findings of fact that support the motion.
3. Before a zoning certificate or sign permit may be revoked, the Administrator shall give the permit
recipient 10 days’ notice of intent to revoke the permit and shall inform the recipient of the
alleged reasons for the revocation and of his right to obtain an informal hearing on the
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 73
allegations. If the permit is revoked, the Administrator shall provide to the permittee a written
statement of the decision and the reasons therefore.
4. No persons may continue to make use of land or buildings in the manner authorized by any
zoning certificate, sign, or conditional-use permit after such permit has been revoked in
accordance with this section.
Section 80. Judicial Review
1. Every decision of the Board of Appeals shall be subject to review by the Circuit Court.
2. The petition must be filed with the Court within 30 days after the later of the following
occurrences:
a. A written copy of the Board's decision (see Section 84) has been filed in the Town office,
and
b. A written copy of the Board's decision (see Section 84) has been delivered by mail to the
applicant or appellant and every other aggrieved party who has filed a written request for
such copy at the hearing of the case.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 74
ARTICLE VIII NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS
Section 81. Intent
1. Within the zones established by this chapter or amendments that may later be adopted, there exist
lots, structures and uses of land and structures which were lawful before this chapter was passed
or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this chapter
or future amendments.
2. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the plans,
construction or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun
prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter and upon which actual
building construction has been diligently carried on. 'Actual construction' is hereby defined to
include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent
manner; except that where demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially
begun preparatory to rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual
construction, provided that work shall be diligently carried on until completion of the building
involved.
Section 82. Applicability
1. Uses, lots and structures existing, except nonconforming signs, lawfully prior to the effective date
of this Chapter which, by reason of this Chapter, are no longer conforming, shall be considered as
legally nonconforming and shall be subject to provision of this Article.
2. Uses, lots and structures existing unlawfully prior to the effective date of this Chapter and which
remain unlawful, shall be considered illegal and - unless remedial action is taken (e.g., brought
into conformance by an another acceptable zoning device permitted by this Chapter) - shall be
prosecuted as a zoning violation in accordance with this Chapter
3. Uses, lots and structures existing lawfully or unlawfully prior to the effective date of this Chapter,
which are made lawful as a result of the provisions of this Chapter, shall be considered as
conforming.
Section 83. Definitions
Unless otherwise specifically provided or unless clearly required by the context, the words and phrases
defined in this section shall have the meaning indicated when used in this article.
Dimensional Nonconformity. A nonconforming situation that occurs when the height, size, or
minimum floor space of a structure or the relationship between an existing building or buildings
and other buildings or lot lines does not conform to the regulations applicable to the district in
which the property is located.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 75
Effective Date of This Chapter. Whenever this Article refers to the effective date of this Chapter,
the reference shall be deemed to include the effective date of any amendments to this Chapter if
the amendment, rather than this Chapter as originally adopted, creates a nonconforming situation.
Nonconforming Lot of Record. A lot existing at the effective date of this Chapter (and not created
for the purposes of evading the restrictions of this Chapter) that does not meet the minimum area
requirement of the district in which the lot is located.
Nonconforming Project. Any structure, development, or undertaking that is incomplete at the
effective date of this Chapter and would be inconsistent with any regulation applicable to the
district in which it is located if completed as proposed or planned.
Nonconforming Sign. A sign (see definition) that, on the effective date of this Chapter does not
conform to one or more of the regulations set forth in this Chapter, particularly Article XV.
Nonconforming Use. A nonconforming situation that occurs when property is used for a purpose
or in a manner made unlawful by the use regulations applicable to the district in which the
property is located. (For example, a commercial office building in a residential district may be a
nonconforming use). The term also refers to the activity that constitutes the use made of the
property. (For example, all the activity associated with running a bakery in a residentially zoned
area is a nonconforming use.)
Nonconforming Situation. A situation that occurs when, on the effective date of this Chapter, an
existing lot or structure or use of an existing lot or structure does not conform to one or more of
the regulations applicable to the district in which the lot or structure is located. Among other
possibilities, a nonconforming situation may arise because a lot does not meet minimum acreage
requirements, because the relationship between existing buildings and the land (in such matters as
density and setback requirements) is not in conformity with this Chapter, or because land or
buildings are used for purposes made unlawful by this Chapter. Nonconforming signs shall not be
regarded as nonconforming situations for purposes of this article but shall be governed by the
provisions of Article XV.
Section 84. Nonconforming Lots of Record
1. In any zone in which single-family dwellings are permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed
by other provisions of this chapter, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings
may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
chapter. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or
width, or both, that are generally applicable in the zone, provided that yard dimensions shall
conform to the regulations for the zone in which such lot is located. Any variance of yard
requirements shall be obtained only through action of the Board of Appeals.
2. An individual lot of land or parcel located within the Town of Perryville Critical Area Overlay
District (0) may be improved with a single-family dwelling and related accessory uses in a
Resource Conservation Area (RCA) and otherwise developed in accordance with Article V, Part
IX in a Limited Development Area (LDA) and an Intensely Developed Area (IDA), provided that
they comply with the provisions of Section 131, Special Buffer yard requirements, and further,
provided that they comply with the following criteria:
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 76
a. Any legally buildable single lot or parcel of record established in the Town of Perryville
prior to May 4, 1988 may be improved or developed with a single-family residence, if
one (1) is not already placed there.
b. Any lot on which development activity has legally progressed to the point of pouring
foundation footings or installation of structural members, prior to adoption of the Town
of Perryville Critical Area Program, will be permitted to complete construction as per
existing development approvals (e.g., building permit).
c. Development may take place on lots created prior to June 1, 1984, subject to the
limitations on permitted uses contained in Article X and subject to the provisions of
Section 131. However, any development of such lands must comply, insofar as possible,
with the critical area criteria if the development occurs between December 1, 1985, and
the time the local program is approved. Development after May 4, 1988 on land
subdivided prior to June 1, 1984, must comply with the use provisions of Article IX and
the provisions of Section 131.
d. Development may take place on lots subdivided between June 1, 1984, and December 1,
1985, for which interim findings (Critical Area Law, 8-1813) have been made by the
Town of Perryville Planning and Zoning Commission, the Town Board of Appeals or the
Town Commissioners.
e. Development on land subdivided into recorded legally buildable lots and approved by the
Planning Commission after December 1, 1985, shall conform to the critical area criteria.
Section 85. Nonconforming Uses of Land
Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, lawful use of land exists that is
made no longer permissible under the terms of this chapter as enacted or amended, such use may be
continued, subject to the provisions of Section 88, so long as it is otherwise lawful.
Section 86. Nonconforming Structures
Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter that could
not be built under the terms of this chapter by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards or
other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may be continued subject to
Section 88, so long as it remains otherwise lawful.
Section 87. Nonconforming Uses of Structures
If a lawful use of a structure or of structure and premises in combination, exists at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this chapter that would not be allowed in the zone under the tenants of this
chapter, the lawful use may be continued subject to Section 88, so long as it remains otherwise lawful,
subject to the following provisions:
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 77
1. Conformance required. Except as hereinafter specified, no land, building, structure or premises
shall hereafter be used, and no building or part thereof or other structure shall be located, erected,
reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted or altered, except in conformity with the regulations
herein specified for the district in which it is located.
2. Continuing existing uses. Except as provided in Articles XI and XII, any lawful use, building or
structure existing at the time of the enactment of this chapter, including a seasonal use, may be
continued, even though such use, building or structure may not conform to the provisions of this
chapter for the district in which it is located.
3. Nonconforming uses. No existing building or premises devoted to a use not permitted by this
chapter in the district in which such building or premises is located, except when required to do
so by law or order, shall be enlarged, extended, substituted or structurally altered unless the use
thereof is changed to a use permitted in the district in which such building or premises is located,
except as follows:
a. Substitution.
(1) If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use of a building may be
changed to another nonconforming use of the same or of a more restricted
classification.
(2) Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a more restricted use or to a
conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed back to a less restricted
use.
(3) When authorized by the Board of Appeals according to the provisions of Article
III of this chapter, a nonconforming use of land may be changed to another
nonconforming use or a nonconforming use of a building may be changed to one
of a less restricted classification.
b. Discontinuance. No building, structure or premises where a nonconforming use has
ceased for one (1) year or more shall again be put to a nonconforming use except by the
Board of Appeals, according to Article III of this chapter.
c. Extensions.
(1) A building devoted to a nonconforming use may be completed or extended, and
other buildings may be erected in addition thereto, for uses necessary and
incidental to the continuation of the existing use, provided that such additions
and extensions are located on the same premises or on adjoining premises that
were under the same ownership on the date such building became
nonconforming, and provided that the floor areas of all such additions and
extensions shall not exceed, in the aggregate, fifty percent (50%) of the floor area
of the existing building devoted to a nonconforming use. Any extension of a
nonconforming use or structure shall be subject to Board of Appeals' approval as
provided in Article III. The extension or completion of a building or the
construction of additional buildings as herein provided shall not be deemed to
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 78
extend or otherwise affect the date when such nonconforming use or building
must be changed or removed, if subject to any of the provisions of this Article.
(2) Any dwelling lawfully existing at the time of enactment of this chapter, not
located on a lot having frontage on a road as required herein, may be continued
and may be enlarged, without increasing the number of dwelling units thereon,
provided that no such addition shall extend closer to the road than the existing
building or the setback line for the district.
(3) A nonconforming use may be extended throughout those parts of a building
which were manifestly designed or arranged for such use prior to the effective
date of this chapter, provided that no structural alterations are made except as
required by law.
(4) A nonconforming use may be extended throughout those parts of a premises
which were manifestly designed or arranged for such use prior to the effective
date of this chapter, provided that no increase in the number of dwelling units
(permanent or seasonal) occurs thereon, and such extension shall not extend
closer to the property lines than existing setback requirements for the district in
which such parcel of land is located.
4. Unsafe buildings. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe
condition of any part of any building or structure declared unsafe by a proper authority.
Section 88. Termination of Certain Nonconformities
Certain nonconformities shall be terminated in accordance with the following provisions:
1. Within not more than two (2) years from the effective date of this chapter or amendment of this
chapter by which a use becomes nonconforming, the right to maintain the following
nonconformities shall terminate, and such nonconformities shall no longer be operated or
maintained and must be removed.
a. Any junkyards within the corporate limits of Perryville
2. Within not more than five (5) years from the effective date of this chapter or amendment of this
chapter all nonconforming off-site signs shall be removed.
3. Mobile homes. Where a lawful use of a mobile home and premises existed, whether on a single
lot or in a mobile home park, at the effective date of adoption of this chapter, the lawful use shall
be permitted to continue, subject to the following:
a. Nothing shall prevent the replacement of a mobile home on a single lot, provided that all
setback regulations for the district in which the replacement unit is to be placed are met.
b. Mobile homes or trailers in a mobile home park or trailer court may be replaced, but the
number of units within the park or court cannot be increased until the park or court has
received its conditional use permit from the Board of Appeals.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 79
Section 89. Restoration of Unsafe Buildings
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of
any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public
safety, upon order of such official.
Section 90. Uses Not Considered Nonconforming
Any use for which a conditional use or special exception is permitted as provided in this chapter shall not
be deemed a nonconforming use but shall, without further action, be deemed a conforming use in such
district, except as granted in Section 87 and Section 88.1 and 88.2.
Section 91. Reserved
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 80
ARTICLE IX ZONING DISTRICTS
Part I Zoning Districts
Section 92. Districts Established
The incorporated area of the Town of Perryville shall be divided into eleven (11) zoning districts: "R-1",
Single Family District; "R-2", Mixed Residential District; "R-3", Multi-Family District; “RM. Residential
Marine; "TC", Town Center Mixed-Use District; “CM-1" Maritime Commercial District; “CM-2"
Commercial Maritime; “NB” Neighborhood Business District; “C-2" Highway Commercial; "LI-1",
Light Industrial District; and the “LI-2 “Industrial District. The districts shall be established to regulate
the location of residences, trades, industries, and buildings erected or altered for specific uses; to regulate
and limit the height and bulk of buildings hereafter erected or structurally altered; to regulate and limit
population density and the intensity of the use of lot areas; to regulate and determine the areas of yards,
courts, and other open spaces with and surrounding such buildings; and to implement the
recommendations of the Perryville Comprehensive Plan and the Perryville Critical Area Program.
Section 93. Residential Districts
1. R-1: Single Family Residential District
The intent of this district is to provide for low-density single-family detached residences and
supporting uses. This zone is located in areas of the Town where low-density single-family
development patterns are generally established or where services and facilities will be adequate to
serve the anticipated population. This zone is designed to secure for residents a comfortable,
healthy, safe, and pleasant environment in which to live, sheltered from incompatible and
disruptive activities that properly belong in non-residential districts. The Comprehensive Plan
should be used to determine the location of this zone. This zone is also intended to provide for
minor in-filling of existing neighborhoods consistent with their zoning and character at the time
of enactment of this Chapter. Such neighborhoods are relatively uniform in character and stable.
The regulations permit future development consistent with existing character. In general, resubdivision
of lots in existing subdivisions to create new building lots is only permitted in
appropriate locations where additional development or redevelopment is deemed to be consistent
with the character of the surrounding neighborhoods.
2. R-2: Mixed Residential District
The intent of this district is to provide for medium-density single-family detached residences,
medium density attached residences and supporting uses. This zone is located in areas of the
Town where medium-density residential development patterns are generally established or where
services and facilities will be adequate to serve the anticipated population. The Comprehensive
Plan should be used to determine location of this zone. This zone is also intended to provide for
minor in-filling of existing neighborhoods consistent with their zoning and character at the time
of enactment of this Chapter. Such neighborhoods are relatively uniform in character and stable.
In general, re-subdivision of lots in existing subdivisions to create new building lots is only
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 81
permitted in appropriate locations where additional development or redevelopment is deemed to
be consistent with the character of the surrounding neighborhoods.
3. R-3: Multi-Family Residential District
This zone is primarily for multi-family dwellings and supporting uses at a higher density than is
provided for in either R-1 or R-2 zones. Within this zone, a variety of housing-types mixes --
including single-family, two-family, duplexes, townhouses, and apartments -- are encouraged in
order to provide for a mix in housing prices, household size, age groups, and lifestyles.
Residential cluster is encouraged for development on minimum lot areas to provide for additional
open space for common use by local residents as well as by the adjacent community. Recreation,
health, and social service facilities for the elderly and handicapped are also encouraged in this
zone.
4. TC: Town Center District
The intent of the Town Center District is to provide for a mix of land uses including residential,
recreational, and commercial uses within the historic town center. It is also the intent of this
district to require and promote the integration of uses through shared parking, access drives,
tasteful signage, landscaping, etc. Supplementary appearance, landscaping, screening, parking
and loading, outdoor storage, and sign regulations apply in this district to ensure an attractive,
inviting pedestrian oriented setting.
5. RM: Residential-Marine District
The purpose of the Residential Marine district is to provide for waterfront residential uses as
adjacent to the Town Center as well as limited commercial marina activities that can be colocated
with existing and future residential uses without having an adverse impact on residents in
the vicinity. In this residential context commercial marine uses are limited to yacht clubs, public
and private marinas, along with accessory marine related sales and services provided all such
activities are conducted in a completely enclosed building, and some small scale retail sales and
lodging establishments.
Section 94. Commercial/Business Districts
1. CM-1: Commercial Maritime District
The purpose of the CM-1 Commercial Maritime District is to encourage commercial uses
associated with the Town's waterfront and its basic water oriented location including commercial
docking, waterfront sales, storage and repair of small boats, including out-of-water repairs, and
for seafood packing and processing establishments, subject to applicable sanitation and pollution
laws. District standards have been established to permit a wide array of marine commercial uses
but not permitting uses that may have an adverse impact on adjacent residential areas, including
structures that would substantially limit views of the Susquehanna River from off-site locations.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 82
2. CM-2: Commercial Maritime District
The purpose of the CM-2 Commercial Maritime District is to encourage commercial uses
associated with the Town's waterfront and its basic water oriented location including commercial
docking, waterfront sales, storage and repair of small boats, including out-of-water repairs, and
for seafood packing and processing establishments, subject to applicable sanitation and pollution
laws. The CM-2 district is located so that adjacent properties are less likely to be adversely
impacted by uses and structures that may block views to the Susquehanna River and thus a
broader array of marine uses may be permitted.
3. NB: Neighborhood Business District
The purpose of this district is to provide primarily for retail shopping and personal service uses,
to be developed either as a unit or in individual parcels, to serve the needs of a relatively small
residential area. To enhance the general character of the district and its compatibility with its
residential surroundings, signs are limited to those accessory to businesses conducted on the
premises, and the number, area and types of signs are limited.
4. C-2: Highway Commercial District
The intent of the General Commercial District is to provide for commercial activities that depend
on highway traffic for business. These areas are generally retail and service establishments that
locate along high volume highways for accessibility and visibility. Although serving an important
function in the local economy, these uses will not be permitted to create traffic problems that
impair the efficient operation of highways.
Section 95. Industrial Districts
1. L-1 Limited Industrial District.
The purpose of this district is to provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for certain types
of business and manufacturing, relatively free from offense, in modern landscaped buildings, to
make available more attractive locations for these businesses and industries and to provide
opportunities for employment closer to places of residence with corresponding reduction of travel
time from home to work. Certain commercial uses are permitted, primarily for service to
employees in the district. Typical development in the district would be that which is commonly
known as an "industrial park." Accessory signs of limited area and application are permitted.
2. L-2 Light Industrial District.
The purpose of this district is to provide for a wide variety of light manufacturing, fabricating,
processing, wholesale distributing and warehousing uses appropriately located for access by
major thoroughfares or railroads. New residential development is excluded.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 83
Section 96. Other Districts [Amended 2-18-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-1]
1. Floating Zone District
a. Purpose. Floating zones are zones that may be appropriate for the Town but are not
mapped out at the time of adoption of the most recent comprehensive revision to the
Perryville Zoning Chapter. The purpose of the designated floating zones is to permit the
mapping of appropriate areas for land uses that may be required over the next 20 years.
The designated floating zone provides a mechanism for the establishment of the district
in appropriate areas, limiting the areas to be zoned and setting conditions that must be
met by any development proposal seeking such a designation. Further, the procedure is
two-stage so that the initial costs are not prohibitive.
b. Designation of Floating Zones. The following are designated as floating zones:
(1) Planned Unit Development - PUD Floating Zone
(2) Planned Manufactured Home Community District - PMHC Floating Zone
(3) The Mixed-Use Development - MUD Floating Zone
(4) The Commercial Entertainment Mixed Use Development – CEMUD Floating
Zone.
The Town Commissioners and Planning Commission find that they are not able to locate
the PUD and PMHC Floating Zones with precision in advance and that it is desirable to
leave specific locations and conditions for future determination as the Town grows and
specific needs develop. In the case of the MUD Floating Zone, the eligible areas are
designated as such in the Comprehensive Plan. The MUD Floating Zone also may be
applied to annexed parcels that meet the criteria in Section 112 below.
2. Overlay Districts
a. The purpose of a special overlay district is to achieve the preservation or enhancement of
a designated geographic area of special and substantial public interest. The overlay
district regulations are intended to supplement the regulations of the underlying zoning
districts and serve to extend, modify, or alter the regulations imposed by the established
zoning classification(s) in said area to accomplish the special public purpose for which
the district is established. Such districts established herein may be modified or expanded
or new districts may be created, by amendment to this Chapter.
b. The following are Special Overlay Districts:
(1) Critical Area Overlay District
(2) Highway Corridor Overlay District
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 84
Part II Planned Unit Development (PUD) Floating Zone
Section 97. Planned Unit Development in General
1. It is the intent of this zone to control the placement, design, use, and density of well planned,
residential developments which will offer a variety of building types and a more efficient overall
use of land, and within these limits, permit the optimum amount of freedom and variety in the
design and management of such varying types of residential structures including one and twofamily
units, townhouses and garden apartments. Within the intention of these regulations, the
following objectives are sought to provide for the Planned Unit Development:
a. To provide a more attractive and varied living environment than would be possible
through the strict application of R-1, R-2, and R-3 district requirements.
b. To encourage a more intimate, efficient and aesthetic use of open space.
c. To encourage developers to use a more creative approach in the development of land.
d. To encourage variety in the physical development pattern of residential areas.
2. The Mayor and Commissioners shall follow the procedures set forth in Article XVII for the
approval of a floating zone.
Section 98. PUD Requirements
1. Permitted uses. Planned Unit Developments are contemplated to be primarily residential in
nature. However, Planned Unit Developments of sufficient size and appropriate character may
have commercial development which is incidental to the Planned Unit Development and is
intended primarily for the use of the residents of the Planned Unit Development. Specifically
permitted uses are as follows:
a. Single family detached units.
b. Multi-family dwellings, attached or detached, one and two family units, townhouses and
garden-type apartments.
c. Apartments (limited to no more than 10 percent of all dwelling units).
d. An office, temporary or permanent, belonging to the developer and clearly incidental to
management and sales operations of the PUD.
e. Temporary structures incidental to construction.
f. In a PUD of over fifty (50) acres or more, a Planned Commercial Center may be
permitted. Such commercial center shall be an integral part of the plan for the PUD. The
total aggregate area of all the commercial establishments and their parking area shall be
established in the approval of the general development plan but in no case shall be more
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 85
than 10 percent of the gross area of the PUD. Planned commercial centers shall be a
group of commercial uses compatible with the residential nature of the PUD and the
Town of Perryville. These may include any use listed as Permitted or special exception
uses in TC or NB districts. No construction on the planned commercial center shall begin
until 30 percent of the total planned residential units are completed.
g. Land and places for public assembly, recreational buildings, public buildings and
accessory buildings, or may require the reservation of lands for such uses if it is deemed
they are advantageous or necessary for the purpose of serving the Planned Unit
Development and the local community.
2. Where Permitted. Planned Unit Developments are permitted in the R-1, R-2, and R-3 districts. In
general, a Planned Unit Development is contemplated in residential zones where tracts of suitable
location size, and character exist. The uses/structures proposed are to be planned and developed
according to the requirements and procedures of this Chapter. Planned Unit Developments shall
be approximately located with respect to the general pattern of urban development existing or
proposed, and to existing public and private facilities and services.
3. Computation of Dwelling Units Permitted.
a. The total gross density in the Planned Unit Development shall not exceed the following:
(1) R-1 - 3 dwelling units per acre
(2) R-2 - 5 dwelling units per acre
(3) R-3 - 8 dwelling units per acre
b. The total permitted dwelling units may be averaged over the entire PUD or clustered in
various groupings.
4. The setback, lot size, lot dimensions, lot coverage, height, and yard requirements in the Planned
Unit Development shall be established for each individual project by the Planning Commission.
In establishing these requirements the Planning Commission shall consider such factors as the
proposed intensity of the project and the existing character of the neighborhood.
5. Land Coverage. The maximum amount of land that may be built over (covered) by parking lots,
roads, sidewalks, or plazas, buildings, or other structures shall be thirty-five (35) percent of the
gross land area of the PUD.
6. Area. The proposed PUD shall in no case contain less than five (5) acres of land.
7. Open Space. Common open space shall comprise not less than twenty-five (25) percent of the
gross area. All open space shall be designated for the common use of all occupants of the PUD
and at least 50 percent of such space shall be developed as recreational areas.
8. Sanitary Facilities - No PUD plan shall be approved unless the proposed development can be
served by public water and sewer disposal systems, which shall be existing at the time the plan
receives final approval. Satisfactory evidence must be furnished to the Planning Commission, the
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 86
Department of Public Works and the Town Commissioners that the existing Town sewer and
water system have adequate capacity to handle the increased demand placed upon them by the
proposed PUD and meet current health department requirements for standards of operation.
9. Parking. At least two (2) usable off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit,
either on the lot it occupies or within one hundred fifty feet of such lot or of an apartment.
Additional parking may be required as determined by the Planning Commission.
Section 99. Administrative Procedures
1. Preliminary Application shall be made to the Mayor and Commissioners and referred to the
Planning Commission for stage one consideration of the PUD zone and shall include, but not be
limited to:
a. A general diagram showing the PUD relation to the Town of Perryville and major public
access to the PUD (15 copies).
b. The General Development Plan setting forth preliminary information as identified in
Appendix A (15 copies). In addition to such information, the Planning Commission may
include, but not be limited to the following:
(1) Elevations and percentages of each building type, number of units and location of
buildings.
(2) Proposed convenience centers, open spaces, their size, their location, their uses,
and their proposed ownership (Town and/or association).
(3) General statement concerning provision of utilities (draft terms and provisions of
a public works agreement).
(4) Statement of expected Town responsibilities.
(5) Cost-Revenue ratio of the proposed PUD for the Town.
(6) Tentative time table and staging of development. (Schedule of construction)
(7) Applicant shall pay an application fee as previously established by the Town.
c. After the Planning Commission makes its findings, the application will be forwarded to
the Mayor and Commissioners for consideration. If the Mayor and Commissioners find
that the proposal has merit, it will be conditionally approved.
2. Preliminary Site Plan. The developer shall submit the following to the Planning Commission for
its review after receiving conditional approval from the Mayor and Commissioners.
a. The (15) copies of a preliminary site plan shall be filed with the Town. The preliminary
site plan shall comply with the requirements of this Article and be accompanied by such
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 87
other written or graphic material as may be necessary or desirable in aiding the decisions
of the Mayor and Commissioners and the Planning Commission.
b. The Planning Commission shall review the site plan for compliance with the
requirements of this Chapter. In their review of the preliminary site plan the Planning
Commission shall consult with such Town officials as may be appropriate, and may offer
such comments as may be appropriate.
c. Preliminary Site Plan shall include but not be limited to the requirements set forth in
Appendix A.
d. The preliminary site plan shall be accompanied by a schedule of construction or timetable
(acceptable to the Mayor and Commissioners and Planning Commission).
e. The developer shall provide a statement detailing the means by which the PUD and all its
various aspects shall be managed. This shall include deed restrictions and covenants
designed to ensure perpetuity of agreements.
f. The preliminary site plan shall also include a management statement governing the
construction, operation, and maintenance of:
(1) Sanitary and storm sewers, water mains, culverts, and other underground
structures.
(2) Streets, alleys, driveways, curb cuts, entrances and exits, parking and loading
area, and outdoor lighting systems.
(3) Parks, parkways, cycle ways, playgrounds, open spaces, fences, walls, screen
planting, and landscaping and signs.
h. The Planning Commission and/or Mayor and Commissioners may establish additional
requirements for preliminary site plans for the PUD District.
i. After review and a public hearing on the proposed zoning, the Planning Commission
shall return the site plan, together with comments and recommendations to the Mayor and
Commissioners for appropriate action.
3. Final Review and Approval Procedure
a. The Mayor and Commissioners shall review the final preliminary site plan and other
documents.
b. The Mayor and Commissioners shall hold a public hearing in the manner required in
Article 299 of this Chapter.
c. The Mayor and Commissioners may approve or disapprove the proposed PUD zoning. In
granting approval, the Mayor and Commissioners shall secure:
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 88
(1) A surety bond or equivalent to be filed for/or deposited in escrow with the Mayor
and Commissioners in an amount sufficient to ensure completion of all
requirements established by the Mayor and Commissioners. Such surety to be
reviewed annually and adjusted to reflect current costs.
(2) A final site plan in the form of a final plat shall be prepared, filed, and recorded.
The final plat shall comply with the specifications set forth in Appendix A, and
applicable State, County and Town laws, regulations, and Chapters governing the
subdivision of land.
(3) Permits for building shall be issued in accordance with the schedule for
construction approved by the Mayor and Commissioners as part of the final
approval.
(4) When a PUD is to be developed in stages, each stage shall be processed as a
separate development after first submitting and receiving approval of the PUD
zone for the entire project.
(5) As part of the final approval, the Mayor and Commissioners shall approve dates
for initiation and completion of the PUD and/or its phases. Any departure from
these dates shall constitute material breach of contract and outstanding bonds can
be called in. The Mayor and Commissioners can waive for cause.
4. Conflict with other Articles
a. Provisions of the PUD zone when found to be in conflict with other provisions of the
Perryville Zoning Chapter shall supersede those other provisions with which they
conflict.
b. Provisions of the PUD zone when found to be in conflict with other provisions of the
Perryville Subdivision Chapter shall supersede those other provisions with which they
conflict.
Part III Manufactured Home Community District (MHCD) Floating Zone
Section 100. Intent of District
The purpose of this floating zone district is to provide for the development of planned manufactured home
parks which are designed to provide an appropriate, safe, sanitary and attractive living environment. The
provisions set forth in this floating district, where in conflict with other provisions of the Chapter shall
prevail. Where an existing manufactured home park is expanded either at the same time or in stages to
include the addition of one (1) or more manufactured home sites, the expanded area must conform to the
provisions of this Part.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 89
Section 101. Administrative Procedures
1. Preliminary Application shall be made to the Mayor and Commissioners and referred to the
Planning Commission for stage one consideration of the MHCD zone and shall include, but not
be limited to:
a. A general diagram showing the MHCD relation to the Town of Perryville and major
public access to the MHCD (15 copies).
b. The General Development Plan setting forth preliminary information as identified in
Appendix A (15 copies). In addition to such information, the Planning Commission may
include, but not be limited to the following:
(1) Elevations and percentages of each unit type, number of units and location of
units.
(2) Proposed convenience centers, open spaces, their size, their location, their uses,
and their proposed ownership (Town and/or association).
(3) General statement concerning provision of utilities (draft terms and provisions of
a public works agreement).
(4) Tentative time table and staging of development. (Schedule of construction)
(5) Applicant shall pay an application fee as previously established by the Town.
c. After the Planning Commission makes its findings, the application will be forwarded to
the Mayor and Commissioners for consideration. If the Mayor and Commissioners find
that the proposal has merit, it will be conditionally approved.
2. Preliminary Site Plan. The developer shall submit the following to the Planning Commission for
its review after receiving conditional approval from the Mayor and Commissioners.
a. The (15) copies of a preliminary site plan shall be filed with the Town. The preliminary
site plan shall comply with the requirements of this Article and be accompanied by such
other written or graphic material as may be necessary or desirable in aiding the decisions
of the Mayor and Commissioners and the Planning Commission.
b. The Planning Commission shall review the site plan for compliance with the
requirements of this Chapter. In their review of the preliminary site plan the Planning
Commission shall consult with such Town officials as may be appropriate, and may offer
such comments as may be appropriate.
c. Preliminary Site Plan shall include but not be limited to the requirements set forth in
Appendix A.
d. The preliminary site plan shall be accompanied by a schedule of construction or timetable
(acceptable to the Mayor and Commissioners and Planning Commission).
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 90
e. The developer shall provide a statement detailing the means by which the MHCD and all
its various aspects shall be managed. This shall include deed restrictions and covenants
designed to ensure perpetuity of agreements.
f. The preliminary site plan shall also include a management statement governing the
construction, operation, and maintenance of:
(1) Sanitary and storm sewers, water mains, culverts, and other underground
structures.
(2) Streets, alleys, driveways, curb cuts, entrances and exits, parking and loading
area, and outdoor lighting systems.
(3) Parks, parkways, cycle ways, playgrounds, open spaces, fences, walls, screen
planting, and landscaping and signs.
g. The Planning Commission and/or Mayor and Commissioners may establish additional
requirements for preliminary site plans for the MHCD District.
h. After review and a public hearing on the proposed zoning, the Planning Commission
shall return the site plan, together with comments and recommendations to the Mayor and
Commissioners for appropriate action.
3. Final Review and Approval Procedure
a. The Mayor and Commissioners shall review the final preliminary site plan and other
documents.
b. The Mayor and Commissioners shall hold a public hearing in the manner required in
Article 299 of this Chapter.
c. The Mayor and Commissioners may approve or disapprove the proposed MHCD zoning.
In granting approval, the Mayor and Commissioners shall secure:
(1) A surety bond or equivalent to be filed for/or deposited in escrow with the Mayor
and Commissioners in an amount sufficient to ensure completion of all
requirements established by the Mayor and Commissioners. Such surety to be
reviewed annually and adjusted to reflect current costs.
(2) A final site plan in the form of a final plat shall be prepared, filed, and recorded.
The final plat shall comply with the specifications set forth in Appendix A, and
applicable State, County and Town laws, regulations, and Chapters governing the
subdivision of land.
(3) Permits for building shall be issued in accordance with the schedule for
construction approved by the Mayor and Commissioners as part of the final
approval.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 91
(4) When a MHCD is to be developed in stages, each stage shall be processed as a
separate development after first submitting and receiving approval of the MHCD
zone for the entire project.
(5) As part of the final approval, the Mayor and Commissioners shall approve dates
for initiation and completion of the MHCD and/or its phases. Any departure from
these dates shall constitute material breach of contract and outstanding bonds can
be called in. The Mayor and Commissioners can waive for cause.
4. Conflict with other Articles
a. Provisions of the MHCD zone when found to be in conflict with other provisions of the
Perryville Zoning Chapter shall supersede those other provisions with which they
conflict, except those provisions applicable to the Critical Area.
b. Provisions of the MHCD zone when found to be in conflict with other provisions of the
Perryville Subdivision Chapter shall supersede those other provisions with which they
conflict, except those provisions applicable to the Critical Area District.
Section 102. Development Standards
1. Generally.
a. A manufactured home development shall be located only upon property designated for
such use by the Town Commissioners in accordance with the provisions for floating zone
amendments in Article XIX, section 301.
b. No part of any park shall be used for nonresidential purposes, except such uses that are
required for the direct servicing and well-being of park residents and for the management
and maintenance of the park. Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed as
prohibiting the sale of a manufactured home located on a manufactured home stand and
connected to the pertinent utilities.
c. Condition of soil, groundwater level, drainage and topography shall not create hazards to
the property or to the health or safety of the occupants. The site shall not be exposed to
objectionable smoke, dust, noise, odors, or other adverse influences, and no portion
subject to predictable sudden flooding or erosion shall be used for any purpose which
would expose persons or property to hazards.
2. Site Plan required. No land may be used as a Manufactured home Community until the Planning
Commission has granted site plan approval in accordance with the standards set forth in this
Chapter.
3. Density; lot size.
a. The maximum density of manufactured homes shall be regulated by separation
requirements, occupied lot area ratios and recreation area requirements, as set forth in this
section. Density will vary considerably in accommodating different sizes of
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 92
manufactured home units with their accessory structures used in the locality and in the
type of layout proposed.
b. No manufactured home shall be located closer than 20 feet to any other manufactured
home or permanent building within the manufactured home development.
c. Manufactured home stands shall not occupy an area in excess of one-third of the
respective lot area. The accumulated occupied area of the manufactured home and its
accessory structures on a manufactured home lot shall not exceed two-thirds of the
respective lot area.
d. Minimum lot size for a single, non-expandable manufactured home shall be 4,000 square
feet, with a minimum frontage of 40 feet.
4. Recreation area. Not less than five percent of the gross site area shall be devoted to recreational
facilities, generally provided in a central location. In larger developments recreational facilities
may be decentralized, with at least one area of two-thirds of an acres (for example, large enough
for a small softball park). Recreation areas may include space for community buildings and
community use facilities, such as indoor recreation areas, swimming pools, hobby and repair
shops and service buildings. Where compliance with this provision results in undue hardship or
where individual lot areas are substantially above minimum standards and provide for sufficient
outdoor recreation, an exemption shall be granted to the extent that an absolute minimum of 100
square feet per lot be considered sufficient for the site of a centralized recreation area; provided
that no recreation area shall contain less than 5,000 square feet. The responsibility of developing
and maintaining such recreational area shall rest with the developer.
5. Setbacks, buffer strips and screening
a. All manufactured homes shall be located at least 25 feet from any park property boundary
line abutting upon a public street or highway and at least ten feet from other park
property boundary lines.
b. Minimum setbacks on all manufactured home sites shall be fifteen (15) feet front and rear
and ten (10) feet on each side.
c. Manufactured home parks shall be surrounded by buffer yards meeting the Buffer yard D
standard as shown in Appendix B of this Chapter.
6. Streets.
a. Generally. All manufactured home developments shall be provided with safe and
convenient vehicular access from abutting public streets or roads to each manufactured
home lot. Such access shall be provided by streets, driveways or other means.
b. Entrance streets. Entrances to manufactured home developments shall have direct
connections to a public street and shall be designed to allow free movement of traffic on
such adjacent public streets. No parking shall be permitted on the entrance street for a
distance of 100 feet from its point of beginning.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 93
c. Circulation. The street system should provide convenient circulation by means of minor
streets and properly locate collector streets. Dead-end streets shall be limited in length to
200 feet, and their closed end shall be provided with an adequate turn-around of 60 feet
in diameter.
d. Pavement widths. Pavements should be of adequate widths to accommodate the
contemplated parking and traffic load in accordance with the type of street, with ten-foot
minimum moving lanes, and, in all cases, shall meet the following requirements.
(1) For collector streets with guest parking allowances, the required width shall be
36 feet.
(2) For collector streets and all other streets, except minor streets, without parking
allowances, the required width shall be 24 feet. Measurement shall be the full
paving width available for traffic and parking.
e. Street grades. Grades of all streets shall be sufficient to ensure adequate surface
drainage.
f. Intersections. Street intersections should generally be at right angles. Offsets at
intersections and intersections of more than two streets at one point should be avoided.
g. Construction standards. All streets shall be constructed to Town specifications.
h. Streetlights. Streetlights should be provided in accordance with Town standards.
i. Adequate site drainage shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the
Perryville Storm water Management Chapter.
7. Walks
a. General requirements. All manufactured home developments shall be provided with safe
convenient all-season pedestrian access of adequate width for the intended use and which
shall be durable and convenient to maintain. Sudden changes in alignment and gradient
shall be avoided.
b. Common walk system. A common walk system shall be provided and maintained
between locations where pedestrian traffic is concentrated. Such common walks shall
have a minimum width of four feet and shall be parallel to the streets. Where approved
by the enforcing agency, sidewalks designed to act as curbs may be poured
monolithically with the sidewalk.
c. Individual walks. All manufactured home stands should be connected to common walks,
to streets, to driveways or to parking spaces. Such individual walks shall have a
minimum width of two feet.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 94
8. Manufactured home lots.
a. Generally. The limits of each manufactured home lot should be marked on the ground by
suitable means. The locations of lot limits on the ground should be the same as shown on
accepted plans.
b. Manufactured home stands. The manufactured home stand shall be improved to provide
adequate support for the placement and tie down of the manufactured home. The stand
shall not heave, shift or settle unevenly under the weight of the manufactured home due
to frost action, inadequate drainage, vibration or other forces acting on the structure.
Anchors or tie downs, if provided, such as cast-in-place concrete dead-men, eyelets
imbedded in concrete, or screw augers to arrowhead anchors shall be placed at least at
each corner of the manufactured home stand, and each device shall be able to sustain a
minimum load of 4,800 pounds.
c. Driveways. Improved driveways should be provided on lots where necessary for
convenient access to manufactured homes. The minimum width shall be ten feet.
d. Parking spaces. The design criteria for automobile parking shall be based upon two
parking spaces for each manufactured home lot. Parking may be in tandem.
e. Outdoor living area. Each manufactured home lot should be provided with an outdoor
living and service area. Such area should be improved as necessary to ensure reasonable
privacy and comfort. The minimum area should not be less than 300 square feet, with a
least dimension of 15 feet.
f. Accessory structures. Accessory structures remain, as per definition, dependent upon the
manufactured home and shall not be used as complete independent living units with
permanent provisions for sleeping, cooking and sanitation. Such structures shall be
erected, constructed or occupied on a manufactured home lot as specified in this
subsection:
(1) Accessory structures shall be designed so as to enhance the appearance of the
manufactured home development. Accessory structures may not be located in
any required front or side yard and must be setback a minimum of 3 feet from
and side lot line and 5 feet from any rear lot line.
(2) Accessory structures shall not obstruct required openings for light and ventilation
of the manufactured home and shall not prevent the inspection of manufactured
home equipment and utility connections.
(3) Construction and electrical installations, unless otherwise specified, shall comply
with this Code or any other Chapter of the Town.
(4) Electrical circuits supplying the accessory structure shall be independent of the
circuit supplying the manufactured home.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 95
(5) Accessory radio and television antennas, but not including microwave antennas
(satellite dishes), are permitted when less than 12 feet above the structure on
which they are mounted.
(6) Accessory mounted microwave antennas (satellite dishes) are permitted as
provided by this Chapter.
(7) Accessory freestanding microwave antennas (satellite dishes) mounted on a
single stanchion are permitted when six feet or less in diameter and less than ten
feet in height and constructed of expanded aluminum mesh or wire screen.
Section 103. Service buildings and other Community Facilities
The following service facilities and other community facilities may be approved in the planned
manufactured home community:
1. Management offices, repair shops and repair areas.
2. Sanitary facilities.
3. Laundry facilities.
4. Indoor recreation areas.
5. Commercial uses supplying essential goods or services for the exclusive use of development
occupants.
Section 104. Community maintenance standards - Responsibilities of Management
1. The person to whom a license for a manufactured home community is issued shall provide
adequate supervision to maintain the community in compliance with this article and to keep its
facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.
2. The management shall notify the community residents of all applicable provisions of this article
and inform them of their duties and responsibilities under this article.
3. The management shall supervise the placement of each manufactured home on its manufactured
home stand, which shall include securing its stability and installing all utility connections.
4. The management shall maintain a register containing the names of all community residents,
identified by lot number or street address. Such register shall be available to any authorized
person inspecting the community.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 96
Section 105. Responsibilities of Residents
1. The resident shall comply with all applicable requirements of this article and shall maintain his
manufactured home lot and its facilities and equipment in good repair and in clean and sanitary
condition.
2. The resident shall be responsible for the proper placement of his manufactured home on its
manufactured home stand and the proper installation of all utility connections in accordance with
the instructions of the management.
3. Skirtings, porches, awnings and other additions shall be installed only if permitted and approved
by the management. When installed, they shall be maintained in good repair. The space
immediately underneath a manufactured home shall be used for storage only if permitted by the
management. If permitted, the following conditions shall be satisfied.
a. The storage area shall be provided with a base of impervious material.
b. Stored items shall be so located as not to interfere with inspection underneath the
manufactured home.
c. The storage area shall be enclosed by skirting.
d. The resident shall store and dispose of all his rubbish and garbage in a clean, sanitary and
safe manner. The garbage container shall be rodent proof, insect proof and watertight.
e. First aid fire extinguishers for class B and C fires shall be kept at the premises and
maintained in working condition.
Section 106. Handling of Solid Waste
1. The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the manufactured home community shall be so
conducted as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or fire
hazards or air pollution.
2. The applicant or developer shall be responsible for all refuse collection. All refuse containers
shall be screened as required in Article XVII.
Section 107. Fire Protection
1. Manufactured home communities shall be free of litter, rubbish and other flammable materials.
2. Portable fire extinguishers, rated for class B and C, shall be kept in service buildings and at other
locations conveniently and readily accessible for use for all occupants, and shall be maintained in
good operating condition. Their capacity shall not be less than 2-1/2 pounds.
3. Fires shall be made only in stoves, incinerators and other equipment intended for such purposes.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 97
Part IV Mixed Use Development (MUD) Floating Zone
Section 108. Purpose of the District
The purpose of the district is to allow flexibility in zoning based on a specific development plan for a
property designated as appropriate by the Comprehensive Plan. This District shall only be used as a
Floating Zone based on a specific development plan submitted to the Planning Commission and Mayor
and Commissioners in accordance with the procedures described in Section 116. It is further the intent of
the District to provide for well-planned Town-scale mixed use development for areas within the existing
Town limits of Perryville or lands adjacent to the Town which are the subject of an annexation petition.
Non-residential uses in a Mixed Use District may serve the immediate needs of the residential portion of
the District or the broader needs of the Town and the surrounding communities.
Section 109. General Criteria
The Mixed Use District shall:
1. Provide an attractive and varied living environment.
2. Provide a variety of building types and an overall more efficient use of land providing residential,
commercial, services, and public uses within a well-planned project.
3. Provide a comprehensive approach to utilities, roads, storm water management, and landscaping.
4. Provide linkages and improvements where possible to adjoining streets and pedestrian systems.
5. Provide for design characteristics that promote integration of the development with downtown
Perryville.
Section 110. Procedure
The Mixed Use Development Floating Zone classification may only be granted upon application by the
property owner in accordance with the procedures identified in Section 116. When the Mixed Use
Floating Zone designation is approved to be applied to a specific area or property, that area shall be so
designated on the Official Zoning Map, and such Mixed Use Floating Zone shall be treated as the zone
classification for the purpose of establishing and interpreting its boundaries.
Section 111. Criteria
In order to be eligible for consideration for a Mixed Use Development Floating Zone, there must be a
finding by the Mayor and Commissioners that:
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 98
1. The development or redevelopment plans for the subject property are consistent with the purpose
and intent of this floating zone classification and that the subject property has been designated as
such in the Town’s Comprehensive Plan.
2. The parcel must be at least 20 acres in size.
3. The proposed development and uses are deemed compatible with adjoining uses and will have no
adverse impacts on adjacent properties or public facilities.
4. The proposed development will be located where services and facilities are adequate to support
the proposed development.
5. The proposed development will not be detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of the Town.
6. The proposed development will promote the general welfare of the inhabitants of the Town as a
whole.
The Mayor and Commissioners may impose appropriate conditions as necessary to ensure that the above
standards are met.
Section 112. Additional Conditions for Annexation Areas
In addition to the requirements specified in Section 111 above, parcels requesting the Mixed Use Floating
Zone as part of an annexation must meet the following conditions:
1. The parcel must be at least 20 acres in size.
2. Where the mix of non-residential uses is such that the non-residential uses are intended to serve
the needs of the residents beyond the immediate area, the non-residential uses shall have access
on state highways.
Section 113. Permitted Uses in the Mixed Use Development Floating Zone [Amended 11-4-2008
by Ord. No. 2008-04]
1. In accordance with the purpose and intent of this section, the following uses are permitted in the
Mixed Use Development Floating Zone:
a. Residential Uses – Single Family Detached, Duplex and Townhouses.
b. Non-Residential Uses – All permitted uses, uses permitted with conditions, uses
permitted by Special Exception and uses permitted by Special Exception with conditions
in the NB and C2 Zones.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 99
2. Any conditions normally associated with permitted uses or uses permitted by Special Exception
in the above-mentioned zones may be waived by the Mayor and Commissioners, provided that
the nature of the overall MUD mitigates the reasons for the said conditions.
Section 114. Additional Conditions
1. The overall residential density of the MUD shall not exceed two (2) units per gross acre of the
entire MUD tract.
2. Non-residential uses shall not occupy more than 50% of the gross tract.
3. The Mayor and Commissioners shall determine the appropriate mix of residential dwelling types
on a case by case basis. In determining the appropriate mix of dwelling types, the Mayor and
Commissioners shall consider the purpose, intent and criteria of the MUD Floating Zone as well
as the shape of the parcel and other physical conditions such as topography, wetlands and steep
slopes.
4. Open space, including active and passive recreation areas shall be at least 30% of the gross tract.
At least 50% of the required open space shall be developed for active recreational uses. All open
space shall be designed and designated for the common use of the occupants of the MUD and, if
determined by the Mayor and Commissioners, shall also be dedicated for use by the general
public.
Section 115. Area and Bulk Requirements
1. For single-family detached and duplexes, the minimum lot, yard and height requirements for the
R-2 Zone as contained in the Schedule of Zone Regulations shall apply.
2. For townhouses, the minimum lot, yard and height requirements for the R-3 Zone as contained in
the Schedule of Zone Regulations as well as the requirements in Section 198.2 shall apply.
3. For non-residential uses, the minimum lot, yard and height requirements for the C-2 Zone as
contained in the Schedule of Zone Regulations shall apply.
Section 116. Administrative Procedures
The Administrative Procedures as described in Section 99 for the establishment of a Planned Unit
Development Floating Zone shall also apply to the MUD Floating Zone.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 100
Part IV-A. Commercial Entertainment Mixed Use Development (CEMUD) Floating Zone
[Amended 2-18-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-1]
Section 116-1. Purpose of the Zone
The purpose of the zone is to allow flexibility in zoning based on a specific development plan consistent
with the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan. This property shall only be used as a floating
zone based on an approved General Development Plan submitted to the Planning Commission and Mayor
and Commissioners in accordance with the procedures described in Section 116-7.
Section 116-2. Intent of the CEMUD Floating Zone.
It is the intent of the Commercial Entertainment Mixed Use Development Floating Zone to:
1. Provide for well-planned Town Scale Urban Development for areas within the existing
Town limits of Perryville on lands adjacent to the Town which are the subject of an
annexation petition;
2. Encourage further economic investment in Perryville in order to promote Perryville as a
growth center of Cecil County and enhance the tax base;
3. Ensure that the possible introduction of commercial entertainment and possible gaming land
uses result in a significant economic benefit to the Town by both direct and indirect means;
4. Promote high quality clustered commercial growth near highway interchanges and along
highways;
5. Provide an attractive, destination style commercial and entertainment development with a
mix of other complementary uses that collectively create a vital commercial entertainment
destination and attract visitors and tourists to Perryville and that, through the provision of an
integrated physical design, encourages multi-purpose trips and extended visits to the site and
surrounding area;
6. Provide a well-planned project with coordinated overall development to ensure an efficient
use of land, smooth flow of traffic and logical phasing of development;
7. Provide an attractive, high-quality, environment with exemplary site, landscape and
architectural design and high quality materials with a coordinated, site wide design character
that enhances the current character and identity of the Town of Perryville; and
8. Provide a compact integrated arrangement of uses and site elements that encourage walking
between uses and reduce the need to drive from place to place within site.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 101
Section 116-3. CEMUD Floating Zone Approval Process.
The Commercial Entertainment Mixed Use Development Floating Zone classification may only be
granted upon application by the property owner or owners in accordance with the procedures identified in
Section 116-7. Establishment and approval of a Commercial Entertainment Mixed Use Development
Floating Zone shall occur in three steps as defined in Section 116-7. The three steps are as follows:
1. Step One: Designation of the site as a CEMUD Floating Zone and approval of a General
Development Plan;
2. Step Two: Preliminary Site Plan approval; and
3. Step Three: Final Site Plan approval in one or more phases.
No building permits may be issued until a Final Site Plan has been approved for all or part of the land
shown on the approved General Development Plan for the property.
Section 116-4. CEMUD Floating Zone Designation.
When land is designated as a Commercial Entertainment Mixed Use Development Floating Zone, the area
so approved shall be so designated on the Town’s Official Zoning Map, and such Commercial
Entertainment Mixed Use Development Floating Zone shall be treated as the zone classification for the
purpose of establishing and interpreting its boundaries.
Section 116-5. Criteria for Designation.
In order to approve an application for designation of a property or properties as a Commercial
Entertainment Mixed Use Development Floating Zone, the Mayor and Commissioners must find that:
1. The General Development Plan for the property or properties is consistent with the purpose and
intent of this floating zone classification and with the development standards in Section 116-6;
2. Placement of a CEMUD Floating Zoning on the property or properties is consistent with the
Town’s Comprehensive Plan;
3. The land to be included in the CEMUD Floating Zoning is at least 140 contiguous acres in size;
4. The land to be included in the CEMUD Floating Zoning has, or will have, access to a highway
interchange and frontage on a highway;
5. The proposed development will include a hotel and a gaming establishment or other significant
commercial entertainment establishment that will serve as a regional draw;
6. The proposed development will provide a significant economic benefit to the Town and;
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 102
7. All land to be designated as a Commercial Entertainment Mixed Use Development Floating
Zone, except that which will convey to the Town or other public entity, will remain under a
coordinated Master Development and Management Agreement in perpetuity regardless of
current or future ownership of the land.
The Mayor and Commissioners may impose appropriate conditions as necessary to ensure that the above
criteria are met.
Section 116-6. CEMUD Floating Zone Development Standards.
Development on land that is designated as a Commercial Entertainment Mixed Use Development
Floating Zone shall comply with the following standards:
1. The overall non-residential development square footage constructed or to be constructed within
the development, excluding square footage included within parking structures, shall not exceed
50% of the gross land area of the entire tract.
2. Commercial entertainment land uses, excluding parking structures, shall represent at least 10%
of the total development square footage.
3. The overall density of residential uses, if any, in the development shall not exceed three and
one-half (3.5) units per gross acre of the entire tract or occupy not more than 25% of the total
development square footage, exclusive of parking structures, in the entire tract. The Mayor and
Commissioners shall determine the appropriate mix of residential dwelling types on a case by
case basis. In determining the appropriate mix of dwelling types, the Mayor and Commissioners
shall consider the purpose, intent and criteria of the CEMUD Floating Zone, as well as the shape
of the parcel and its physical conditions such as topography, wetlands, steep slopes and
relationships to other land uses on and off the site. Development of residential uses shall not
begin prior to commencement of construction of at least 25% of the approved non-residential
uses.
4. If the entire development is not to be built in a single phase, the project shall reflect a logical
phasing of development that enables interim phases to meet the intent of the CEMUD Floating
Zone, and provides for the first phase of the project to include:
A. Development of at least 25% of the non-residential square footage;
B. At least one hotel with associated conference center facilities;
C. A gaming establishment or other significant commercial entertainment establishment,
except that the Town may not require a phasing plan that would preclude the gaming
establishment or other significant commercial entertainment establishment from receiving
approvals, permits and certificates of use and occupancy before any approvals, permits or
certificates of use and occupancy are issued for the hotel with associated conference
center facilities or any other proposed facilities within phase one other than utilities, roads,
and other improvements necessary to service the gaming or commercial entertainment
facility; and
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 103
D. At least 30% of the land area in the development.
5. Open space, including active and passive recreation areas, shall comprise at least 30% of the
gross tract area. At least 25% of the required open space shall be developed for usable open
space. All open space shall be designed and designated for the common use of any residential
occupants and of visitors to the development’s commercial uses. Specific design standards for
usable open spaces and for the landscaping throughout the site shall be established in the
project’s site design standards to ensure a high quality of design and materials. Open space
requirements for residential areas shall be as defined in Article XIII of this Chapter.
6. Requirements for building setbacks, lot sizes, lot dimensions, lot coverage, and yard and buffer
and landscaping shall be established for each CEMUD Floating Zone projects as a part of the
project’s site design standards and may vary significantly by lot. In reviewing these
requirements the Planning Commission and Mayor and Commissioners shall consider such
factors as the intent of the CEMUD Floating Zone, its development standards, and the goal of a
compact mixed use development and appropriate transitions to abutting uses on the perimeter of
the site. Unless otherwise defined in the approved site design standards or final site plan, the
following area and bulk requirements shall apply:
A. For single-family detached and duplex dwellings, the minimum lot, yard and height
requirements for the R-2 zone as contained in the Schedule of Zone Regulations shall
apply.
B. For townhouses, the minimum lot, yard and height requirements for the R-3 zone as
contained in the Schedule of Zone Regulations and the requirements in Section 198.2 shall
apply.
C. For non-residential uses, the minimum lot, yard and height requirements for the C-2 zone
as contained in the Schedule of Zone Regulations shall apply.
7. The development shall be served by external access roads, exits, entrances, internal streets and
drives of sufficient capacity and design to ensure that traffic congestion does not occur on the
roads used for immediate access to the site.
8. Private streets, built to Town standards, may serve to access lots and buildings within the
approved CEMUD in lieu of public streets.
9. Public and semi-public services and facilities must be adequate to support the proposed
development.
10. The development shall be served by a site wide comprehensive pedestrian network with
generously scaled streetscapes and walks. The network shall connect all buildings to walks,
streets and private drives so that pedestrians need not walk through parking lots to reach
buildings.
11. A coordinated architectural design approach shall be established for the site. Buildings shall be
clustered together to create distinct places and walkable districts with attractive, active street
side facades. Buildings shall be designed so that facades, signs and other appurtenances are
integrated and harmonious, attractively arranged on all sides, and that designs and massing do
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 104
not adversely affect surrounding on-site uses and off-site developments. Building designs and
materials shall draw from the character and indigenous materials of the Town and the region.
12. The development shall be served by underground community sewer, gas, water, and electric
facilities.
13. All vehicular circulation areas, parking areas and pedestrian walks shall be paved and properly
illuminated when in use after dark in such a manner as to prevent the direct transmission of light
into adjacent residential properties.
14. Where possible, physical linkages shall be provided from the development to adjoining off-site
streets and pedestrian systems.
15. The development shall reflect a comprehensive site-wide approach to the design and ongoing
maintenance of utilities, roads, parking, pedestrian systems, storm water management, open
spaces landscaping buildings, lighting and signs.
16. Innovative designs that promote an environmentally sensitive and energy efficient approach to
development are encouraged.
Section 116-7. Administrative Procedures.
The administrative procedures for the establishment and approval of a CEMUD Floating Zone shall be as
provided in this Section. The Town Staff, Planning and Zoning Commission and Mayor and
Commissioners shall process, review and decide without undue delay all proper and complete
applications submitted under this Part IV-A. After approval of an application to designate land as a
CEMUD Floating Zone, applicants may elect to apply simultaneously for approval of a Preliminary and a
Final Site Plan for the first phase of development as defined below in Steps Two and Three.
1. Step One Designation.
A. An application shall be made to the Mayor and Commissioners for the designation of land
as a Commercial Entertainment Mixed Use Development Floating Zone. Applications
shall be made on forms prescribed by the Town, shall be signed by all owners of land
within the area proposed to be designated as a CEMUD Floating Zone, and shall be
submitted by the project’s Master Developer. Town Staff shall review the application to
ensure that it includes all of the information and materials required by the application and
paragraph B. below, and may accept an application for review only after Staff determines
that the application is complete.
B. Applications shall include 15 copies of a General Development Plan setting forth
preliminary information as identified in Appendix A and the following supplemental
items:
(1) A general diagram showing the relation of the proposed CEMUD Floating Zone to
the Town of Perryville and major public access to the site.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 105
(2) A preliminary development phasing plan stating a tentative time table and staging of
development and improvements.
(3) A cost-revenue ratio analysis of the proposed General Development Plan
Development Program demonstrating the anticipated direct and indirect economic
benefits and impacts to the Town.
(4) A statement of expected Town responsibilities.
(5) A general statement concerning provision of utilities (draft terms and provisions of
a public works agreement).
(6) A preliminary traffic impact study and plan defining the anticipated traffic demand
for the site based on the amount and mix of development, demonstrating adequacy of
the site access points and adjoining intersections and defining links between key
traffic improvements to site access and development phasing if necessary. The study
shall include preliminary comments from the State Highway Administration to the
extent that the Administration is willing to provide such comments.
(7) A preliminary market study demonstrating the viability of the development concept
and estimating the general rate of absorption of the proposed development program
land uses within the stated development time frames. The study should take into
consideration assumptions about market changes over the course of the development
projected build-out time frame. These assumptions may include estimates of new
development and population growth in the surrounding market area in conjunction
with the timing of development phases on this site. With approval of the Town, the
applicant may rely upon existing studies to satisfy all or part of the requirements of
this paragraph.
(8) Images sufficient to convey the intended site and architectural character of the
development including but not limited to prototypical building elevations, sketches,
or photographic images of comparable sites and buildings.
(9) A non-binding illustrative plan of the proposed development.
(10) An application fee as established by the Town not to exceed the Town’s
anticipated costs in the Step 1, 2 and 3 review processes.
(11) A demonstration that the proposed development would comply with any
applicable overlay zones.
(12) A preliminary list of the land uses to be permitted in the development and a
statement identifying the conditions that will be met for those uses that are listed in
Section 116.9 as permitted with conditions.
(13) Other written or graphic material as the applicant or the Town may deem
necessary or desirable to aid the decisions of the Mayor and Commissioners and the
Planning Commission.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 106
C. The Mayor and Commissioners shall refer a completed application to the Planning
Commission for review and recommendation. The Planning Commission shall review the
CEMUD Floating Zone designation application for compliance with the purpose, intent
and development standards of the CEMUD Floating Zone. The Planning Commission
shall consult with such Town officials as may be appropriate, hold a public hearing and
forward the Commission’s written findings and recommendations to the Mayor and
Commissioners for consideration.
D. After receiving the findings and recommendations of the Planning Commission, the
Mayor and Commissioners shall review the CEMUD Floating Zone designation
application for compliance with the purpose, intent and development standards of the
CEMUD Floating Zone. They shall consult with such Town officials as may be
appropriate and hold a public hearing. If the Mayor and Commissioners make a written
finding that the application is in compliance, the site shall be designated as a CEMUD
Floating Zone and the General Development Plan approved. The Mayor and
Commissioners may impose appropriate conditions as necessary to ensure that the criteria
for approval are met.
2. Step 2 Preliminary Site Plan.
A. After receiving designation as a CEMUD Floating Zone and approval of a General
Development Plan from the Mayor and Commissioners, applicants shall submit a
Preliminary Site Plan application to the Planning Commission for review. Town Staff
shall review the Preliminary Site Plan application submittal to ensure that it includes all of
the information and materials required by paragraph B. below, and may accept a
Preliminary Site Plan for review only after Staff determines that the submittal is complete.
B. Fifteen (15) copies of a Preliminary Site Plan and related information and materials shall
be filed with the Planning Commission. The Preliminary Site Plan shall include
preliminary information as identified in Appendix A and as listed below. In addition, such
other written or graphic material as may be necessary or desirable in aiding the decisions
of the Mayor and Commissioners and the Planning Commission may be required. The
Preliminary Site Plan shall include or be accompanied by the following:
(1) A preliminary phasing plan that defines, by phase, a schedule of construction or
timetable and a detailed tabulation of land uses, building area, open spaces, site
amenities, parking, transportation, utilities and other site improvements to be built
and dedicated.
(2) A final traffic impact study and plan prepared based on scoping instructions from
State Highway Administration, county and Town staff, and includes State Highway
comments and approval. The study shall define the anticipated amount of traffic
generation for the site based on the amount and mix of development and reflecting
varied traffic peaks by use, reasonable transit use and onsite capture assumptions, and
establishes links between traffic improvements, development phasing if necessary
and defines the maximum trip count needed for total development and each
development phase.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 107
(3) A parking tabulation and plan defining the anticipated parking demand and supply
based on the amount and mix of development. The plan shall reflect peak hour
patterns of use and demonstrate adequacy of the proposed parking supply assuming
reasonable joint parking use to promote parking efficiency. It shall set parking
supply requirements for any uses for which parking requirements are not set forth in
this Chapter. It may include both on-street and off-street parking to meet
requirements and shall include bike parking and transit stops where applicable.
(4) A final market and visitation study demonstrating the viability and anticipated timing
of the proposed development program elements within the stated development time
frames, and estimating the anticipated mix of commercial entertainment and
complementary non-residential land uses will attract visitors for multi-purpose trips
and extended visits to the site and surrounding area. The study should take into
consideration assumptions about market changes over the course of the development
projected build-out time frame. These assumptions may include estimates of new
development and population growth in the surrounding market area in conjunction
with the timing of development phases on this site. With approval of the Town, the
applicant may rely upon existing studies to satisfy all or part of the requirements of
this paragraph.
(5) Preliminary Master Development control documents that outline the means by which
coordinated development and long term management of the overall site will be
achieved. These documents may include deed restrictions, covenants, by-laws, crossaccess
easements, joint use agreements, master lease agreements between the Master
Developer and tenants, or other instruments designed to provide for continuing
maintenance and control of common areas. The preliminary documents shall outline
the proposed plan for coordinated annual maintenance, security and public
conveniences either by individual tenants or as the responsibility of the developer. It
should include a management statement governing the design, construction,
operation, and maintenance of:
A. Sanitary and storm sewers, water mains, culverts, and other underground
structures.
B. Streets, alleys, driveways, curb cuts, entrances and exits, parking joint use
parking areas and loading area, and outdoor lighting systems.
C. Parks, parkways, bike ways, playgrounds, open spaces, fences, walls, screen
planting, and landscaping and signs.
(6) Preliminary site design standards in a format approved by Town Staff. The site
design standards shall include:
A. Design standards that define the intended design character of the site’s
architecture, signage lighting and thematic site landscape elements.
B. Requirements for building setbacks, lot sizes, lot dimensions, lot coverage, and
yard and buffer and landscaping.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 108
C. A preliminary Master Sign Plan defining how signs within the proposed
development will be managed and controlled as defined in Section 271 of this
Chapter.
D. Architectural exhibits illustrating the intended architectural design of all major
buildings and buildings types shown by front elevations, three dimensional
massing sketches, photographs or architectural renderings. Where a variety of
designs are proposed, each design shall be shown.
E. Master Developer design review procedures for enforcement of these standards
in perpetuity.
(7) A preliminary landscape master plan defining the design for the development’s
landscape, lighting, furnishings, amenities, circulation areas, usable open spaces,
recreational areas, other common open space and pedestrian circulation areas.
C. The Planning Commission shall review the Preliminary Site Plan application for
compliance with the purpose, intent and development standards of the CEMUD Floating
Zone. The Planning Commission shall consult with such town officials as may be
appropriate, shall hold a public hearing and make written findings and recommendations.
The Commission shall forward its written findings and recommendations to the Mayor
and Commissioners for consideration. The Planning Commission may recommend
additional appropriate conditions as necessary to ensure that the conditions for approval
are met.
D. The Mayor and Commissioners shall review the Preliminary Site Plan for compliance with
the purpose, intent and development standards of the CEMUD Floating Zone. They shall
consult with such Town officials as may be appropriate and shall hold a public hearing. If
the Mayor and Commissioners make a written finding that the Preliminary Site Plan
application is in compliance with the purpose, intent and development standards of the
CEMUD Floating Zone, the Mayor and Commissioners shall approve the Preliminary Site
Plan. As part of their determination the Mayor and Commissioners may impose additional
appropriate conditions as necessary to ensure that the conditions for approval are met.
3. Step 3. Final Site Plan.
A. An applicant shall submit a Final Site Plan application to the Mayor and Commissioners
for review either after receiving approval of a Preliminary Site Plan from the Mayor and
Commissioners or at the same time as submitting an application for approval of a
Preliminary Site Plan as provided for in Step 2 above. Town staff shall review the Final
Site Plan application submittal to ensure that it includes all of the information and
materials required by paragraph B. below, and may accept a Final Site Plan application for
review only after staff determines that the submittal is complete.
B. Final Site Plan applications may be submitted for the entire site or for the land area within
one or more of the development phases approved in the Preliminary Site Plan. The first
Final Site Plan, at a minimum, shall address the first phase of development and any
overall site wide improvements or commitments established in the Preliminary Site Plan
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 109
necessary to service the first phase. Subsequent phases of development shall be submitted
as separate Final Site Plan applications.
C. Application submittals for Final Site Plan approval shall include 15 copies of all submittal
items and shall include:
(1) A Final Site Plan in the form of a Final Plat that complies with the specifications set
forth in Appendix A, and applicable State, county and Town laws, regulations, and
chapters governing the subdivision of land.
(2) Final Master Development control documents including deed restrictions, covenants,
by-laws or other instruments designed to provide for continuing maintenance and
control of common areas, a copy of the master lease between the Master Developer
and tenants and the Final site design standards.
(3) Final phasing plan reflecting a commitment to final dates for initiation and
completion of the development, dedications and improvements shown on the
approved Final Site Plan and/or its phases that are acceptable to the Mayor and
Commissioners. The applicant may seek an extension of time to complete one or
more of the contemplated improvements for that particular phase based upon
economic conditions, or unforeseen delays or difficulties beyond the control of the
applicant that may adversely impact the timing of the construction or completion of
the development in that phase. The Mayor and Commissioners shall not
unreasonably deny or delay such a request.
(4) A takedown chart in an approved format indicating the amount of development, open
space dedications and improvements covered by the proposed and previously
approved Final Site Plans, if any, as compared to the development wide totals
established by the approved Preliminary Site Plan.
(5) Detailed architectural designs of buildings within the Final Site Plan area. These
shall be detailed schematic designs with information on floor plans, elevations, roof
plans, exterior materials and color ranges sufficient to determine compliance with the
final design standards.
(6) Final Landscape Master Plan with detailed landscape, lighting, furnishings and
amenities designs for the property within the Final Site Plan.
D. The Mayor and Commissioners shall review the Final Site Plan application for compliance
with the approved Preliminary Site Plan. The Mayor and Commissioners shall consult
with such Town officials as may be appropriate and may hold a public hearing. The
Mayor and Commissioners may approve or disapprove the Final Site Plan based on a
finding of compliance or non-compliance with the approved Preliminary Site Plan. As
part of their findings the Mayor and Commissioners may impose additional appropriate
conditions as necessary to ensure that the conditions for approval are met.
E. Applications for Final Site Plans that vary significantly from the approved Preliminary
Site Plan regarding construction schedule, development program elements or other
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 110
elements, may require an amendment to the approved Preliminary Site Plan. This
determination shall be made by the Mayor and Commissioners.
F. If the Mayor and Commissioners approve the Final Site Plan:
(1) The applicant shall file or deposit in escrow with the Mayor and Commissioners an
irrevocable letter of credit in a form satisfactory to the Mayor and Commissioners
and in an amount sufficient to ensure completion of all requirements established by
the Mayor and Commissioners for completion of all public improvements and
dedications applicable to the phase for which a Final Site Plan is under review. The
amount of the security shall be reviewed annually by the Mayor and Commissioners
and adjusted to reflect current costs and amount of work remaining to be completed.
(2) The approved Final Site Plan shall be filed and recorded among the county land
records together with signed copies of all relevant covenants and documents, which
shall include:
(A) Final site design plat;
(B) Final master development control documents;
(C) Final phasing plan;
(D) Final site design standards; and
(E) Final landscape master plan.
(3) Building and sign permits shall be issued in accordance with the approved Final Site
Plan. The Zoning Administrator shall review building permit applications for
compliance with the recorded Final Site Plan and related documents as defined in
Section 116-7.3.F.(2). All building and sign permit applications shall be
accompanied by a signed letter from the Master Developer attesting to its approval of
the application, and confirming that the application was approved by an applicable
Master Developer internal design review process.
(4) In a multi-phase project, building permits for a subsequent phase may not be issued
until substantial construction has commenced on all prior phases, except as the
Mayor and Commissioners may expressly authorize. Except in the last phase of a
project, a use and occupancy certificate may not be issued for the last building
constructed in a phase, and the Town may not accept public infrastructure and
improvements for that phase, until the applicant has filed a Final Site Plan application
and acceptable phasing schedule for the next phase of the project.
Section 116-8. Procedures for Amendments to Approved Preliminary and Final Site Plans and
General Development Plan.
1. An application for a Final Site Plan, building permit or sign permit that is inconsistent with the
approved relevant Final Site Plan or Preliminary Site Plan, or determined by the Mayor and
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 111
Commissioners to require an amendment to a previously approved Preliminary Site Plan or Final
Site Plan, shall be accompanied by an application for an amendment. An application that is
inconsistent with an approved General Development Plan shall require an amendment to the
General Development Plan.
2. Amendment application submittals shall include a written request, a rationale for the amendment
and amended versions of each of the plans or documents proposed for amendment. The Mayor
and Commissioners may either require only a revision to the affected document or, if they deem
the modification to be more extensive, they may require a full re-submittal and such other written
or graphic material as may be necessary or desirable in aiding their decisions.
3. The Mayor and Commissioners shall review applications for amendments to previously approved
Final Site Plans, Preliminary Site Plans and General Development Plans. The Mayor and
Commissioners shall consult with such Town officials as may be appropriate and may submit an
application to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation. The Mayor and
Commissioners, and Planning Commission where a requested amendment has been referred to it,
may hold a public hearing for Preliminary Site Plan or General Development Plan amendments.
The Planning Commission may recommend where a requested amendment has been referred to it,
and the Mayor and Commissioners may approve or disapprove the requested amendment, based
on a finding as follows:
A. Final Site Plan findings based on compliance or non-compliance with the approved
Preliminary Site Plan.
B. Preliminary Site Plan findings based on compliance or non-compliance with the approved
General Development Plan and the purpose, intent and development standards of the
CEMUD Floating Zone.
C. General Development Plan findings based on compliance or non-compliance with the
purpose, intent and development standards of the CEMUD Floating Zone.
D. As part of their findings the Mayor and Commissioners may impose additional appropriate
conditions as necessary to ensure that the conditions for approval are met.
4. Amendments to approved Final Site Plans shall be recorded among the county land records.
5. In any particular situation where the Mayor and Commissioners determine that a requested
amendment is minor in nature, the Mayor and Commissioners waive or modify any of the
submittal or approval process requirements of this section.
Section 116-9. Conflict With Other Provisions.
1. Provisions for development shown on an approved General Development Plan, Preliminary Site
Plan and Final Site Plans that conflict with other provisions of this Chapter shall supersede those
other provisions with which they conflict.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 112
2. Provisions for development shown on an approved General Development Plan, Preliminary and
Final Site Plans that conflict with other provisions of the Subdivision Chapter of the Perryville
Town Code shall supersede those other provisions with which they conflict.
Section 116-10. Permitted Uses in the CEMUD Floating Zone.
In accordance with the purpose and intent of CEMUD Floating Zone, the following uses are permitted in
the CEMUD Floating Zone:
A. Any conditions normally associated with uses permitted with conditions or uses permitted
by Special Exception, as defined in Article XI, Supplementary Uses, and Article IV, Part II,
Special Exceptions, may be waived or altered by the Mayor and Commissioners, provided
that such waiver or alteration is reasonably consistent with the purposes and intent of the
CEMUD Floating Zone and would not adversely affect surrounding or nearby properties.
Section 116-11 through 19 Reserved.
Part IV-B. Planned Infill and Redevelopment District (PIRD) Floating Zone
[Amended 1/3/2017 by Ord No. 2016-21]
Section 116-20. Establishment.
The Planned Infill and Redevelopment District or “PIRD” is a floating zone that may be applied to land
through a zoning map amendment adopted by the Mayor and Commissioners in accordance with the
provisions of this section for projects that involve compatible new uses created through redevelopment,
adaptive re-use, demolition, reconstruction and infill.
Section 116-21. Purpose.
The purpose of the Planned Infill and Redevelopment district (PIRD) is to:
1. Stimulate re-investment and development in order to strengthen the local economy and to stabilize
and improve property values of such sites and structures.
2. Facilitate infill and redevelopment of properties through adaptive re-use, demolition, or
reconstruction of vacant or underutilized properties.
3. Encourage development which presents an attractive appearance and is compatible with uses in the
surrounding area by means of appropriate architecture, siting of buildings, service areas and
landscape treatment.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 113
4. Provide developers and property owners flexibility that achieves high quality design and results in
infill and redevelopment projects.
5. Locate development on land that is or can be served with public water and sewer facilities and on
sites that are clearly suitable for the physical characteristics of development for such lots.
6. Provide a more flexible approach to the comprehensive development of large tracts of land in terms
of land use, intensity and design.
7. Implement the Comprehensive Plan, Sustainable Communities Action Plan and other policies in a
manner closely compatible with said plans and policies.
8. Assure compatibility of land uses proposed in such a development with uses in the surrounding area
of the site by incorporating higher standards of land planning and site design.
Section 116-22. Planned Infill and Redevelopment District Requirements.
A Planned Infill and Redevelopment District shall meet the following requirements:
1. Ownership. The entire area proposed for a PIRD shall be owned by the applicant. If the entire area is
not wholly owned by one individual or entity, all owners shall join in the application and shall be
bound, jointly and severally, by any conditions, amendments, modifications, or changes to the
underlying base or overlay zone, the PIRD, and the approved General Development Plan.
2. Zoning Districts. The PIRD is a floating zone that may be established in any base zone or with other
overlay zones provided the requirements of this section are met.
3. General Development Plan. A PIRD shall include a General Development Plan approved by the
Mayor and Commissioners as part of the rezoning. The General Development Plan shall include a
schedule or timetable for all development and construction that includes beginning, duration, and
completion dates.
4. Uses. The uses permitted for a particular PIRD shall be the uses permitted in the approved General
Development Plan, and, except as modified by the approved General Development Plan, uses
permitted in the base zoning district.
5. Bulk Requirements. The bulk requirements for a particular PIRD shall be the bulk requirements in
the approved General Development Plan.
6. Density. The Maximum permitted residential and non-residential densities for a particular PIRD shall
be the maximum permitted densities set forth in the approved General Development Plan.
7. Architectural Requirements. The architectural requirements for a particular PIRD shall be the
architectural requirements set forth in the approved General Development Plan.
8. Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 274 of this Chapter or as set
forth in the approved General Development Plan.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 114
9. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Article XVII of this Chapter or as
set forth in the approved General Development Plan.
10. Signs. Signage shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Article XV of this Chapter.
11. Transportation Facilities. Adequate transportation facilities capable of serving the proposed
redevelopment must exist or be provide in conjunction with the PIRD.
12. Water and Wastewater Treatment. Adequate water and wastewater facilities capable of serving the
proposed redevelopment must exist or be provided in conjunction with the PIRD.
Section 116-23. Standards for Approval.
A proposed Planned Infill and Redevelopment District and General Development Plan may be approved
only if the Mayor and Commissioners finds that:
1. It is consistent with the Perryville Comprehensive Plan;
2. It will promote the general welfare of the public;
3. The size and location of a PIRD is appropriate to the surrounding neighborhood;
4. The improvements and reuse or new uses in the General Development Plan are appropriate to the
surrounding neighborhood;
5. The proposed building designs, uses, intensity, scale, bulk, and location of structures and uses are
appropriate to the surrounding neighborhood. The applicant shall demonstrate how this standard will
be achieved by providing:
a. Images sufficient to convey the intended site and architectural character of the development
including but not limited to prototypical building elevations, sketches, or photographic images of
comparable sites and buildings.
b. A non-binding illustrative plan of the proposed development.
c. A preliminary list of the land uses to be permitted in the development.
6. It includes all or some combination of the following redevelopment tools to substantially improve
existing development in the proposed PIRD: enhanced site design and layout; improved public and
private infrastructure and amenities, which may include compatible new uses; and adaptive re-use,
infill, demolition, reconstruction, expansion, relocation, or replacement of legal nonconforming
structures and/or legal nonconforming uses in accordance with the requirements of this section;
7. It preserves appropriate existing development, manage redevelopment, and allow for new
development consistent with the standards and requirements of this section;
8. It will promote, and will not interfere with, the adequate and orderly provision of public facilities; and
9. All requirements of this section have been met.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 115
Section 116-24. Applications for Planned Infill and Redevelopment Districts.
Applications for a PIRD shall be filed with the Director of Planning and Zoning (the Director) on such
forms as may be required by the Town and shall include the following:
1. A narrative describing the existing conditions on the site and within one hundred feet (100’) of all
boundaries of the site.
2. A properly prepared plat, signed and sealed by a Maryland registered professional property surveyor
and an adequate legal description of the property to be included in the PIRD.
3. Include a proposed General Development Plan that includes all information required pursuant to
Section 34 and this section in sufficient detail to permit thorough review of the application.
4. Include all information required to demonstrate that the application meets the standards for approval
of the PIRD and General Development Plan.
5. Include all additional or supplemental information as the Director may require from time to time to
properly evaluate the application under the standards and requirements of this section.
Section 116-25. Procedure for Approval.
1. A pre-application meeting with the Director is required prior to submission of an application for a
PIRD.
2. A PIRD shall be established by a zoning map amendment adopted pursuant to Section 317.
Section 116-26. Mayor and Commissioners Authority.
1. Review authority. As a condition for approval of an application, the Mayor and Commissioners may:
a. Modify, amend, or reconfigure the boundaries of a proposed PIRD;
b. Impose modified, amended, or different conditions, requirements, or limitations to include height,
bulk, location of structures and existing and new uses, architectural appearance, open space,
required public facilities, landscaping, parking, timing and phasing of the development, use and
other provisions (collectively referred to as “amendments”) of a proposed General Development
Plan;
c. Approve a General Development Plan that amends or changes existing standards of the
underlying zone;
d. Approve a General Development Plan for a particular PIRD that differs from General
Development Plans in other PIRDs; and
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 116
e. Impose additional requirements, conditions, and safeguards as reasonably required to achieve the
public purposes for the PIRD or to promote public health, safety, or welfare.
2. Applicant Consent. Amendments to a proposed PIRD or to a proposed General Development Plan
shall not be effective without the written consent of the applicant, which shall be filed and made part
of the record of the proceedings.
3. Approval Authority.
a. The Mayor and Commissioners may establish a PIRD and approve a proposed General
Development Plan only if the Mayor and Commissioners determines that the standards and
requirements in this section have been met. The Mayor and Commissioners decision shall
include written findings of fact and conclusions of law.
b. There is no presumption that a proposed PIRD or General Development Plan meets the standards
in this section, or that granting any application will be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
Compliance with all standards and requirements of this section permits, but does not require,, the
Mayor and Commissioners to establish a PIRD or approve a proposed General Development
Plan.
Section 116-27. Site Plan Approval.
After approval of a PIRD and General Development Plan, the applicant shall apply to the Planning office
for site plan approval in accordance with Section 34 to implement the General Development Plan. The
Site Plan approval shall be based upon, consistent with, and shall implement the approved General
Development Plan.
Section 116-28. Implementation of Approved General Development Plan.
Construction of improvements or implementation of uses authorized by a final General Development Plan
shall commence within two (2) years of site plan approval. If construction or implementation does not
commence within two (2) years following final site plan approval, the PIRD shall lapse and the zoning of
the property shall revert to the former base zoning unless the applicant requests a time extension for good
cause shown and the Mayor and Commissioners grant the request.
Section 116-29. Amendments.
An approved General Development Plan and an approved Site Plan in a PIRD may be amended as set
forth in this section. Proposed amendments shall be submitted to the Director in writing in the same
manner and subject to the same conditions as an original application. Applications for amendments under
this paragraph shall be signed by all property owners in the PIRD.
1. Consideration of proposed amendments to the boundaries of an approved PIRD shall follow the same
process set forth in this section to establish new PIRDs.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 117
2. Proposed amendments to an approved General Development Plan shall be submitted to the Mayor
and Commissioners for decision, except that minor amendments may be approved by the Director as
set forth below.
3. All requests shall be submitted to the Director with all information, plats, and submittals necessary to
evaluate the proposed amendment. The Director shall review the proposed amendment to determine
if it constitutes a minor change to the approved General Development Plan. The Planning Officer
may approve only minor amendments to final General Development Plans. Minor amendments may
not:
a. Increase the intensity of the development (e.g. floor area);
b. Increase residential density;
c. Increase the lot coverage by more than 1,000 square feet;
d. Increase area of any building by more than 1,000 square feet or ten percent (10%) of the gross
floor area, whichever is less;
e. Adversely impact surrounding properties or affect setbacks, landscaping or buffering along the
perimeter of the PIRD.
4. The Director, for just cause, may request Mayor and Commissioners review and approval of minor
amendments.
5. Other than minor amendments, all other proposed amendments to an approved General Development
Plan must be approved by the Mayor and Commissioners in accordance with the process set forth in
this section for approval of General Development Plans.
6. Consideration of proposed amendments to an approved site plan in a PIRD shall follow the same
processes set forth in this Chapter to obtain site plan approval.
Section 116-30. Construction.
Except as modified by this Section and an approved General Development Plan, the provisions of this
Chapter remain in effect in an approved PIRD. This Section shall not be construed or applied to modify,
limit, supersede, or repeal any other Chapter of the Town Code.
Section 116-31. Appeals.
1. Any person with standing aggrieved by the floating zone reclassification or approval of a General
Development Plan by the Mayor and Commissioners may seek judicial review of the same by the
Circuit Court for Cecil County, Maryland.
2. The time for appeal shall be governed by the Maryland Rules of Procedure.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 118
Part V Critical Area District
Section 117. Purpose
1. The purpose of this district is to implement the Perryville Critical Area Program. The provisions
of this district are adopted to manage and regulate land use and foster more sensitive development
activity to accomplish the following:
a. Conserve fish, wildlife and plant habitat; and
b. Establish land use policies for development in the district that accommodate growth as
well as address the environmental impacts that the number, movement, and activities of
persons may have in the Critical Area.
c. Minimize adverse impacts on water quality that result from pollutants that are discharged
from structure or run off from surrounding lands;
2. The Perryville Critical Area includes any tributaries to the Chesapeake Bay to the head of tide,
tidal wetlands, and all land and water within 1,000 feet beyond the landward boundary of these
waters and wetlands.
Section 118. Implementation of the Critical Area Provisions
1. Regulated activities and applicability. Any applicant for a permit or license to pursue activities
within the Critical Area, such as development or redevelopment, grading, sediment and erosion
control, timber harvesting, shoreline erosion control, installation of a septic system and drain
field, operation of a waste collection or disposal facility, operation of a commercial or private
marina or other water-related commercial or industrial operation (whether public or private),
mining (whether surface or sub-surface) or quarrying, farming or other agriculturally-related
activities shall only have such permits or licenses issued by the Zoning Administrator after review
and approval under this Critical Area Program.
2. Responsible agency. All applications for local permits and licenses that are issued by the Town
shall be made to the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall make available to all
agencies involved in overseeing regulated activities a set of maps showing the location of all
parcels of land in the Critical Area so that these agencies may identify affected properties subject
to said referrals. Applications for timber harvesting shall be reviewed by the Department of
Natural Resources and the District Forestry Board. Applications for mining and quarrying shall
be reviewed by the County Office of Planning, Zoning and Community Development and
appropriate State agencies.
3. Critical Area Program. The Town’s Critical Area Program consists of Article IX, Part V of the
Town Zoning Ordinance; the Sensitive Areas Element of the Comprehensive Plan, and twelve
Critical Area and Habitat Protection Maps.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 119
4. Process. Upon receiving the referred application, the Zoning Administrator shall review the
application for compliance of the proposed activity with the requirements of this part (Article IX,
Part V) of this Chapter. If the activity is in compliance with this part then it shall be issued
provided it is issued in accordance with the provisions contained in Article IV. If it is not in
compliance it shall be returned to the applicant with the reasons cited for non-compliance.
5. Process for site plan review. All applications requiring site plan review shall follow the
procedures outlined in Section 34.
Section 119. Enforcement
1. Consistency. The Critical Area provisions of this Chapter, in accordance with the Maryland
Chesapeake Bay Critical Area Act and Criteria, and as set out in any other applicable Town
Chapters, supersedes any inconsistent law, Chapter or plan of the Town of Perryville. In the case
of conflicting provisions, the stricter provisions shall apply.
2. Responsible agencies. These provisions shall be implemented and enforced by the Zoning
Administrator with the assistance of the Critical Area Circuit Rider. Should an infraction of
provisions contained in this Critical Area Overlay District, or under any law, Chapter or plan
related to the Town’s Critical Area Program provisions or requirements, be brought to the
attention of any official of the Town, said official shall immediately contact the Zoning
Administrator who may consult with the Critical Area Circuit Rider and/or the Town Attorney to
determine the proper remedial course of action. The Zoning Administrator shall send a copy of
his decision to the Critical Area Commission. The Commission, at its discretion, may also take
such remedial action as given it under State law.
3. Violations. In addition to any other penalty applicable under state or municipal law, a person who
violates any provisions of Natural Resource Article, Title 8 Subtitle 18, or the Town’s Critical
Are Program, ordinance, or regulations is subject to a fine not to exceed $10,000. In determining
the amount of the penalty to be assessed under, the Town may consider the following:
a. The gravity of the violation
b. Any willfulness or negligence involved in the violation; and
c. The environmental impact of the violation.
Section 120. Development in the Critical Area Overlay District
1. Description. The Critical Area of the Town contains approximately 532.7 acres.
2. General policies. In order to accommodate already existing land uses and growth in the Town of
Perryville Critical Area while providing for the conservation of habitat and the protection of
water quality, the Town has identified three land use management sub-districts within the Critical
Area. The Town has identified each of the three sub-districts within the Critical Area based on
the following criteria and has developed policies and programs to achieve the objectives as
proposed by the Town Program. The Town recognizes the following three types of development
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 120
areas: Intensely Developed Areas (IDAs); Limited Development Areas (LDAs); and Resource
Conservation Areas (RCAs). The following provisions are applicable throughout the Critical
Area:
a. Intense development should be directed outside of the Critical Area. Future intense
development activities, when proposed in the Critical Area, shall be directed towards the
Intensely Developed Areas.
b. Additional low intensity development may be permitted in the Limited Development
areas, but shall be subject to strict regulation to prevent adverse impacts on habitat and
water quality.
c. Development shall be limited in the Resource Conservation Area, which shall be chiefly
designated to protect open space, forestry, fisheries activities, other resource utilization
activities and for habitat protection.
3. Implementation. For purposes of implementing this regulation the Town has determined, based
on land uses and development in existence on December 1, 1985, which land areas fall within the
three sub-districts described in this Chapter.
4. Activities not permitted except in IDA. Certain new development, redevelopment or expanded
activities or facilities, because of their intrinsic nature or because of their potential for adversely
affecting habitats or water quality, may not be permitted in the Critical Area except in Intensely
Developed Areas under regulations of this section and only after the activity or facility has
demonstrated to all appropriate Town and State permitting agencies that there will be a net
improvement in water quality to the adjacent body of water. These activities include the
following:
a. Non-maritime heavy industry;
b. Transportation facilities and utility transmission facilities, except those necessary to serve
permitted uses, or where regional or interstate facilities must cross tidal waters (utility
transmission facilities do not include power plants); or
c. Permanent sludge handling, storage and disposal facilities, other than those associated
with wastewater treatment facilities. However, agricultural or horticultural use of sludge
under appropriate approvals when applied by an approved method at approved
application rates may be permitted in the Critical Area, except in the 100 foot-Buffer;
d. The Town may preclude additional development activities that it considers detrimental to
water quality or fish, wildlife, or plant habitats within the Critical Area.
5. Activities not permitted. Certain new development activities or facilities, or the expansion of
certain existing facilities, because of their intrinsic nature or because of their potential for
adversely affecting habitat and water quality, may not be permitted in the Critical Area unless no
environmentally acceptable alternative exists outside the Critical Area, and these development
activities or facilities are needed in order to correct an existing water quality or wastewater
management problem. These include:
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 121
a. Solid or hazardous waste collection or disposal facilities, including transfer stations; or
b. Sanitary landfills.
6. Continuation of existing, permitted facilities. Existing, permitted facilities of the type noted in
Section 120.4 above shall be subject to the standards and requirements of the Department of the
Environment, under COMAR Title 26.
7. Reasonable accommodations for the needs of disabled citizens. The Board of Appeals may make
reasonable accommodations to avoid discrimination on the basis of a physical disability.
Reasonable accommodations for the needs of disabled citizens may be permitted in accordance
with the evidentiary requirements set forth in the following paragraphs.
a. An applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating the following:
(1) The existence of a physical disability;
(2) Literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance would result in discrimination
by virtue of such disability;
(3) A reasonable accommodation would reduce or eliminate the discriminatory effect of
the provisions of this ordinance;
(4) The accommodation requested will not substantially impair the purpose, intent, or
effect, of the provisions of this ordinance as applied to the property;
(5) Environmental impacts associated with the accommodation are the minimum
necessary to address the needs resulting from the particular disability of the applicant.
b. The Board of Appeals shall determine the nature and scope of any accommodation under
this section and may award different or other relief than requested after giving due regard
to the purpose, intent, or effect of the applicable provisions of this ordinance. The Board
may also consider the size, location, and type of accommodation proposed and whether
alternatives exist which accommodate the need with less adverse effect.
c. The Board of Appeals may require, as a condition of approval, the upon termination of
the need for accommodation, that the property be restored to comply with all applicable
provisions of this ordinance. Appropriate bonds may be collected or liens placed in order
to ensure the Town’s ability to restore the property should the applicant fail to do so.
Section 121. Intensely Developed Areas
1. Description. Intensely Developed Areas (IDA’s) are those areas where residential, commercial,
institutional, and/or industrial developed uses predominate and where relatively little natural
habitat occurs. At the time of the initial mapping, these areas shall have had at least one of the
following features:
a. Housing density equal to or greater than four dwelling units per acre;
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 122
b. Industrial, institutional or commercial uses are concentrated in the area; or
c. Public sewer and water collection and distribution systems are currently serving the area
and housing density is greater than three dwelling units per acre;
d. In addition, these features shall be concentrated in an area of at least 20 adjacent acres or
that entire upland portion of the Critical Area within the boundary of a municipality,
whichever is less.
2. General policies. The following policies are applicable for Intensely Developed Areas. New or
expanded development or redevelopment shall take place in such a way as to:
a. Improve the quality of runoff from developed areas that enters the Chesapeake Bay or its
tributary streams;
b. Accommodate additional development of the type and intensity designated by the Town
in this Program provided that water quality is not impaired;
c. Minimize the expansion of Intensely Developed Areas into portions of the Critical Area
designated as Habitat Protection Areas and Resource Conservation Areas under this
Program;
d. Conserve and enhance Habitat Protection Areas to the extent possible within Intensely
Developed Areas; and
e. Encourage the use of retrofitting measures to address existing storm water management
problems.
3. Development standards. The following development standards are hereby adopted for Intensely
Developed Areas:
a. All plans shall be assessed for their impacts on water quality and other biological
resources.
b. Alterations in the plans shall be made to mitigate any negative impacts.
c. Urban best management practices shall be considered and, where appropriate,
implemented as part of all plans for development or redevelopment.
d. Development and redevelopment shall be subject to the Habitat Protection Area
requirements prescribed in Sections 137 through 141 in this Chapter.
e. Storm water shall be addressed in accordance with the following provisions:
(1) The Town shall require, at the time of development or redevelopment, that
technologies as required by applicable State and local regulations be applied by
anyone undertaking development activities in order to minimize adverse impacts
to water quality caused by storm water. The technologies shall be developed in
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 123
accordance with the guidelines published by the Critical Area Commission
entitled “Critical Area 10% Rule Guidance Manual”, Fall 2003 and as may be
amended.
(2) In the case of redevelopment, if these technologies do not reduce pollutant
loadings measured by use of the keystone pollutant method by at least 10 percent
below the level of pollution on the site prior to redevelopment, then offsets shall
be provided.
(3) In the case of new development, offsets as determined appropriate by the Town
shall be used if they reduce pollutant loadings by at least 10 percent of the predevelopment
levels. Offset fees-in-lieu shall be set based on the actual cost to
achieve the required pollution reduction plus reasonable fees for cost incurred by
the Town, e.g., planning, design, and administration of offset measures.
(4) Offsets may be provided either on or off site, provided that water quality benefits
are equivalent, that the benefits are obtained within the same watershed, and that
the benefits can be determined through the use of modeling, monitoring or other
computation of mitigation measures as specified in the “Critical Area 10% Rule
Guidance Manual, Fall 2003” and as may be amended.
.
f. If practicable, permeable areas shall be established in vegetation and whenever possible,
redevelopment shall reduce existing levels of pollution.
g. Areas of public access to the shoreline, such as foot paths, scenic drives and other public
recreational facilities, should be maintained and, if possible, encouraged to be established
within Intensely Developed Areas.
h. Ports and industries which use water for transportation and derive economic benefits
from shore access shall be located near existing port facilities. The Town may identify
other sites for planned future port facility development and use if this use will provide
significant economic benefit to the State, County or Town and is consistent with the
provisions for Water Dependent Facilities within this overlay district and other State and
Federal regulations.
i. The Town shall promote with the assistance of State agencies, participation in programs
and activities for the enhancement of biological resources within the Critical Area for
their positive effects on water quality and urban wildlife habitat. These programs may
include urban forestry, landscaping, gardens, wetland and aquatic habitat restoration
elements.
j. To the extent practicable, future development in the Critical Area shall use cluster
development as a means to reduce impervious areas and to maximize areas of natural
vegetation.
k. When the cutting or clearing of trees in forests and developed woodland areas is
associated with current or planned development activities, the following shall be
required:
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 124
(1) Participation in programs established by the Town for the enhancement of forest
and developed woodland resources such as programs for urban forestry (for
example, street tree planting, gardens, landscaping, Buffer planting);
(2) Development activities shall be designed and implemented to minimize
destruction of forest and woodland vegetation; and
(3) Development activities shall address the protection of existing forests and
developed woodlands identified as Habitat Protection Areas in the Habitat
Protection Sections of this Chapter.
4. Public education program. The Town shall use a public education program to alert developers
and property owners to potential impacts, mitigation measures and urban best management
practices that should be considered as part of all intense development activity from individual
dwellings through major development projects.
Section 122. Limited Development Areas
1. Description. Limited Development Areas are those areas which are currently developed in low or
moderate intensity uses. They also contain areas of natural plant and animal habitats. The quality
of runoff from these areas has not been substantially altered or impaired. At the time of the initial
mapping, these areas shall have had at least one of the following features:
a. Housing density ranging from one dwelling unit per 5 acres up to four dwelling units per
acre;
b. Areas not dominated by agricultural, wetland, forest, barren land, surface water, or open
space;
c. Areas meeting the conditions of Intensely Developed Area but comprising less than 20
acres;
d. Areas having public sewer or public water, or both.
2. General policies. The following policies are established within Limited Development Areas.
New or expanded development or redevelopment shall take place in such a way as to:
a. Maintain, or, if possible, improve the quality of runoff and groundwater entering the
Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries;
b. Maintain, to the extent practicable, existing areas of natural habitat; and
c. Accommodate additional low or moderate intensity development if:
(1) This development conforms to the development standards in paragraph 3 below;
and;
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 125
(2) The overall intensity of development within the Limited Development Area is
not increased beyond the level established in a particular area so as to change its
prevailing character as identified by density and land use currently established in
the area.
3. Development standards. The following performance standards are hereby adopted for Limited
Development Areas:
a. For all development activities in the Limited Development Areas, the Town shall require
that the applicant identify any environmental or natural feature described below, and shall
meet all of the following standards of environmental protection:
(1) Adherence to the provisions of Sections 137 through 141 in this Chapter for
Habitat Protection Areas in the Critical Area and the provisions of Section 129 in
this chapter for water-dependent facilities.
(2) All roads, bridges, and utilities that must cross a Habitat Protection Area shall be
located, designed, constructed, and maintained so as to provide maximum
erosion protection and minimize negative impacts to wildlife, aquatic life and
their habitats and maintain hydrologic processes and water quality. Roads,
bridges, or utilities may not be located in any Habitat Protection Area unless no
feasible alternative exists.
(3) All development activities that must cross or affect streams shall be designed to:
i. Reduce increases in flood frequency and severity that are attributable to
development;
ii. Retain tree canopy so as to maintain stream water temperature within
normal variation;
iii. Provide a natural substrate for stream beds; and
iv. Minimize adverse water quality and quantity impacts of storm water.
(4) For development activities in RCA and LDA, wildlife corridors shall be
established and used to connect the area left in forest cover with any large forest
tracts which are located outside of the area or property being developed or
subdivided. Forest left in its natural state should be adjacent to larger forested
areas and not left as an isolated island of trees. Planting required as a mitigation
measure should be adjacent to other habitat. Tree planting which serves as visual
screening or landscaping should not be considered to meet these requirements.
Protective conservation easements shall be required and apply to all wildlife
corridors.
b. For the cutting or clearing of trees in forests and developed woodland areas which are
associated with current or planned development activities in a Limited Development
Area, the Town shall:
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 126
(1) Implement development in accordance with Section 132, Forest and Woodland
Protection.
(2) Require that the applicant consider the recommendations of the Maryland
Department of Natural Resources when planning development on forested land;
(3) Design and implement development activities to minimize the destruction of
woodland vegetation; and
(4) Provide protection for forests and developed woodlands identified as Habitat
Protection Areas.
c. For the alteration of forest and developed woodland in the Limited Development Area,
the Town shall apply all of the following requirements:
(1) The total acreage in forest coverage within the Town in the Critical Area shall be
maintained or preferably increased;
(2) All forests that are allowed to be cleared or developed shall be replaced in the
Critical Area on not less than an equal area basis;
(3) No more than 20 percent of any forest or developed woodland may be removed
from forest use, except as provided in paragraph (d)(iv) below. The remaining
80 percent shall be maintained through recorded, restrictive covenants or similar
instruments approved by the Town Attorney; and
(4) Developed woodland vegetation shall be conserved to the greatest extent
practicable.
d. For replacement of forest and developed woodland, if more than 20 percent is to be
removed from forest use, an applicant may clear or develop not more than 30 percent of
the total forest area provided that the afforested area shall consist of 1.5 times the total
surface acreage of the disturbed forest or developed woodland area, or both.
e. In addition, applicants shall adhere to the following criteria for forest and woodland
development:
(1) A performance bond in an amount determined by the Town to assure satisfactory
replacement as required by paragraphs (c)(iii) and (c)(iv) above;
(2) No vegetation shall be removed without prior authorization from the Town.
Grading permits shall be required before forest or developed woodland is
cleared;
(3) Vegetation that has been cleared before obtaining appropriate authorization or
that exceed the maximum area allowed in 3,d above shall be replanted at three
times the areal extent of the cleared area;
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 127
(4) If the areal extent of the site limits the application of the reforestation guidelines
in paragraphs 3c, 3d and 3e above, alternative provisions or reforestation
guidelines may be permitted by the County if they are consistent with the intent
of the Forest and Woodland Section of this overlay district to conserve the forest
and developed woodland resources of the Critical Area. Alternative provisions
may include fees-in-lieu provisions or use of a forest mitigation bank if the
provisions are adequate to ensure the restoration or establishment of an
equivalent forest area;
(5) If no forest is established on proposed development sites, these sites shall be
planted to provide a forest or developed woodland cover of at least 15 percent of
the site area;
(6) All forests designated on development plans shall be maintained to the extent
practicable, through conservation easements, restrictive covenants or other
protective instruments approved by the Town Attorney;
(7) The applicant shall designate, subject to the approval of the town, a new forest
area on a part of the site not forested; and
(8) The afforested area shall be maintained as forest cover through easements,
restrictive covenants or other protective instruments approved by the Town
Attorney.
c. Development on slopes greater than 15 percent, as measured before development, shall
be prohibited unless the project is the only effective way to maintain or improve the
stability of the slope and is consistent with the policies in Section 122.
4 Except as otherwise provided in this sub-section, for storm water runoff, man-caused impervious
areas shall be limited to 15 percent of the site.
a. If a parcel or lot of one-half acre or less in size existed on or before December 1, 1985,
then man-made impervious surfaces are limited to twenty-five (25%) of the parcel or lot.
b. If a parcel or lot greater than one-half acre and less than one acre in size existed on or
before December 1, 1985, then man-made impervious surfaces are limited to fifteen
percent (15%) of the parcel or lot.
c. If an individual lot one acre or less in size is part of a subdivision approved after
December 1, 1985, then man-made impervious surfaces of the lot may not exceed
twenty-five percent (25%) of the lot, and the total impervious surfaces of the entire
subdivision may not exceed fifteen percent (15%).
d. This section does not apply to mobile home parks that were in residential use on or before
December 1, 1985.
e. Impervious surface limits provided in sub-sections a through c above may be exceeded,
upon findings by the Zoning Administrator or his designee that the following conditions
exist:
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 128
(1) New impervious surfaces on the property have been minimized;
(2) For a lot or parcel one-half acre or less in size, total impervious surface area does
not exceed impervious surface limits in Section 4 above by more than twentyfive
percent (25%) or five hundred square feet (500 square feet), whichever is
greater;
3. For a lot or parcel greater than one-half acre and less than one acre in
size, total impervious surface area does not exceed impervious surface
limits in paragraph b above or 5,445 square feet, whichever is greater;
4. Water quality impacts associated with runoff from new impervious
surfaces can be and have been minimized through site design
considerations or the use of best management practices to improve water
quality; and
5. The property owner performs on-site mitigation to offset potential
adverse water quality impacts from the new impervious surfaces, or the
property owner pays a fee to the Town in lieu of performing the on-site
mitigation. The amount of the fee shall be $11.00 per square foot of new
impervious surface area on the property. The Town shall use all fees
collected under this provision to fund projects that improve water quality
within the Critical Area, consistent with the Town’s Critical Area
Regulations.
f. The Town may allow for modifications in road standards on a case-by-case basis to
reduce potential impacts to the site and Critical Area resources, where the reduced
standards do not significantly affect safety.
g. To reduce the extent of impervious areas and maximize areas of natural vegetation,
cluster development shall be considered when planning for future development.
h. Development may be allowed on soils having development constraints if the
development includes mitigation measures that adequately address the identified
constraints and that will not have significant adverse impacts on water quality or plant,
fish or wildlife habitat.
5. Complementary State laws and regulations. In applying this Critical Area Program, the Town
refers to all of the following complementary existing State laws and regulations:
a. For soil erosion and sediment control (COMAR 26.17.01)
(1) In order to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation, a Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Plan shall be required whenever a development within the
Critical Area will involve any clearing, grading, transporting, or other form of
disturbance to land by the movement of earth. This plan shall be consistent with
the requirements of Natural Resources Article §§8-1101 - 8-1108 and
Environment Article §§4-103 - 4-108 and 4-116, Annotated Code of Maryland
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 129
and local Chapters. Sediment control practices shall be appropriately designed to
reduce adverse water quality impacts.
(2) The Town requires erosion control as the basis of sediment control plans within
the Critical Area.
b. For storm water runoff (COMAR 26.17.02)
(1) Limitation on Storm water Runoff - Development may not cause downstream
property, watercourses, channels or conduits to receive storm water runoff at a
higher volume or rate than would have resulted from a 10-year storm where the
land is in its pre-development state.
(2) Storage Capacity - All storm water storage facilities shall be designed with
sufficient capacity to achieve water quality goals of this Section and to eliminate
all runoff caused by the development in excess of that which would have come
from the site if it were in its pre-development state.
(3) Storm water management measures shall be consistent with the requirements of
Environment Article 4-201 et. seq., Annotated Code of Maryland.
Section 123. Resource Conservation Areas
1. Description. Areas characterized by nature-dominated environments (that is wetlands, forests,
abandoned fields) and resource-utilization activities (that is agriculture, forestry, fisheries
activities or aquaculture). At the time of the initial mapping, these areas had at least one of the
following features:
a. Existing density was less than one dwelling unit per five acres; or
b. Dominant land use was in agriculture, wetland, forest, barren land, surface water or open
space.
2. General Policies. The Town’s Critical Area Program hereby incorporates the following policies
for Resource Conservation Areas. New or expanded development or redevelopment in these
areas shall take place in such a way as to:
a. Conserve, protect and enhance the overall ecological values of the Critical Area, its
biological productivity and its diversity;
b. Provide adequate breeding, feeding and wintering habitats for those wildlife populations
that require the Chesapeake Bay, its tributaries or coastal habitats in order to sustain
populations of those species.
c. Conserve the land and water resource base that is necessary to maintain and support land
uses such as agriculture, forestry, fisheries activities and aquaculture.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 130
d. Conserve the existing developed woodlands and forests for the water quality benefits that
they provide.
3. Development standards. The following development standards shall apply in Resource
Conservation Areas:
a. Land use management practices shall be consistent with the policies and criteria for the
Habitat Protection Area Sections, the Agriculture Section, and the Forest and Woodlands
Protection Section of this Chapter.
b. Agricultural and conservation easements shall be promoted in Resource Conservation
Areas.
c. Land within the Resource Conservation Area may be developed for residential uses at a
density not to exceed one dwelling unit per 20 acres. Within this limit of overall density,
minimum lot sizes may be determined by the Town. Such mechanisms as cluster
development, maximum lot size provisions and/or additional means to maintain the land
area necessary to support the protective uses will be encouraged by the Town and
implemented as necessary.
d. Existing industrial and commercial facilities, including those that directly support
agriculture, forestry, aquaculture or residential development not exceeding the density
specified in Section c above, shall be allowed in Resource Conservation Areas.
Additional land may not be zoned, used or developed for industrial, commercial, or
institutional development, except as provided by the Town’s Growth Allocation
provisions.
e. The Town shall ensure that the overall acreage of forest and woodland within the RCA
does not decrease.
f. Development activity within the Resource Conservation Areas shall be consistent with
the requirements for Limited Development Areas in this Chapter as specified in Section
122.
g. Nothing in this section shall limit the ability of a participant in the Agricultural Easement
Program to convey real property impressed with such an easement to family members
provided that no such conveyance will result in a density greater than one dwelling unit
per 20 acres.
h. In calculating the 1-in-20 acre density of development that is permitted on a parcel
located within the Resource Conservation Area, the Town may permit the area of any
private wetlands located on the property to be included under the following conditions:
(1) The density of development on the upland portion of the parcel may not exceed
one dwelling unit per eight acres; and
(2) The area of private wetlands shall be estimated on the basis of vegetative
information as designated on the State wetlands maps or by private survey
approved by the Town and the Department of the Environment.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 131
4. Land use in the RCA. In addition to the uses specified above, certain nonresidential uses may be
permitted in Resource Conservation Areas if it is determined by the Zoning Administrator that the
proposed use is one of the following:
a. A home occupation as an accessory use on a residential property and as provided for in
this Chapter;
b. A golf course, excluding any buildings and/or structures such as the clubhouse, pro-shop,
parking lot, etc.;
c. A cemetery that is an accessory use to an existing church, provided impervious surfaces
are limited to 15 percent of the site or 20,000 square feet, whichever is less;
d. A bed and breakfast facility located in an existing residential structure and where meals
are prepared only for guests staying at the facility;
e. A gun club or skeet shooting range or similar use, excluding main buildings and/or
structures, such as a clubhouse, snack bar, etc.;
f. A day care facility in a dwelling where the operators live on the premises and there are no
more than eight children;
g. A group home or assisted living facility with no more than eight residents;
h. Other uses determined by the Town and the Critical Area Commission to be similar to
those listed above.
Section 124. Growth Allocation
1. Definition. Growth allocation means the number of acres of land in the Chesapeake Bay Critical
Area that a local jurisdiction may use to create new Intensely Developed and new Limited
Development Areas. The growth allocation shall be calculated based on five percent of the total
Resource Conservation Area in the local jurisdiction at the time of the original approval of the
local jurisdiction’s program by the Commission, not including tidal wetlands or land owned by
the federal government.
2. Description. The upland area of the Town within the Critical Area comprises about 532.7 acres.
At the time of Critical Area Program adoption there were 102.4 acres classified IDA, 391.4 acres
classified LDA and 38.9 acres RCA. In March 2000, 40 acres of growth allocation was award to
the Firestone site to change its designation from LDA to IDA. In December 2003, 2.7 acres were
awarded to the Richmond Hills and in January 2004, 15.96 awarded to Frenchtown Crossing to
change their designations from LDA to IDA. Presently the Town has 161.06 acres IDA, 332.74
LDA and 38.9 RCA.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 132
3. Guidelines. The area of expansion of Intensely Developed or Limited Development Areas, or
both, shall be coordinated with the County. When locating new Intensely Developed or Limited
Development Areas the Town shall use these guidelines:
a. New Intensely Developed Areas should be located in Limited Development Areas or
adjacent to existing Intensely Developed Areas;
b. New Limited Development Areas should be located adjacent to existing Limited
Development Areas or Intensely Developed Areas;
c. New Intensely Developed Area (IDA) shall be at least 20 acres in size unless:
(1) They are contiguous to an existing IDA or LDA; or
(2) They are a grandfathered commercial or industrial uses which existed as of the
date of approval of the Perryville Critical Area Program. The amount of growth
allocation deducted shall be the equivalent to the area of the entire parcel or
parcels subject to the growth allocation request.
d. New Intensely Developed Areas and Limited Development Areas should be located in
order to minimize impacts to Habitat Protection Areas as specified in this Chapter and in
an area and in a manner that optimizes benefits to water quality;
e. New Intensely Developed Areas should be located where they minimize their impacts to
the defined land uses of the Resource Conservation Area;
f. New Intensely Developed Areas and Limited Development Areas in the Resource
Conservation Area should be located at least 300 feet beyond the landward edge of tidal
wetlands or tidal waters;
g. New Intensely Developed or Limited Development Areas to be located in Resource
Conservation Areas shall conform to all criteria of the Town for such areas, shall be so
designated on the Town Zoning Map and shall constitute an amendment to this program
subject to review and approval by the Town Planning Commission, the Town
Commissioners and the Critical Area Commission.
4. Process. Applications for growth allocation shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator
accompanied by appropriate plans and environmental reports in accordance with the following
process:
a. Request shall be accompanied by a concept plan and appropriate environmental reports
and/or studies so as to provide sufficient information to permit the Planning Commission
to review the application for consistency with the Town’s Critical Area regulations.
b. The subdivision history of parcels designated as RCA must be provided as part of the
growth allocation application. The date of December 1, 1985, is the date used for the
original Critical Area mapping and shall be used as a beginning point of analysis.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 133
c. All applications for growth allocation shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission
with review comments from the Critical Area Circuit Rider and all appropriate
environmental reports. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the
growth allocation request prior to making a recommendation on the proposal to the Town
Commissioners.
d. The applicant shall address the Planning Commissioner’s comments and
recommendations and may revise the concept plan accordingly. The growth allocation
request shall then be forwarded to the Town Commissioner’s with a recommendation for
approval or denial from the Planning Commission.
e. The Town Commissioners shall hold a public hearing consistent with the provisions of
Article XVII as it relates to changes within the Critical Area Overlay District due to use
of growth allocation.
f. The Town Commissioners may establish conditions of approval that are consistent with
the intent of the Town’s Critical Area Program.
g. Upon approval of the growth allocation request by the Town Commissioners, the Town
shall send a request to the Cecil County Commissioners to award a portion of their
growth allocation to the applicant. Upon receipt of all local approvals, the Town shall
send a letter of request to Critical Area Commission to award a portion of growth
allocation to the applicant. The request shall be accompanied by all local approval letters
pertinent plans, environmental reports and/or studies. Upon receipt of the request from
the Town, the Critical Area Commission shall notify the Town regarding the processing
of the request as an amendment or refinement to the Town’s Critical Area Program.
Refinements shall be acted on within 30 days of the Commission’s notification to the
Town of a completed submission. Amendments shall be acted on within 90 days of the
Commission’s notification to the Town of a complete submission.
h. Following approval of the growth allocation request by the Critical Area Commission,
the Town Commissioners may implement the change, and the applicant may proceed
with the preparation of the final site plan or subdivision plat for recordation. The Town
shall also notify the County in writing.
i. Prior to approving the final site plan or subdivision plat, the Planning Commission or
their designee shall ensure that all conditions of approval are incorporated into the final
plan, public works agreement, deed restrictions, etc.
j. Final subdivision plats and site plans shall be processed in accordance with the
requirements of this Chapter and/or the Town’s Subdivision Regulations.
k. The Town’s official Critical Area map shall be amended to reflect the new land
classification, and a copy of the new map shall be provided to the Critical Area
Commission.
l. A condition of approval shall be that Growth Allocation shall be awarded to a specific
project and the projects approved for Growth Allocation be substantially completed
within three (3) years of the date of approval. Substantially completed shall be
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 134
determined by the Town Commission and is defined as projects in which all public
improvements such as roads, sewer and/or water facilities have been built as required by
the Town or State.
5. Deduction methodology. The following standards shall be used to determine the area of growth
allocation to be deducted when the designation of a parcel or a portion of a parcel is changed
through the growth allocation process.
a. Subdivision of any parcel of land that was recorded as of December 1, 1985, as classified
as RCA where all or part of the parcel is identified by the Town as a Growth Allocation
area, shall result in the acreage of the entire parcel not in tidal wetlands counting against
the Growth Allocation, unless the development concept outlined in item b below is used.
b. In order to allow some flexibility in the use of growth allocation when development is
only proposed on a portion of the property, the following methodology may be used. On
a parcel proposed for the use of growth allocation, a single development envelope may be
specified, and the acreage of the development envelope rather than the acreage of the
entire parcel shall be deducted from the Town’s growth allocation if the development
envelope meets the following criteria:
(1) The development envelope shall include individually owned lots, required
buffers, impervious surfaces, roads, utilities, storm water management measures,
on-site sewage disposal measures, any acres subject to human use such as active
recreation acres, and any additional acreage needed to meet the development
requirements of the criteria. The required buffers refer to the minimum 100-foot
Buffer and the 25 foot non-tidal wetlands buffer.
(2) Only one development envelope shall be established per parcel of land.
(3) If a development envelope is proposed in the RCA, a minimum of 20 acres must
remain outside of the development envelope or the acreage of the entire parcel
must be deducted. If the original parcel in the RCA is less than 20 acres, then the
acreage of the entire parcel must be deducted. If there is a permanently protected
Resource Conservation Area (an area protected by easement) adjacent and
contiguous to a residue that is less than 20 acres, that will result in a minimum
20-acre residue, then the entire parcel does not have to be deducted.
(4) The minimum 20-acre residue outside of the development envelope may be
developed at an RCA density unless some type of permanent protection exists
that restricts development.
c. For Growth Allocation areas proposed in the RCA, a 300-foot naturally vegetated Buffer
is strongly encouraged and where is provided it shall not be deducted even if the Buffer
does not meet the 20-acre minimum requirement.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 135
Section 125. Grandfathering
1. Continuation of existing uses. The Town shall permit the continuation, but not necessarily the
intensification or expansion, of any use in existence on the date of Program approval, unless the
use has been abandoned for more than one year or is otherwise restricted by the provisions of
Article VIII of this Chapter. If any existing use does not conform with the provisions of the
Program, its intensification or expansion may be permitted only in accordance with the Variance
Procedures outlined in Section 127 of this Chapter.
2. Residential density. Except as otherwise provided, the Town shall permit the types of land
described in the following subsections to be developed in accordance with density requirements
in effect prior to the adoption of the Critical Area Program notwithstanding the density provisions
of the Program. The Town shall permit a single-lot or parcel of land that was legally of record on
the date of Program approval to be developed with a single-family dwelling if a dwelling is not
already placed there (not withstanding that such development may be inconsistent with the
density provisions of this Chapter) provided that:
a. It is on land where development activity has progressed to the point of the pouring of
foundation footings or the installation of structural members.
b. It is a legal parcel of land, not being part of a recorded or approved subdivision, that was
recorded as of December 1, 1985 and land that was subdivided into recorded, legally
buildable lots, where the subdivision received the Town’s final approval prior to June 1,
1984 if at the time of development, the land is brought into conformance with the Critical
Area Program insofar as possible, including the consolidation or re-configuration of lots
not individually owned.
c. It is on land that was subdivided into recorded, legally buildable lots, where the
subdivision received the town’s final approval between June 1, 1984 and December 1,
1985; and
d. It is on land that was subdivided into recorded, legally buildable lots, where the
subdivision received the final approval after December 1, 1985 and provided that either
development of any such land conforms to the IDA, LDA or RCA requirements in this
Chapter or the area of the land is counted against the Growth Allocation permitted under
this Chapter, or was approved by the Critical Area Commission at the time of local
Program approval.
3. Consistency. Nothing in this section may be interpreted as altering any requirements for
development activities set out in the Water-Dependent Facilities Section or the Habitat Protection
Section of this Chapter.
Section 126. Intrafamily Transfers
1. Definitions. In this section the following words have the meanings indicated:
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 136
a. "Bona Fide Intra-family Transfer" means a transfer to a member of the owner's
immediate family of a portion of the owner's property for the purpose of establishing a
residence for that family member.
b. "Immediate Family" means a father, mother, son, daughter, grandfather, grandmother,
grandson or granddaughter.
2. Applicability. The Town shall permit bona fide intra-family transfers to be made only from
parcels of land that:
a. Were of Record on March 1, 1986; and
b. Are 7 acres or more and less than 60 acres in size.
3. Required subdivision. A bona fide intra-family transfer from a parcel of land shall be a
subdivision of the parcel of land that is subject to approval under the Subdivision Regulations of
the Town.
4. Approval of subdivision of parcels. The Town may approve the subdivision of a parcel of land
into the number of lots indicated in this subsection by means of a bona fide intra-family transfer
and may not approve any greater subdivision of the parcel of land or any portion of it as follows:
a. A parcel that is seven acres or more and less than 12 acres in size may be subdivided into
two lots.
b. A parcel that is 12 acres or more and less than 60 acres in size may be subdivided into
three lots. The lots may be created at different times.
5. Conditions of approval. As a condition of approval the Town shall require that:
a. Any deed for a lot that is created by a bona fide intra-family transfer shall contain a
covenant approved by the Town Attorney stating that the lot is created subject to the
provisions of Natural Resources Article Section 8-1808.2, Annotated Code of Maryland,
and
b. A lot created by a bona fide intra-family transfer may not be conveyed subsequently to
any person other than a member of the owner's immediate family, except under
provisions set forth in 6 of this section.
c. This subsection does not prevent the conveyance of the lot to a third party as security for
a mortgage or deed of trust.
6. Standards and procedures for subsequent conveyance of lots. The following standards and
procedures are established as part of this Program to permit the subsequent conveyance of lots to
persons other than immediate family members under certain circumstances. The applicant shall
demonstrate to the Planning Commission that:
a. The lot was created as part of a bona fide intra-family transfer and not with the intent of
subdividing the original parcel of land for purposes of ultimate commercial sale; and
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 137
b. A change in circumstances has occurred since the original transfer was made that is not
inconsistent with this subtitle and that warrants an exception; or there are other
circumstances that are consistent with this Program to maintain land areas necessary to
support the protective uses of agriculture, forestry, open space and natural habitats in
Resource Conservation Areas and thus warrant an exception.
Section 127. Variances
1. Applicability. The Town has established provisions where, owing to special features of a site or
other circumstances, implementation of this program or a literal enforcement of provisions within
the program would result in unwarranted hardship to the applicant, a Critical Area variance may
be requested. In considering an application for a variance, the Town shall presume that the
specific development activity in the Critical Area, that is subject to the application and for which
a variance is required, does not conform with the general purpose and intent of Natural Resources
Article, Title 8 Subtitle 18, COMAR Title 27, and the requirements of the Town’s Critical Area
Program. The applicant has the burden of proof and the burden of persuasion to overcome the
presumption of nonconformance established above.
2. Standards: The provisions for granting such a variance shall include evidence submitted by the
applicant that the following standards are met
a. Special conditions or circumstances exist that are peculiar to the land or structure
involved and that a literal enforcement of provisions and requirements of the Town’s
Critical Area Program would result in unwarranted hardship. Unwarranted hardship
means that, without a variance, an applicant would not be denied reasonable and
significant use of the entire parcel or lot for which the variance is requested.
b. A literal interpretation of the provisions of the Critical Area Program and related
Chapters will deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by the other properties in
similar areas within the Critical Area.
c. The granting of a variance will not confer upon an applicant any special privilege that
would be denied by the Town Critical Area Program to other lands or structures within
the Critical Area.
d. The variance request is not based upon conditions or circumstances which are the result
of actions by the applicant, including the commencement of development activity before
an application for a variance has been filed, nor does the request arise from any condition
relating to land or building use, either permitted or non-conforming on any neighboring
property.
e. The granting of a variance shall not adversely affect water quality or adversely impact
fish, wildlife or plant habitat within the Critical Area and the granting of the variance will
be in harmony with the general spirit and intent of the Critical Area Act and the Town
Critical Area Program.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 138
f. Applications for a variance will be made in writing to the Town Board of Appeals with a
copy provided to the Critical Area Commission.
2. Process. After hearing an application for a Critical Area Program variance, the Board of Appeals
shall make written findings reflecting analysis of each standard. The Town shall notify the
Critical Area Commission of its findings and decision to grant or deny the variance request.
3. Appeals. Appeals of decisions concerning the granting or denial of a variance under these
regulations shall be taken in accordance with all applicable laws and procedures of the Town for
variances. Variance decisions by the Board of Appeals may be appealed to the Circuit Court in
accordance with the Maryland Rules of Procedure. Appeals may be taken by any person, firm,
corporation or governmental agency aggrieved or adversely affected by any decision made under
this section.
4. Conditions and Mitigation. The Board of Appeals may impose conditions on the use or
development of a property which is granted a variance as it may find reasonable to ensure that the
spirit and intent of the Critical Area Program is maintained including, but not limited to the
following:
a. Impacts resulting from the granting of the variance shall be mitigated by planting on the
site an area equal to three times the area of the variance granted or as recommended by
the Town staff.
b. New or expanded structures or impervious surfaces shall be located the greatest possible
distance from mean high water, the landward edge of tidal wetlands, tributary streams,
nontidal wetlands, or steep slopes.
Section 128. Critical Area Program Amendments
1. Program Amendments. The Town Commissioners may from time to time amend the Town
Critical Area Program. All such amendments shall also be approved by the Critical Area
Commission as established in Section 8-1809 of the Critical Area Act. No such amendment shall
be implemented without approval of the Critical Area Commission. Standards and procedures for
Critical Area Commission approval of proposed amendments are as set forth in the Critical Area
Act Section 8-1809(i) and Section 8-1809(d), respectively. In addition, the Planning Commission
and Town Commissioners shall review the entire program and propose any necessary
amendments as required at least every six (6) years.
2. Process. When an amendment is requested, the applicant shall submit the amendment to the
Planning Commission for review. Upon completing Findings of Fact, these documents shall be
forwarded to the Town Commissioners. The Town Commissioners shall hold a public hearing at
which parties of interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. At least fifteen (15)
days’ notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town. The Town Commissioners shall forward their decision and applicable
ordinances and resolutions along with the amendment request to the Critical Area Commission
for final approval.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 139
3. Zoning Map Amendments. Except for program amendments or program refinements developed
during a four-year comprehensive review, a zoning map amendment may only be granted by the
Town Commissioners upon proof of a mistake in the existing zoning. This requirement does not
apply to proposed changes to a zoning map that meet the following criteria:
a. Are wholly consistent with the land classifications in the adopted Program; or
b. Propose the use of growth allocation in accordance with Section 124 of this Chapter.
Section 129. Water Dependent Facilities
1. Definition. "Water-dependent facilities" means those structures or works associated with
industrial, maritime, recreational, educational or fisheries activities that require location at or near
the shoreline within the Buffer specified in Section 138 of this Chapter. An activity is waterdependent
if it cannot exist outside the Buffer and is dependent on the water by reason of the
intrinsic nature of its operation.
2. Identification. Water dependent facilities include, but are not limited to, ports, the intake and
outfall structures of power plants, water-use industries, marinas and other boat docking structures,
public beaches and other public water-oriented recreation areas, and fisheries activities. Excluded
from this regulation are individual private piers installed or maintained by riparian landowners,
and which are not part of a subdivision which provides community piers.
3. Policies. The policies of the Town with regard to water-dependent facilities shall be to limit
development activities in the Buffer to those that are water-dependent and to provide by design
and location criteria that these activities or facilities will have minimal individual and cumulative
impacts on water quality and fish, wildlife, and plant habitat in the Critical Area.
4. Criteria. The following criteria shall apply to new or expanded development activities associated
with water -dependent facilities:
a. New or expanded development activities may be permitted in the Buffer in the Intensely
Developed Areas and Limited Development Areas provided that it can be shown:
(1) That they are water-dependent;
(2) That the project meets a recognized private right or public need;
(3) That adverse effects on water quality, fish, plant and wildlife habitat are
minimized;
(4) That, insofar as possible, non-water-dependent structures or operations associated
with water-dependent projects or activities are located outside the Buffer; and
(5) That the facilities are consistent with an approved local plan as set forth below.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 140
b. Except as otherwise provided in this program, new or expanded development activities
may not be permitted in those portions of the Buffer which occur in Resource
Conservation Areas.
5. Implementation. Applicants for new or expanded water-dependent facilities in Intensely
Developed Areas or Limited Development Areas shall set out in the application how the above
requirements are met.
6. Evaluating new and expanded water-dependent facilities. The Town shall evaluate on a case-bycase
basis all proposals for expansion of existing or new water-dependent facilities. The Town
shall work with appropriate State and federal agencies to ensure compliance with applicable
regulations. The following factors shall be considered when evaluating proposals for new or
expanded water dependent facilities:
a. That the activities will not significantly alter existing water circulation patterns or salinity
regimes;
b. That the water body upon which these activities are proposed has adequate flushing
characteristics in the area;
c. That disturbance to wetlands, submerged aquatic plant beds, or other areas of important
aquatic habitats will be minimized;
d. That adverse impacts to water quality that may occur as a result of these activities, such
as non-point source run-off, sewage discharge from land activities or vessels, or from
boat cleaning and maintenance operations, is minimized;
e. That shellfish beds will not be disturbed or be made subject to discharge that will render
them unsuitable for harvesting;
f. That dredging shall be conducted in a manner, and using a method which causes the least
disturbance to water quality and aquatic and terrestrial habitats in the area immediately
surrounding the dredging operation or within the critical area, generally;
g. That dredged spoil will not be placed within the Buffer or elsewhere in that portion of the
Critical Area which has been designated as a Habitat Protection Area except as necessary
for:
(1) Backfill for permitted shore erosion protection measures;
(2) Use in approved vegetated shore erosion projects;
(3) Placement on previously approved channel maintenance spoil disposal areas; and
(4) Beach nourishment.
h. That interference with the natural transport of sand will be minimized; and
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 141
i. That disturbance will be avoided to historic areas of waterfowl staging and concentration
or other Habitat Protection Area identified in the Habitat Protection Area Sections of this
chapter.
7. Availability of information. The information necessary for evaluating the above factors, if not
available locally, shall be obtained from appropriate State and Federal agencies.
8. Industrial and port-related facilities. New, expanded or redeveloped industrial or port-related
facilities and the replacement of these facilities may be permitted only in those portions of
Intensely Developed Areas designated as Special Buffer Areas in accordance with Section 138 of
this Chapter and are subject to the factors set forth in this section.
9. Marinas and other commercial maritime facilities. New, expanded or redeveloped marinas may
be permitted in the Buffer within Intensely Developed Areas and Limited Development Areas
subject to the requirements set forth in this section. New marinas or related maritime facilities
may not be permitted in the Buffer within Resource Conservation Areas except as provided in
this section. Expansion of existing marinas may be permitted by the Town within Resource
Conservation Areas provided that it is sufficiently demonstrated that the expansion will not
adversely affect water quality, and that it will result in an overall net improvement in water
quality at or leaving the site of the marina. New and existing marinas shall meet the sanitary
requirements of the State Department of the Environment as required in COMAR 26.04.02. New
marinas shall establish a means of minimizing the discharge of bottom wash waters into tidal
waters.
10. Community piers. New or expanded community marinas and other non-commercial boatdocking
and storage facilities may be permitted in the Buffer subject to the requirements in this
section of the zoning Chapter provided that:
a. These facilities may not offer food, fuel, or other goods and services for sale and shall
provide adequate and clean sanitary facilities;
b. The facilities are community-owned and established and operated for the benefit of the
residents of a platted and recorded riparian subdivision;
c. The facilities are associated with a residential development approved by the Town for the
Critical Area and consistent with all State requirements and program requirements for the
Critical Area;
d. Disturbance to the Buffer is the minimum necessary to provide a single point of access to
the facilities; and
e. If community piers, slips, or moorings are provided as part of the new development,
private piers in the development are not allowed.
11. Number of slips or piers permitted. The number of slips, or piers permitted at the facility shall be
the lesser of a. or b. below:
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 142
a. One slip for each 50 feet of shoreline in the subdivision in the Intensely Developed and
Limited Development Areas and one slip for each 300 feet of shoreline in the subdivision
in the Resource Conservation Area; or
b. A density of slips, or piers to platted lots or dwellings within the subdivision in the
Critical Area according to the following schedule:
Platted Lots or Dwellings in the
Critical Area
Slips
up to 15 1 for each lot
16 - 40 15 or 75% whichever is greater
41 - 100 30 or 50% whichever is greater
101 - 300 50 or 25% whichever is greater
over 300 75 or 15% whichever is greater
11. Public beaches, recreation or education areas. Public beaches or other public water-oriented
recreation or education areas including, but not limited to, publicly owned boat launching and
docking facilities and fishing piers may be permitted in the Buffer in Intensely Developed Areas.
These facilities may be permitted within the Buffer in Limited Development Areas and Resource
Conservation Areas provided that:
a. Adequate sanitary facilities exist;
b. Service facilities are, to the extent possible, located outside the Buffer;
c. Permeable surfaces are used to the extent practicable, if no degradation of groundwater
would result;
d. Disturbance to natural vegetation is minimized; and
e. Areas for passive recreation, such as nature study, and hunting and trapping, and for
education, may be permitted in the Buffer within Resource Conservation Areas if service
facilities for these uses are located outside of the Buffer.
12. Research areas. Water-dependent research facilities or activities operated by State, Federal, or
local agencies or educational institutions may be permitted in the Buffer, if non-water-dependent
structures or facilities associated with these project are, to the extent possible, located outside of
the Buffer.
13. Fisheries activities. Lands and water areas with high aquacultural potential will be identified by
the Town in cooperation with the State when applications for new or expanded fisheries or
aquaculture facilities in these areas are submitted to the Town. These areas are encouraged for
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 143
that use and if so used, should be protected from degradation by other types of land and water use
or by adjacent land and water uses. Commercial water-dependent fisheries including, but not
limited to structures for crab shedding, fish off-loading docks, shellfish culture operations and
shore-based facilities necessary for aquaculture operations and fisheries activities may be
permitted in the Buffer in Intensely Developed Areas Limited Development Areas and Resource
Conservation Areas.
Section 130. Structures on Piers
1. Definition. “Pier” means any pier, wharf, dock, walkway, bulkhead, breakwater, piles or other
similar structure. “Pier” does not include any structure on pilings or stilts that was originally
constructed beyond the landward boundaries of State or private wetlands.
2. Standards. Except as provided in paragraphs a, b, and c below, the Town may not issue a
building permit for any project involving the construction of a dwelling unit or other non-waterdependent
structure on a pier located on State or private tidal wetlands within the Critical Area.
a. The Town may issue a building permit for a project involving the construction of a
dwelling unit or other non-water-dependent- structure on a pier located on State or
private wetlands within the Critical Area that was issued a permit by the Department of
Natural Resources on or before January 1, 1989.
b. The Town may issue a building permit for a project involving the construction of a
dwelling unit or other non-water-dependent-structure on a pier located on State or private
wetlands within the Critical Area if the following conditions exist:
(1) The project is constructed on a pier that existed as of December 1, 1985 that can
be verified by a Department of Natural Resources aerial photograph dated 1985,
accompanied by a map of the area;
(2) The project does not require an expansion of the pier greater than 25% of the area
of piers or dry docks removed on the same property; however, additional
expansion may be allowed in the amount of 10% of the water coverage
eliminated by removing complete piers from the same or other properties. If the
horizontal surface of a pier to be removed is not intact, but pilings identify its
previous size, then that area may be used in determining the additional expansion
permitted. The project expansion based on water coverage eliminated can be
considered only if all nonfunctional piers on the property are removed except for
the project pier. The total expansion may not exceed 35% of the original size of
the piers and dry docks removed;
(3) The project is approved by the Zoning Administrator;
(4) The project is located in an Intensely Developed Area (IDA) as designated in
programs approved by the Critical Area Commission.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 144
c. The Town may issue a building permit for the repair of an existing dwelling unit or other
non-water-dependent- structure on a pier located on State or private wetlands within the
Critical Area.
d. If a structure that is not water-dependent is to be permitted by the Town under the
exceptions included in this Section, an applicant is required to demonstrate that the
project will meet the following environmental objectives using the standards established
under the Town’s Critical Area Program:
(1) The construction and operation of the project will not have a long term adverse
effect on the water quality of the adjacent body of water;
(2) The quality of storm water runoff from the project will be improved; and
(3) Sewer lines or other utility lines extended for the pier will not affect the water
quality of adjoining waters.
Section 131. Shore Erosion Protection Works
1. Definition. “Shore erosion protection works” means those structures or measures constructed or
installed to prevent or minimize erosion of the shoreline in the Critical Area. The use of
structural devices to protect the shoreline from erosion can result in a significant disturbance to
the aquatic environment and increase erosion downstream. This section sets forth a plan for
limiting the use of structural erosion control devices to only those areas where major erosion
problems exist. As an alternative to structural erosion controls, the Town encourages the use of
non-structural controls such as marsh creation, maintenance of buffer zones, and the
establishment of natural barriers to prevent destruction of fragile vegetative shoreline. The
criteria set forth in this Chapter are not intended to apply to those structures necessarily
associated with water-dependent facilities as discussed in Section 129 of this Chapter.
2. General policies. In protecting shore areas from erosion the Town shall follow these policies:
a. Encourage the protection of rapidly eroding portions of the shoreline in the Critical Area
by public and private landowners;
b. Where such measures can effectively and practically reduce or prevent shore erosion,
encourage the use of non-structural shore protection measures in order to conserve and
protect plant, fish and wildlife habitat.
3. Standards for erosion protection. The Town shall consider the following standards when
evaluating shore erosion control projects:
(1) Structural control measures shall only be used in areas where appreciable erosion
occurs and where non-structural measures would not be practical or effective in
controlling erosion.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 145
(2) Where structural erosion control is required, the measure that best provides for
conservation of fish and plant habitat, and which is practical and effective shall
be used;
(3) Non-structural measures shall be utilized in areas of erosion where they would be
a practical and effective method of erosion control;
(4) Structural erosion measures shall not be encouraged in areas where no significant
erosion occurs;
(5) If significant alterations in the characteristics of a shoreline occur, the measure
that best fits the change may be used for sites in that area.
e. Implementation. The Town shall require that each application for shore erosion
protection demonstrate how it complies with the preceding standards.
f. Shoreline changes. The Town recognizes that storms and other natural events may
change current shoreline erosion patterns. As such, an individual may request the use of
a structural erosion control device in an area currently designated for non-structural
controls. This request must be accompanied by documentation which identifies the
specific location of the site to be protected, and a description of the event or events which
led to the change in the erosion pattern.
g. Process. The Town, in reviewing any application for a permit for structural erosion
control devices, shall refer the application to the Maryland Department of the
Environment for field verification of the need for the structural erosion control as well as
for recommendations on proposed erosion control mechanisms.
(1) Any application made to the Town for the installation of an erosion control
device must, at a minimum, include the following information:
(a) Photograph of erosion problem;
(b) The specific location of the site on a USGS 7.5 topographic map;
(c) Soil type and erodibility; and
(d) Proposed and existing land use.
(2) Applications must include appropriate authorization from the Maryland
Department of the Environment and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
Section 132. Forest and Woodland Protection
1. General Policies. The following policies for forest and woodland protection recognize the value
of forested land for its water quality benefits and for habitat protection while accommodating the
utilization of forest resources:
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 146
a. Maintain and increase the forested vegetation in the Critical Area;
b. Conserve forests and developed woodlands and provide for expansion of forested areas;
c. Provide that the removal of trees associated with development activities shall be
minimized and, where appropriate, shall be mitigated; and
d. Recognize that forests are a protective land use and should be managed in such a manner
so that maximum values for wildlife, water quality, timber, recreation, and other
resources can be maintained, even when they are mutually exclusive.
2. Identification. The Town has identified and mapped forests and developed woodlands within the
Critical Area and has identified and mapped habitat protection areas. More detailed evaluation of
forest resources on specific sites shall be accomplished as part of the environmental analysis
required prior to site plan and subdivision approval.
3. Policies for the Protection of Riparian Forest Habitat. The protection of riparian habitat shall be
accomplished through the following policies:
a. Vegetation shall be maintained in its natural condition along all streams to provide
wildlife corridors.
b. A minimum 100-foot Buffer shall extend landward from the mean high water line of tidal
water, and the edge of tributary streams and tidal wetlands. This area is to be conserved
for wildlife protection.
c. Non-tidal wetland forests should be left in a natural state for wildlife and water quality
protection.
d. Forest areas utilized as breeding areas by forest interior dwelling birds and other wildlife
species (for example relatively mature forested areas within the Critical Area of 100 acres
or more, or forest connected with these areas) shall be conserved.
e. Existing riparian forests (for example, those relatively mature forest of at least 300 feet in
width) which occur adjacent to streams, wetlands, or the Bay shoreline and which are
documented breeding areas shall be conserved.
4. Process. If a forest is to be developed, a site-specific field investigation shall be conducted to
determine important sensitive species present and to make sure that appropriate protection
measures are incorporated into the development plan. The Department of Natural Resources will
make specific recommendations based on an evaluation of the site and the proposed development.
In general, the following measures are recommended:
a. Minimize forest and woodlands disturbance from May through August of each year;
b. Focus all development on the periphery of the forest or woodlands;
c. Retain the forest canopy as well as shrub understory;
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 147
d. Retain snag and mature seed trees as dens for woodpeckers and as nests for bald eagles;
e. Discourage the creation of small clearings and expansion of forest edge habitats; and
f. Encourage re-establishment of native forests and woodlands.
5. Policies for the establishment or replacement of forest. The following policies should be used for
afforestation and reforestation:
a. The replacement or establishment of forests or developed woodlands should ensure a
diversified plant community and should include canopy trees, understory trees, shrub
scrub and herbaceous plants; and
b. Native species should be used for all reforestation and afforestation.
6 Tree cutting in the Buffer. The Buffer shall be managed to achieve or enhance the policies stated
in this Section 132. Individual trees may be cut for personal provided the cutting does not impair
the water quality or existing habitat value or other functions of the Buffer set forth in Section 138.
Cutting or clearing of trees within the Buffer shall be prohibited except that:
a. Cutting of trees or removal of natural vegetation may be permitted where necessary to
provide access to private piers, or to install or construct a shore erosion protection device
or measure, or a water-dependent facility, provided the device, measure or facility has
received all necessary State and Federal permits and the trees are replaced on an equal
basis for each tree cut.
.
b. Individual trees may be cut for personal use providing that this cutting does not impair
the water quality or existing habitat value or other functions of the buffer as set forth in
the policies of this plan and provided that the trees are replaced on an equal basis for each
tree cut.
c. Individual trees may be removed which are in danger of falling and causing damage to
dwellings or other structures, or which are in danger of falling and therefore causing the
blockage of streams, or resulting in accelerated shore erosion.
d. Horticultural practices may be used to maintain the health of individual trees.
e. Other cutting techniques may be undertaken within the Buffer and under the advice and
guidance of the State Departments of Agriculture and Natural Resources, if necessary to
preserve the forest from extensive pest or disease infestation or threat from fire.
7. Enforcement. Unauthorized clearing, cutting, or removal of vegetation; unauthorized clearing,
cutting, or removal of vegetation in the Buffer; and clearing, cutting or removal of vegetation in
excess of the area permitted to be cleared by this Chapter is considered a civil violation of this
Chapter and shall result in fines and mandatory planting. The Zoning Administrator, or his
designee, shall have the authority to enforce these provisions as set forth in Article VII and
Section 119. In addition to any fines that may be levied, the following shall apply:
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 148
a. For unauthorized clearing, cutting, or removal of vegetation that does not exceed the area
that could be authorized in accordance with this Chapter, fines shall be assessed in the
amount of $100 for each occurrence and reforestation shall be required on an equal area
basis if less than 20 percent of the forest cover is removed. For clearing between 20
percent and 30 percent of the existing forest cover, reforestation shall be required at 1.5
times the total surface acreage of forest cleared.
b. For unauthorized clearing, cutting, or removal of vegetation that exceeds the area that
could be authorized in accordance with this Chapter, fines shall be assessed at $100 for
each occurrence and reforestation shall be required at 3 times the total surface acreage of
forest cleared.
c. For unauthorized clearing, cutting, or removal of vegetation in the Buffer or another
Habitat Protection Area, fines shall be assessed at $100 for each occurrence and
reforestation shall be required at 3 times the total surface acreage of forest cleared.
d. When trees or vegetative cover cannot be fully replaced on site as described above
because of existing vegetation, existing development, or the size of the parcel, then one
of the following shall occur:
(1) A fees-in-lieu of planting may be collected. Fees shall be assessed at $0.40 per
square foot of required mitigation or $120 per tree; or
(2) Planting shall take place on an off-site location approved by the Planning
Commission or their designee.
e. Fines collected from enforcement actions in the Critical Area shall be maintained in a
separate account to be used by the Town for reforestation or other habitat enhancing
efforts.
f. All violations resulting in planting on site or off site shall include a written Planting
Agreement signed by the land owner and the Planning Commission designee. Said
Planting Agreement shall include: size, species to be planted, planting time line,
survivability, bonding and other factors deemed to be relevant.
Section 133. Commercial Timber Harvesting
1. Policies. A goal of the Critical Area program is to maintain or increase the lands in forest cover,
because forests provide protection of the water quality and habitat values of the Chesapeake Bay
and its tributaries.
2. Procedures. Landowners proposing to harvest timber within any one year interval and affecting
one or more acres in the Critical Area shall submit a "Timber Harvest Plan”. This plan shall be
prepared by a registered professional forester. The Timber Harvest Plan shall be reviewed and
approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 149
3. Timber Harvest Plan contents. Plans shall include measures to protect surface and groundwater
quality and identify whether the activities will disturb or affect Habitat Protection Areas and shall
incorporate protection measures for these areas as specified in later sections of this Chapter. To
provide for the continuity of habitat, the plans shall address mitigation through forest
management techniques which shall include scheduling size, timing and intensity of harvest cuts,
afforestation and reforestation.
4. Sediment Control Plan. Any landowner who plans to harvest timber on an area which will
disturb 5,000 square feet or more within the Critical Area Overlay district, including harvesting
on agricultural lands, shall submit a Sediment Control Plan. This plan shall be developed
according to the State guidelines entitled: "Standard Erosion and Sediment Control Plan for
Harvest Operations". The operations shall be implemented in accordance with specifications set
out by the Department of Natural Resources and enforced by the Department of the Environment.
5. Buffer protection standards for timber harvests. The Buffer shall be managed to achieve the
water quality and habitat functions set forth in Section 138 of this Chapter. Cutting or clearing of
trees within the Buffer shall be prohibited except that:
a. Commercial harvesting of trees by selection or by the clear-cutting of loblolly pine and
tulip poplar may be permitted to within 50 feet of the landward edge of the mean high
water line of tidal waters and perennial tributary streams, or the edge of tidal wetlands,
provided that this cutting is conducted in conformity with this Section and in
conformance with a Buffer Management Plan prepared by a registered, professional
forester and approved by the Maryland Department of Natural Resources.
b. A Buffer Management Plan shall be required for all commercial harvests within the
Buffer, regardless of the size of the area to be cut, and shall comply with the following
minimum requirements:
(1) Disturbance to stream banks and shorelines shall be avoided;
(2) Areas disturbed or cut shall be replanted or allowed to regenerate in a manner
that assures the availability of cover and breeding sites for wildlife and reestablishes
the wildlife corridor function of the Buffer;
(3) The cutting may not involve the creation of logging roads and skid trails within
the Buffer; and
(4) Commercial harvesting practices shall be conducted to protect and conserve the
Habitat Protection Areas in accordance with Sections 137 through Section 141 of
this Chapter.
c. Commercial harvesting of trees, by any method, may be permitted to the edge of
intermittent streams provided that the cutting is conducted pursuant to the requirements
of paragraph 5 above.
6. Other requirements. Forest and timbering operations within the Critical Area shall conform to all
other requirements of this Chapter.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 150
Section 134. Agriculture
1. General policies. The Town shall follow all of the following policies with regard to agriculture in
the Critical Area:
a. Assure that agricultural lands are identified and that programs are established for the
Critical Area to maintain, where appropriate, agricultural lands in agricultural use, to the
greatest extent possible.
b. Recognize that agriculture is a protective land use that should be properly managed so
that it minimizes its contribution to pollutant loadings to the Bay and its tributaries.
c. Assure that the creation of new agricultural lands is not accomplished:
(1) By diking, draining or filling of any nontidal wetlands unless mitigation is
accomplished in accordance with all applicable State and County regulations;
(2) By clearing of forests or woodlands on soils with a slope greater than 15 percent;
or on soils with a "K" value greater than .35 and slope greater than 5 percent;
(3) If the clearing will adversely affect water quality or will destroy plant and
wildlife habitat as defined in this Chapter; or
(4) By the clearing of existing natural vegetation within the Buffer as defined in this
Chapter.
d. Assure that the drainage of non-tidal wetlands for the purpose of agriculture be done in
accordance with a Soil Conservation and Water Quality Plan, approved by the County
Soil Conservation District.
e. Assure that Best Management Practices for the control of nutrients, animal wastes,
pesticides and sediment runoff be used to protect the productivity of the land base and
enhance water quality. These practices shall minimize contamination of surface and
groundwater and further, shall minimize adverse effects on plants, fish and wildlife
resources.
f. Assure that animal feeding operations, including retention and storage ponds, feed lot
waste storage and manure storage minimize the contamination of water bodies.
g. Assure that agricultural activity permitted within the Critical Area use Best Management
Practices in accordance with a Soil Conservation and Water Quality Plan approved by the
County Soil Conservation District.
2. Identification. The Town’s intent is to maintain agriculture and forestry as viable and productive
land uses. The Town has not developed an Agricultural Protection Plan as part of the Critical
Area Program since no farmland presently exists within the Town. However, if such plans need to
be developed due to annexation of farmland in the future, such a protection plan will be
developed in cooperation with the Soil Conservation Districts, the County Agricultural Land
Preservation Advisory Boards and other appropriate agencies.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 151
3. Standards. The following performance standards shall be adopted for all land in agricultural use
or to be converted to agricultural use within the Critical Area:
a. The Town hereby incorporates the agricultural components of the Clean Water Act and
other State and local water quality programs into this Chapter. These components shall
be applicable to any future agricultural activities in the Critical Area.
b. Soil Conservation and Water Quality Plans and Best Management Practices shall be
developed and implemented for those portions of farms which lie within the Critical
Area. Local farmers shall cooperate with the Cecil County Soil Conservation District for
approval of their proposed plans. Landowners who have signed up as Conservation
District operators but who do not have a Conservation Plan prepared for them by the
local Conservation District shall be allowed to continue to farm until a Conservation Plan
is developed provided that the goals of this program are being met.
c. A landowner shall select and implement, with the assistance of a technically trained soil
conservation planner or technician, from among the several best management practices
that minimize impacts to water quality, conserve fish, wildlife, and plant habitat, and
integrate best with the farming operation.
d. Until such time as the farm plans are developed and implemented, farmers shall as a part
of the program be encouraged to use the following practices:
(1) Cover crops shall be planted to reduce erosion.
(2) Nutrients shall be applied at the appropriate time and appropriate methods shall
be used.
(3) Reduced tillage (e.g. “no-till”) practices shall be utilized where practical.
(4) Crop rotations shall be implemented.
4. Agriculture in the Buffer. Agricultural activities are permitted in the Buffer, if, as a minimum
best management practice, a 25-foot vegetated filter strip measured landward from the mean high
water line of tidal waters or tributary streams (excluding drainage ditches), or from the edge of
tidal wetlands, whichever is further inland, is established and further provided that:
a. The filter strip shall be composed of either trees with a dense ground cover or a thick sod
of grass and shall be so managed as to provide water quality benefits and habitat
protection consistent with the policies stated above. Noxious weeds, including Johnson
grass, Canada thistle, and multiflora rose, which occur in the filter strip, may be
controlled by authorized means;
b. The filter strip shall be expanded by a distance of 4 feet for every 1 percent of slope, for
slopes greater than 6 percent;
c. The 25-foot vegetated filter strip shall be maintained until such time as the landowner is
implementing, under an approved Soil Conservation and Water Quality Plan, a program
of best management practices for the specific purposes of improving water quality and
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 152
protecting plant and wildlife habitat; and provided that the portion of the Soil
Conservation and Water Quality Plan being implemented achieves the water quality and
habitat protection objectives of the 25-foot vegetated filter strip;
d. The best management practices shall include a requirement for the implementation of a
grassland and manure management program where appropriate and that the feeding or
watering of livestock, may not be permitted within 50 feet of the mean high water line of
tidal water and the edge of the bank of tributary streams and the landward edge of tidal
wetlands within the Critical Area;
e. Clearing of existing natural vegetation in the Buffer is not allowed;
f. Farming activities, including the grazing of livestock, shall not disturb stream banks, tidal
shorelines or other Habitat Protection Areas as described in this Chapter; and
g. Where agricultural use of lands within the Buffer ceases and the lands are proposed to be
converted to other uses, the Buffer shall be established. In establishing the Buffer,
management measures shall be undertaken to provide forest vegetation that assures the
Buffer functions set forth in this section of the Chapter.
Section 135. Surface Mining in the Critical Area
1. Definition. Surface mining is defined as the breaking of the surface soil in order to extract or
remove minerals in the Critical Area. Surface mining includes any activity or process
constituting all or part of a process for the extraction or removal of minerals from their original
location in the Critical Area and the extraction of sand, gravel, rock, stone, earth or fill from
borrow pits for highway construction purposes or for other facilities. For the purpose of this
section, surface mining is also defined as operations engaged in processing minerals at the site of
extraction; removal of overburden and mining of limited amounts of any mineral when done for
the purpose of prospecting and to the extent necessary to determine the location, quantity or
quality of any natural deposit; and mining operations, if the affected land exceeds one acre or
more in area.
2. Surface mining is not a permitted use in the corporate limits of Perryville. Should the Town
amend its Zoning Chapter to allow surface mining in any zone within the Critical Area, the Town
shall amend its Critical Area Chapter to include appropriate language.
Section 136. Natural Parks
1. Definition. Natural parks are areas of natural habitat that provide opportunities for those
recreational activities that are compatible with the maintenance of natural conditions.
2. Identification. The Town has identified areas within the Critical Area that are appropriate for
natural parks. These areas were not chosen to preserve only natural curiosities, but include
coastal ecosystems that are within the jurisdiction, each with its geological and biological
resources intact.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 153
3. General policies. The Town shall encourage the creation of opportunities for interaction between
people and natural environments without destroying the fragile components of natural habitats.
Any plans developed for the use of parks should recognize that all natural terrain has a finite
capacity to tolerate human disturbances, and, therefore, attention should be given to limiting the
number of park visitors in any park at any one time or in the course of a season.
a. Limit park activities to passive recreation such as hiking , picnicking, fishing, bird
watching, etc. Consider limited hours or park closure, if necessary, during the breeding
season of certain species.
b. Limit development in the park to reduce impacts to sensitive resources. Structures should
be limited to trails, observation blinds, walkways, rest stops, instructional pavilions,
maintenance offices and maintenance equipment storage sheds.
c. Limit park use during times when plant or wildlife species may be especially sensitive to
disturbance (i.e. after a heavy rain, a flood, during a drought period or at the beginning of
the growing season).
Section 137. Habitat Protection
1. Description. The Habitat Protection Sections of the Town of Perryville Critical Area Program
addresses protection of the following four habitats:
a. The 100-foot Buffer (Buffer)
b. Threatened and Endangered Species and Species in Need of Conservation;
c. Plant and Wildlife Habitat Protection Areas including non-tidal wetlands; and
d. Anadromous Fish Propagation Waters
2. Identification. Maps illustrating the general location, extent and configuration of Habitat
Protection Areas in the Town are on file at the Town Hall. They will be used to assist property
owners, developers, any person proposing development activity. They will also be used by the
Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission and other agents of the Town government when
reviewing development plans. While these maps give a general indication of the area, they do not
excuse any property owner or operator from establishing to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Administrator, whether or not the property or activity will affect the element of habitat to be
protected. At the time of development the applicant will be responsible for providing a more
detailed site analysis and inventory.
Section 138. The 100-foot Buffer
1. Definition. The Buffer is an existing, naturally vegetated area or an area established in native
vegetation and managed to protect aquatic, wetlands, shoreline and terrestrial environments from
man-made disturbances.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 154
2. Identification of the Buffer. The establishment of a minimum 100-foot Buffer from the mean
high water line of tidal waters, the edge of the bank of tributary streams, and the landward extent
of tidal wetlands shall be required on a site by site basis as part of the environmental review and
site analysis process.
3. General policies. The Town adopts the following policies with regard to the functions of the
Buffer:
a. Provide for the removal or reduction of sediments, nutrients and potentially harmful or
toxic substances in runoff entering the Bay and its tributaries;
b. Minimize the adverse effects of human activities on wetlands, shoreline, stream banks,
tidal waters and aquatic resources;
c. Maintain an area of transitional habitat between aquatic and upland communities;
d. Maintain the natural environment of streams; and
e. Protect riparian wildlife habitat.
4. Standards. The following criteria apply to land use activities within the Buffer:
a. The Buffer shall be established at a minimum distance of 100 feet landward from the
mean high water line of tidal waters, the edge of the bank of tributary streams and the
landward edge of tidal wetlands within the Critical Area.
b. The Buffer shall be expanded beyond 100 feet to include contiguous areas of steep
slopes, hydric soils or highly erodible soils whose development or disturbance may
impact streams, wetlands or other aquatic environments. In the case of contiguous slopes
of 15 percent or greater the Buffer shall be expanded four feet for every one percent of
slope or to the top of the slope, whichever is greater in extent. .
c. New development activities including structures, roads, parking areas and other
impervious surfaces, mining and related facilities or septic tanks may not be allowed in
the Buffer except for those necessarily associated with Water-Dependent Facilities
approved under Sections 129 and 130 of this Chapter.
d. The Buffer shall be maintained in natural vegetation, but may include planted vegetation
where necessary to protect, stabilize, or enhance the shoreline. When lands are proposed
to be developed or converted to new uses, the Buffer shall be established. In establishing
the Buffer, management measures shall be undertaken to provide forest vegetation that
assures the Buffer functions set forth in this section.
e. Buffer Protection Standards for Timber Harvests. The buffer shall be managed to achieve
the or to enhance the buffer functions set forth in the buffer section of this ordinance.
The buffer is measured landward from the mean high water line of tidal waters, from
each bank of tributary streams, and from the landward edge of tidal wetlands.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 155
1. Where necessary the buffer can be planted to protect, stabilize or enhance the
shoreline.
2. Cutting or clearing of the trees within the buffer is prohibited except for the
following: commercial harvesting by selection or clear-cutting of loblolly pine
or tulip poplar is permitted to within 50 feet of the landward edge of the mean
high water line of tidal rivers, perennial tributary streams or the edge of wetlands,
provided that the cutting is conducted in conformity the Habitat Protection Areas
provisions of this ordinance and with a Buffer Management Plan that is prepared
by a registered professional forester and is approved by the Department of
Natural Resources. The plan shall be required for all commercial harvests within
the buffer, regardless of the size of the area to be cut, and shall comply with the
following requirements:
A. Disturbance to stream banks and shorelines shall be avoided;
B. Areas disturbed or cut shall be replanted or allowed to regenerate in a
manner that assures the availability of cover and breeding sites for
wildlife and reestablishes the wildlife corridor function of the buffer;
C. The cutting may not involve the creation of logging roads and skid
trails within the buffer; and
D. Commercial harvesting practices shall be conducted to protect and
conserve the Habitat Protection Areas in accordance with Sections 137
through Section 141 of this chapter.
5. Tree cutting in the Buffer. Individual trees may be cut for personal provided the cutting does not
impair the water quality or existing habitat value or other functions of the Buffer set forth in this
Section. Cutting or clearing of trees within the Buffer shall be prohibited except that:
a. Cutting of trees or removal of natural vegetation may be permitted where necessary to
provide access to private piers, or to install or construct a shore erosion protection device
or measure, or a water-dependent facility, providing the device, measure or facility has
received all necessary State and Federal permits.
b. Individual trees may be cut for personal use providing that this cutting does not impair
the water quality or existing habitat value or other functions of the buffer as set forth in
the policies of this plan and provided that the trees are replaced on an equal basis for each
tree cut.
c. Individual trees may be removed which are in danger of falling and causing damage to
dwellings or other structures, or which are in danger of falling and therefore causing the
blockage of streams, or resulting in accelerated shore erosion.
d. Horticultural practices may be used to maintain the health of individual trees.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 156
e. Other cutting techniques may be undertaken within the Buffer and under the advice and
guidance of the State Departments of Agriculture and Natural Resources, if necessary to
preserve the forest from extensive pest or disease infestation or threat from fire.
6. Special Buffer Area Provisions IDA, LDA and RCA.
The following provisions are intended to accommodate limited use of shoreline areas that have been
mapped as Special Buffer Areas (SBAs) under the provisions of this Ordinance while protecting water
quality and wildlife habitat to the extent possible. This section applies only to new development or
redevelopment within 100 feet of tidal waters, tidal wetlands and tributary streams on lots of record as of
December 1, 1985. The lots shall have been officially designated by the Town, and approved by the
Critical Area Commission, as Special Buffer Areas.
a. Commercial, Industrial, Institutional, Recreational and Multi-family residential
Development and Redevelopment Standards.
New development or redevelopment activities, including structures, roads, parking areas
and other impervious surfaces or septic systems will not be permitted in the Buffer unless
the applicant can demonstrate that there is no feasible alternative and the Planning
Commission finds that efforts have been made to minimize Buffer impacts based on the
following standards:
(1) Development and redevelopment activities have been located as far as possible
from mean high tide, the landward edge of tidal wetlands, or the edge of tributary
streams.
(2) Variances to other local setback requirements have been considered before
additional intrusion into the Buffer.
(3) Convenience or expense were not factors considered when evaluating the extent
of allowable impacts to the Buffer.
(4) New development, including accessory structures, shall minimize the extent of
intrusion into the Buffer. New development shall not be located closer to the
water (or edge of tidal wetlands) than the local setback for the zoning district or
25-feet, whichever is greater. Structures on adjacent properties shall not be used
to determine the setback line. The 25-foot setback shall be maintained for all
subsequent development or redevelopment of the property.
(5) Redevelopment, including accessory structures, shall minimize the extent of
intrusion into the Buffer. Redevelopment shall not be located closer to the water
(or edge of tidal wetlands) than the local setback for the zoning district or 25 feet,
whichever is greater. Structures on adjacent properties shall not be used to
determine the setback line. Existing structures located within the setback may
remain or a new structure may be constructed on the footprint of an existing
structure or impervious surface. Opportunities to establish a 25-foot setback
should be maximized.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 157
(6) Development and redevelopment may not impact any Habitat Protection Area
(HPA) other than the Buffer, including nontidal wetlands, other State or federal
permits notwithstanding.
(7) Special Buffer Area designation shall not be used to facilitate the filling of tidal
wetlands that are contiguous to the Buffer or to create additional build able land
for new development or redevelopment.
(8) No natural vegetation may be removed in the Buffer except that required by the
proposed construction.
(9) Mitigation for development or redevelopment in the in the Special Buffer Area
approved under the provisions of this subsection shall be implemented as
follows:
(a) A forested or landscaped buffer yard, 25 feet wide, shall be established
on the project site between the development and the distance to the
water. This buffer yard shall be densely planted with trees and shrubs in
accordance with Table 1.
(b) Redevelopment sites, where existing structures or those rebuilt on an
existing footprint limit the area available for planting, appropriate
modifications to the width of the planted buffer yard may be made on a
case-by-case basis.
Table 1
Required Buffer yard Planting
Area Quantity and Stocking Suggested Species
For every 100
linear feet of
buffer yard
5 Trees
and
10 Understory Trees/Large Shrubs,
and
30 Small Shrubs
and
40 Herbaceous Plants, Grasses, Etc.
White or Red Oak, Pin Oak, Willow Oak,
Red Maple, American Holly, Eastern Red
Cedar
Dogwood, Mountain Laurel, Bayberry,
Shadbush, Winterberry
Pepperbush, Chokeberry, Strawberry
Bush, Sweetspire
Wild Columbine, Butterflyweed,
Common Milkweed, Asters
(10) In addition to establishing a 25-foot buffer yard on site as described above, one
of the following mitigation measures shall be implemented based on the
following order of preference:
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 158
(a) Natural forest vegetation of an area twice the extent of the footprint of
the development activity within the 100-foot Buffer shall be planted on
site in the Buffer or at another location approved by the Planning
Commission.
(b) Applicants who cannot fully comply with the planting requirement in “a”
above, may use offsets to meet the mitigation requirement. Offsets
include the removal of an equivalent area of existing impervious surfaces
in the Buffer, the construction of Best Management Practices for storm
water, wetland creation or restoration, or other measures that improve
water quality or habitat.
(c) Applicants who cannot comply with either the planting or offset
requirements in a or b above shall pay into a fee-in-lieu program as
follows:
(1) Applicants must submit to the Planning Commission two
planting proposal cost estimates from qualified landscape
businesses for planting the equivalent of twice the extent of the
disturbed area within the 100-foot buffer. The estimate shall
include the cost of stock, planting staking, mulching and a oneyear
guarantee.
(2) The Planning Commission shall determine the amount of the feein-
lieu based on the average of the two estimates.
(d) Any fees-in-lieu collected under these provisions shall be placed in an
account that will assure their use only for projects within the Critical
Area for the benefit of wildlife habitat and water quality improvement.
The status of these funds must be reported in the jurisdiction’s quarterly
reports.
(e) Any required mitigation or offset areas shall be protected from future
development through an easement, development agreement, plat notes or
other instrument and recorded among the land records of the Cecil
County.
b. Single Family Detached Residential Development and Redevelopment Standards.
New development or redevelopment activities, including structures, roads, parking areas
and other impervious surfaces or septic systems will not be permitted in the Buffer unless
the applicant can demonstrate that there is no feasible alternative and the Planning
Commission or their designee finds that efforts have been made to minimize Buffer
impacts based on the following guidelines:
(1) New development or redevelopment shall minimize the shoreward extent of
intrusion into the Buffer. New development and redevelopment shall not be
located closer to the water (or the edge of tidal wetlands) than principal structures
on adjacent properties or the local setback for the zoning district, whichever is
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 159
greater. In no case shall new development or redevelopment be located less than
25 feet from the water (or the edge of tidal wetlands).
(2) Existing principal or accessory structures in the Buffer may be replaced in the
same location. Any increase in impervious area within the Buffer shall comply
fully with the requirements of this policy.
(3) New accessory structures may be permitted in the Buffer in accordance with the
following setback requirements:
(a) New accessory structures may be located closer to the water or edge of
tidal wetlands than the principal dwelling only if it has been determined
by the Planning Commission or their designee in consultation with the
Critical Area Circuit Rider that there are no other locations for the
accessory structures.
(b) The area of the accessory structures within the Buffer shall be minimized
and the cumulative total area of all new and existing accessory structures
on the property shall not exceed 500 square feet within 50-feet of the
water and 1,000 square feet total.
(4) Variances to other local setback requirements shall have been considered before
additional intrusion into the buffer.
(5) Development may not impact any Habitat Protection Areas other than the buffer,
including nontidal wetlands, other state of federal permits notwithstanding.
(6) No natural vegetation may be removed in the buffer except that required by the
proposed construction. The applicant will be required to maintain any other
existing natural vegetation in the buffer.
(7) Modified Buffer Area designation shall not be used to facilitate the filling of
nontidal wetlands that are contiguous to the buffer to create additional buildable
land for new development or redevelopment.
(8) Mitigation for development or redevelopment in the Modified Buffer Areas
approved under this subsection shall be implemented as follows:
A. Natural vegetation of an area twice the extent of the footprint of the
development activity within the 100-foot buffer shall be planted on site
in the buffer or other location as may be determined by the Planning
Commission. If it is not possible to carry out offsets or other mitigation
within the Critical Area, any plantings or other habitat/water quality
improvements should occur within the affected watershed.
B. Applicants who cannot comply with the planting requirements may use
offsets to meet the mitigation requirements. Offsets may include the
removal of an equivalent area of existing impervious surface within the
buffer, the construction of Best Management Practices for storm water,
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 160
wetland creation or restoration, or other measures that improve water
quality or habitat.
C. Applicants who cannot comply with either the planting or offset
requirements in A. and B. above shall pay into a fee-in-lieu program as
follows:
I) Applicants shall submit to the Planning Commission two cost
estimates from qualified landscape businesses for planting the
equivalent of an area twice the extent of the footprint of the
development activity within the 100- foot buffer, the estimate
shall include the cost of stock, planting, staking, mulching and
a two-year survival guarantee.
II) The Planning Commission shall determine the amount of the
fee-in-lieu bases on the average of the two estimates.
D. Any required mitigation or offset areas shall be protected from future
development through an easement, development agreement, plat notes,
or other instrument and recorded among the land records of Cecil
County.
c. Notification Requirements
(1) All new commercial, industrial, institutional, recreational, multi- family
residential development or redevelopment projects shall be submitted to the
Critical Area Commission in accordance with COMAR 27.03.01.03. Mitigation
plans shall be included as part of the project submission.
(2) The Planning Commission shall make written findings documenting that all the
Criteria in this section are met including that the disturbance to the Buffer is the
least intrusion necessary. These findings shall be available to the Commission
upon request.
d. Special Buffer Area Mapping Standards
The following standards shall apply for the mapping of new Special Buffer Areas:
(1) Only lots of record as of December 1, 1985 are eligible for mapping as Special
Buffer Areas (SBAs).
(2) The parcel or lot being considered for SBA status shall contain a Buffer that was
significantly impacted by development at the time of program adoption and that
prevent the Buffer from fulfilling its functions.
(3) Developed parcels or lots shall contain a Buffer intrusion by the principal
structures (excluding utilities or septic systems).
(4) Undeveloped or vacant parcels or lots (i.e., infill) may be designated as a SBA if
development within the Buffer cannot be avoided based on the size of the parcel
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 161
or lot, area of the parcel or lot within the Buffer, or the surrounding pattern of
development.
(5) If only part of a parcel or lot meets the criteria for designation as a Special Buffer
Area, then only portions of the parcel or lot shall be designated as a Special
Buffer Area. The portion of the parcel designated as a Special Buffer Area will
be subject to the Special Buffer Area requirements. Portions of the property that
are not designated as a Special Buffer Area shall comply fully with the 100-foot
Buffer restrictions.
(6) Any proposal by the Town for designation of an area as a SBA shall include, at a
minimum, written findings and supporting reasons which demonstrate the degree
to which the proposed SBA does not perform each of the following Buffer
functions:
(a) Provide for the removal or reduction of sediments, nutrients, and
potentially harmful or toxic substances in runoff entering the Bay and its
tributaries;
(b) Minimize the adverse effects of human activities on wetlands, shorelines,
stream banks, and aquatic resources;
(c) Maintain an area of transitional habitat between aquatic and upland
communities;
(d) Maintain the natural environment of streams; and
(e) Protect riparian wildlife habitat.
e. Definitions
For the purpose of implementing this subsection, the following words have the following
meanings. (In the case of conflicts with other definitions, the stricter provisions shall apply.):
Accessory Structure means a structure that is detached from the principal structure, located on the
same lot and clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal structure; or if there is no
principal structure on the lot, a structure that is customarily incidental and subordinate to a
principal structure.
Special Buffer Area means an area officially mapped by the Town and approved by the Critical
Area Commission as a Special Buffer Area, where it has been sufficiently demonstrated that the
existing pattern of residential, industrial commercial, institutional or recreational development in
the Critical Area prevents the Buffer from fulfilling its intended functions for water quality
protection and wildlife habitat conservation.
Buffer yard means an area, at least 50 feet wide, located between development activity and the
water (or edge of wetlands or streams), planted with vegetation consisting of native species and
other appropriate plantings. This area shall be maintained primarily for wildlife habitat and
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 162
water quality and shall not be maintained in a manner that conflicts with these goals such as
mowing or applying herbicides.
Grandfathered Parcel/Lot means a parcel of land or lot that was subdivided into recorded, legally
buildable lots where the subdivision received final approval before December 1, 1985.
Development Activity means the construction or substantial alteration of residential, commercial,
industrial, institutional, recreational or transportation facilities or structures. Development
activities include, among other things, structures, roads, parking areas, and other impervious
surfaces, mining and related facilities, clearing, grading and septic systems. For purposes of
implementing this policy, development activity does not include subdivision.
Natural Forest Vegetation means vegetation consisting of canopy trees, understory trees, shrubs,
and herbaceous plants that are typically found in riparian areas in Maryland. Areas of natural
forest vegetation planted to meet the mitigation requirements in this policy shall be designed to
mimic the structure and species composition of natural forests.
New Development means a development activity that takes place on a property with predevelopment
imperviousness less than 15 percent as of December 1, 1985.
Principal Structure means, for the purpose of establishing setbacks, the primary or predominant
structure on any lot or parcel. For residential parcels or lots, the principal structure is the primary
dwelling, excluding utilities and the septic system.
Redevelopment means a development activity that takes place on a property with predevelopment
imperviousness greater than 15 percent as of December 1, 1985.
Section 139. Threatened and Endangered Species and Species in Need of Conservation
1. Definitions. Areas of threatened and endangered species and areas with species in need of
conservation are those areas where these species, as designated by the Secretary of the
Department of Natural Resources, are found or have historically been found and their surrounding
habitats. In this section, the following words have the meanings indicated:
a. "Threatened species" means any species of fish, wildlife, or plants designated as such by
regulation by the Secretary of the Department of Natural Resources which appear likely,
within the foreseeable future, to become endangered, including any species of wildlife or
plant determined to be a "threatened" species pursuant to the Federal Endangered Species
Act, 16 USC §1531 et seq., as amended.
b. "Endangered species" means any species of fish, wildlife, or plants which have been
designated as such by regulation by the Secretary of the Department of Natural
Resources. Designation occurs when the continued existence of these species as viable
components of the State's resources are determined to be in jeopardy. This includes any
species determined to be an "endangered" species pursuant to the Federal Endangered
Species Act, cited above.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 163
c. "Species in need of conservation" means those fish and wildlife whose continued
existence as a part of the State's resources are in question and which may be designated
by regulation by the Secretary of the Department of Natural Resources as in need of
conservation pursuant to the requirements of Natural Resources Articles, §§10-2A-903
and 4-2A-03, Annotated Code of Maryland.
2. Identification. The approximate location of threatened and endangered species, and species in
need of conservation are shown on the Town Critical Area program maps filed in the Town Hall.
These maps will be used to assist in the identification of general areas where threatened and
endangered species are located.
3. General policies. The Town shall provide protection for threatened and endangered species,
those species in need of conservation and their habitats which occur in the Critical Area.
4. Standards. The Town shall provide for the protection of the known habitats of species in need of
conservation and threatened and endangered species and also habitats of these species that may be
identified in the future. If a development activity is proposed for a site within the Critical Area,
then the Town shall review the proposed activities on a case-by-case basis and seek technical
advice from the Department of Natural Resources. Based on the Departments’ recommendations,
additional research and site analysis may be required to identify the location of threatened and
endangered species on a site. If any habitats are identified on a project site, the applicant shall
coordinate with the Department of Natural Resources the development of a Habitat Protection
Plan to protect and conserve the habitats identified. This information concerning habitats will be
incorporated into the Town’s Resource Inventory Maps for future reference.
5. Standards for bald eagle nests. A three zone protection area of 1/4 mile (1,320') in radius around
each Bald Eagle nest shall be established and within the zones the Town shall comply with the
following recommended protection measures:
a. Zone 1 shall include the area extending from the nest out to a radius of 330 feet from the
nest. In this zone timber cutting, land clearing, and development activities are prohibited.
Hiking, fishing, and agricultural activities may be permitted from June 16 to December
14. These activities and human activity in general should not be permitted in this zone
from December 15 to June 15.
b. Zone 2 extends from the outer limit of Zone 1 to a radius of 660 feet from the nest. In
this zone, major habitat changes should be avoided including clear-cutting, land clearing,
and development activity. Hunting, hiking, fishing, and agricultural activities may be
permitted from June 16 to December 14. These activities and human activity in general
should not be permitted in this zone from December 15 to June 15. Agricultural activities
may be permitted if Department of Natural Resources data indicate that the nesting eagles
are tolerant of these activities. From August 16 to November 14, selective thinning and
maintenance of timber stands and building and road maintenance may be permitted.
c. Zone 3 extends from the outer limit of Zone 2 to a radius of 1,320 feet from the nest.
Timber cutting, land clearing, and development activities should be restricted from
December 15 to June 15. Other activities in this zone that are within sight of the eagles
on the nest may need to be restricted during this time period in accordance with
Department of Natural resources recommendations.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 164
d. If a Bald Eagle nest has not been used for three successive nesting seasons, then any
protective regulations applied to the specific site may be removed after verification by the
Department of Natural Resources that the nest has been abandoned.
6. Implementation. The owner of any property containing a portion of, or adjacent to, a habitat of a
threatened or endangered species or a species in need of conservation, on which a land altering or
land development activity, is proposed shall prepare a Habitat Protection Plan, identifying
appropriate protection measures, and submit this Plan with other project documents to the Zoning
Administrator and Planning Commission prior to approval of the project. The Planning
Commission will request review and comments from the Department of Natural Resources. A
land altering activity shall include, but is not be limited to, such activities as subdivision,
timbering, sand and gravel mining, clearing new farmlands, the construction of homes or
commercial structures.
7. Public notice. The determination of the existence and extent of these habitats and protection
areas shall result from a cooperative effort between the Town and public agencies or private
organizations. If the Secretary of the Department of Natural Resources designates additional
species by regulation in the future, additional local public hearings, as appropriate, shall be held
to consider comments on the protection measures proposed for these species. The protection
measures shall be adopted within 12 months of the date of the Secretary’s designation.
a. The establishment of Habitat Protection Areas shall not be intended to restrict or affect,
beyond any existing local, State or Federal laws or regulations or on private land, any
private restrictions, such activities as non-commercial passive recreation (for example,
hiking and nature photography), educational pursuits, scientific observation, or noncommercial
hunting, trapping or fishing.
b. Development activities in areas of threatened or endangered species or species in need of
conservation may be subject to other provisions and requirements of this program.
Section 140. Plant and Wildlife Habitat and Nontidal Wetlands Protection
1. Definitions. In this section, the following words have the meanings indicated:
a. "Plant habitat" means a community of plants commonly identifiable by the composition
of its vegetation and its physiographic characteristics.
b. "Wildlife habitat" means those plant communities and physiographic features that
provide food, water and cover, nesting, and foraging or feeding conditions necessary to
maintain populations of animals in the Critical Area.
2. Description. The following plant and wildlife habitats shall be identified and protected in the
Critical Area:
a. Colonial water bird nesting sites;
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 165
b. Historic waterfowl staging and concentration areas in tidal waters, tributary streams or
tidal and non-tidal wetlands;
c. Existing riparian forests (for example: relatively mature forests of at least 300 feet in
width which occur adjacent to streams, wetlands, or the bay shoreline and which are
documented breeding areas);
d. Forest areas utilized as breeding areas by forest interior dwelling birds and other wildlife
species (for example: relatively mature forested areas within the Critical Area of 100
acres or more, or forest connected with such areas);
e. Other areas which may, in the future, be identified by the State and Federal agencies as
important plant and wildlife habitat areas;
f. Other plant and wildlife habitats determined to be of local significance;
g. Natural Heritage Areas which have been designated; and
h. Non-tidal wetlands.
3. General policies. Town policies regarding plant and wildlife habitat in the Critical Area are to:
a. Conserve wildlife habitat in the Critical Area;
b. Protect those wildlife habitats that tend to be least abundant or which may become so in
the future if current land-use trends continue;
c. Protect those wildlife habitat types which are required to support the continued presence
of various species;
d. Protect those wildlife habitat types and plant communities which are determined by the
Town to be of local significance;
e. Protect Natural Heritage Areas; and
f. Protect and conserve non-tidal wetlands.
4. Standards. The Town’s Critical Area Program and Chapter will serve to accomplish the goals of
the Critical Area Program to protect water quality and wildlife habitat. In addition to the
standards set forth for the protection of the Buffer, the following standards shall apply to new
development or land disturbance in the Critical Area:
a. Any development or significant land use change of a property located within the Critical
Area of Perryville will require the Town review the proposed activities on a case-by-case
basis and seek technical advice from the Department of Natural Resources. Based on the
Departments’ recommendations, additional research and site analysis may be required to
identify the location of threatened and endangered species on a site. If any habitats are
identified on a project site, the applicant shall develop a Habitat Protection Plan to protect
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 166
and conserve the habitats identified. This information concerning habitats will be
incorporated into the Town’s Resource Inventory Maps for future reference.
b. The Town may seek additional information and comments from The Department of
Natural Resources and other appropriate agencies and adjacent jurisdictions.
c. Rough areas, e.g., depressions, swales, non-tidal wetlands or other areas unsuitable for
development or agriculture shall be conserved as wildlife cover. Using cluster
development, the developer shall leave these areas in natural vegetation or where this is
not feasible, replant with native vegetation.
d. For development activities in RCA and LDA, wildlife corridors shall be established and
used to connect the area left in forest cover with any large forest tracts which are located
outside of the area or property being developed or subdivided. Forest left in its natural
state should be adjacent to larger forested areas and not left as an isolated island of trees.
Planting required as a mitigation measure should be adjacent to other habitat. Tree
planting which serves as visual screening or landscaping should not be considered to
meet these requirements.
e. Buffer areas for colonial water bird (heron, egret, tern, and glossy ibis) nesting sites shall
be established (if such birds are found to exist in the Critical Area) so that these sites are
protected from the adverse impacts of development activities and from disturbance
during the breeding season.
f. New water-dependent facilities shall be located to prevent disturbance to sites of
significance to wildlife such as historic, aquatic staging and concentration areas for
waterfowl.
g. Protection measures, including a buffer area, shall be established where appropriate, for
other plant and wildlife habitat sites identified in this Chapter.
h. Forested areas required to support wildlife species shall be protected and conserved by
developing management programs which have as their objective, conserving the wildlife
that inhabit or use the areas. Development activities, or the clearing or cutting of trees
which might occur in the areas, shall be conducted so as to conserve riparian habitat,
forest interior wildlife species and their habitat. Management measures may include
incorporating appropriate wildlife protection elements into Forest Management Plans,
cluster zoning or other site design criteria which provide for the conservation of wildlife
habitat. Measures may also include Soil Conservation Plans which have wildlife habitat
protection provisions appropriate to the areas defined above, and incentive programs
which use the acquisition of easements and other similar techniques.
i. When development activities, or the cutting or clearing of trees, occurs in forested areas,
corridors of existing forest or woodland vegetation shall be maintained to provide
effective connections between wildlife habitat areas.
j. Plant and wildlife habitats considered to be of local significance by the Town shall be
protected. Examples of these are those whose habitat values may not be of statewide
significance, but are of importance locally or regionally because they contain species
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 167
uncommon or of limited occurrence in the jurisdiction, or because the species are found
in unusually high concentrations.
k. Natural Heritage Areas shall be protected from alterations due to development activities
or cutting or clearing so that the structure and species composition of the areas are
maintained.
(1) Development activities or cutting and clearing in Natural Heritage Areas shall be
prohibited unless an analysis is performed and measures proposed to mitigate any
adverse impacts of the proposed activities. The analysis and mitigation measures
shall be prepared by qualified professionals (e.g., ornithologists, zoologists,
environmental engineers and planners) at the expense of the applicant and shall
address the expected effects on the natural environment within the Natural
Heritage Area.
(2) The analysis shall be submitted to the Planning Commission who shall then
submit it to the State Department of Natural Resources for review and comment.
Upon receiving said comment and, if appropriate, upon seeking the advice of
expert consultants, the Planning Commission shall find against or in favor of the
activities or may make suggestions for changing the analysis and ask the
applicant to resubmit the analysis. The initial analysis review between the
Planning Commission and State Department of Natural Resources should be
completed within sixty (60) days from submission.
5. Standards for non-tidal wetlands. The provisions of COMAR 26.23.01 apply to non-tidal
wetlands in the Critical Area. A person conducting a regulated activity within non-tidal wetlands
in the Critical Area shall obtain a permit from the Maryland of the Environment. Nothing in this
regulation may be interpreted as altering any requirements for development activities set out in
this subtitle. The following standards shall apply to new development or land disturbance in the
Critical Area:
a. Maintain at least a 25-foot buffer around identified non-tidal wetlands where
development activities or other activities that may disturb the wetlands or the wildlife
contained therein, shall be prohibited unless it can be shown that these activities will not
adversely affect the wetland. This requirement is not intended to restrict the grazing of
livestock in these wetlands.
b. Protect the hydrologic regime and water quality of identified non-tidal wetlands by
providing that development activities or other land disturbances in the drainage area of
the wetlands shall minimize alterations to the surface or subsurface flow of water into and
from the wetlands and not cause impairment of the water quality or the plant and wildlife
and habitat value of the wetland.
c. If an applicant demonstrates that activities or operations that impact non-tidal wetlands
are water-dependent or of substantial economic benefit, but will cause unavoidable and
necessary impacts to the wetlands, a Mitigation Plan shall be required. The Plan shall
specify mitigation measures that will provide water quality benefits and plant and wildlife
habitat equivalent to those of the wetland destroyed or altered and shall be accomplished,
to the extent possible, onsite or near the affected wetland. If the Planning Commission
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 168
finds that the proposed activity is not water-dependent, or of substantial economic
benefit, or the wetland impacts are avoidable or unnecessary, then the activity may not be
allowed to occur. In evaluating a proposal involving wetland impacts, the Planning
Commission shall consider the following:
(1) Avoidance of the impacts by not taking a certain action or parts of an action;
(2) Minimization of the impacts by limiting the degree of magnitude of action and its
implementation;
(3) Remediating the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the affected
environments;
(4) Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation and maintenance
operations during the life of the action; and
(5) Compensation for the impact by replacing or providing substitute resources or
environments.
d. For all activities or operations proposed that may impact a non-tidal wetland, the
proposer shall seek comments and/or required permits from the Maryland Department of
the Environment, the local Soil Conservation Districts and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service. Upon finding that the plan as proposed, or as may be modified to address the
comments of these agencies, provides mitigation sufficient to accomplish the objectives
of this section, then the proposer shall implement the plan.
e. Public Notice. The determination of the existence and extent of these habitats and
protection areas shall result from a cooperative effort between the town and public
agencies or private organizations. If the Secretary of the Department of Natural
Resources designates additional species by regulation in the future, public hearings, as
appropriate, shall be held to consider comments on these areas and the protection
measures proposed for these species. The protection measures shall be adopted within 12
months of the date of the secretary’s designation.
(1) The establishment of Habitat Protection Areas shall not be intended to restrict or
affect, beyond any existing local, state or federal laws or regulations or on private
land, any private restrictions, such activities as non-commercial passive
recreation (for example, hiking and nature photography), educational pursuits,
scientific observation, or non-commercial hunting, trapping or fishing.
(2) Development activities in areas of threatened or endangered species in need of
conservation may be subject to other provisions and requirements of this
program.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 169
Section 141. Anadromous Fish Propagation Waters
1. Definition. Anadromous fish propagation waters are those streams that are tributary to the
Chesapeake Bay where spawning of anadromous species (e.g., rockfish or striped bass, yellow
perch, white perch, shad and river herring) occurs or has occurred.
2. Identification. The Town has identified and mapped anadromous fish propagation waters as
defined in this section, and these maps are available at the Town Hall.
3. General policies. The policies of the Town with regard to anadromous fish propagation waters
shall be to:
a. Protect the instream and streambank habitat of anadromous fish propagation waters;
b. Promote land use policies and practices in the watershed of spawning streams within the
Critical Area which will minimize the adverse impacts of development on the water
quality of the streams; and
c. Provide for the unobstructed movement of spawning and larval forms of anadromous fish
in streams.
4. Standards. Within anadromous fish propagation watersheds, the following measures are required:
a. The installation or introduction of concrete riprap or other artificial surfaces onto the
bottom of natural streams shall be prohibited unless it can be demonstrated that water
quality and fisheries habitat can be improved.
b. Channelization or other physical alterations which may change the course or circulation
of a stream and thereby interfere with the movement of fish, shall be prohibited.
c. The Town shall require each development activity that occurs within a watershed
draining to anadromous fish propagation waters to fulfill the following objectives:
(1) Minimize development activities or land disturbances within the watershed;
(2) Maintain, or if practicable, improve water quality in affected streams or other
water bodies;
(3) Minimize to the extent possible the discharge of sediments into affected streams
or other water bodies;
(4) Maintain, or if practicable, increase the natural or native vegetation of the watershed
and tree canopy over the streams;
d. The Town shall ensure coordination and compliance with complementary State laws and
regulations:
(1) Prohibit the construction or placement of dams or other structures that would
interfere with or prevent the movement of spawning fish or larval forms in
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 170
streams or other designated water bodies. If practical, existing structures that
block streams or other water bodies shall be removed; and
(2) Ensure that the construction, repair or maintenance activities associated with
bridges, or other stream crossing, or with utilities and roads, which involve
disturbance within the Buffer or which occur instream, as described in COMAR
08.05.03.11B(5), shall be prohibited between March 1 and June 15 of each year.
Section 142. Reserved
Section 143. Reserved
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 171
Part VI Highway Corridor Overlay District
Section 144. Purpose
1. The purpose of establishing this overlay district is to protect and/or enhance the aesthetic and
visual character of the Town of Perryville and to provide for and promote orderly growth of the
same. The Highway Corridor Overlay District regulations are intended to supplement the
regulations of the underlying zoning districts and to provide for the harmony and compatibility of
development along the major highway corridors that serve as gateways to the community. When
other provisions of this Chapter are more restrictive, they shall apply. All development within this
District shall be subject to the procedures, standards, and guidelines specified in the following
sections, in addition to those standards pertaining to the particular base zoning district in which
the development occurs. In cases of conflict, the more restrictive standards and/or requirements
shall apply. In particular, the purpose of the Special Overlay District is as follows:
a. To encourage and better articulate positive visual experiences along the Town's major
existing and proposed highways.
b. To provide for the continued safe and efficient use of these roadways.
c. To maintain natural beauty and scenic, cultural, and positive visual character of the
corridor, particularly distinctive views, vistas, and visual continuity.
d. Minimize intersection and site access points.
These purposes will be accomplished through evaluation of proposed developments within this
overlay zoning district by the Planning Commission which shall review the location, character
and appearance of new development in a positive manner. It is the purpose of such review to
determine, in a cooperative fashion with the applicant, whether a proposed plan meets the
guidelines and other standards of this zoning district.
2. The Highway Corridor Overlay Zoning District shall include all lands within 500 feet of each
side of the center line of the following rights-of-way: U.S. 40, I-95, and MD 222. The
approximate boundary of the overlay district shall be shown on the Official Zoning Map and shall
be shown as a surveyed line by the applicant on each property subject to review.
Section 145. Affected Development
1. All development plan applications, including applications for building permits, site plan review
and subdivision approval, for development located in the Highway Corridor Overlay District shall
be reviewed by the Planning Commission for compliance with this Part. All changes subject to
approval by the Commission shall receive such approval before proceeding.
2. In the case of applications for development plan approval on properties already developed, for
example an application for a building permit for an addition to an existing building, shall be
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 172
required to comply with the provisions of this Part, to the extent possible, as determined by the
Planning Commission. For the purposes of this Part, the term “to the extent possible” shall not
preclude the Planning Commission from requiring existing pavement be removed to enable
establishment of visual enhancement buffer yards, that entrances/exits and site traffic circulation
be modified to improve channelization of traffic and reduction and/or consolidation of
entrances/exits on major highways, or removal and/or replacement of existing signs and
associated lighting.
3. Development Activity Permitted Within The District.
a. Any alteration of existing conditions of the land, uses or structures within the Highway
Corridor Overlay District requiring a permit from the Town from the date of enactment of
this section shall henceforth be done as provided for by this section or by other sections
of this Article.
b. The overlay district regulations are supplementary to the permitted uses and requirements
for the appropriate underlying zoning district as contained in Article X of this Chapter.
4. Development activity prohibited within the district. Uses prohibited in the underlying zoning
district are also prohibited in the overlay district.
Section 146. Tree Protection
The following regulations supplement, but do not supersede the Forest Conservation Chapter adopted by
the Town of Perryville on (date adopted) and as amended.
1. Development of land for different uses and intensity of uses will often times necessitate the
removal of trees to accommodate roads, parking, buildings, and facilities. It is the expressed
intent of this Chapter that every effort be made through the design, layout, and construction of
development projects to incorporate and save as many trees as possible.
2. No person shall cut, destroy, move, or remove any living, disease-free tree of any species having
a trunk with a diameter of eight (8) inches or larger, in conjunction with any development of land
governed by this Chapter unless and until such removal or destruction has been approved under
the provisions of this Chapter. Trunk diameter is measured 4.5 feet above the ground, and is
referred to as "diameter at breast height (dbh)".
3. No person shall cut or clear land of trees for the sole purpose of offering land for sale.
4. The clear-cutting of trees is prohibited. The term "clear-cutting" as used herein shall mean the
cutting of more than 75 percent of the trees six inches in trunk diameter or larger. Clear-cutting
pursuant to an approved development plan shall require the planting of replacement trees as
indicated in the detailed landscape plan accompanying the development application.
5. A survey of all trees of applicable size shall be made and submitted in conjunction with the
development site layout. All trees proposed for removal shall be clearly noted.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 173
Section 147. Retention of and/or Creation of a Minimum Visual Buffer along Highway Corridor
Right-of-Ways
1. Each approved application for development shall provide a minimum visual buffer between the
right-of-way line of the subject roadway and all proposed structures and parking areas. The
purpose of the minimum visual buffer is to soften the appearance of structures and parking lots
from the road, to screen vehicular headlight glare on and off site, and to lessen spill-over light
from on-site lighting. The buffer shall be continuous, except as set forth in 2. below, and be no
less than the requirements for Buffer yard B (see attached sketch of Buffer yard B) contained in
Article XVII and Appendix B depth across the existing right-of-way line or from the new rightof-
way line should the application under consideration be required to or voluntarily provide a
dedication of or easement for proposed roadway purposes. The minimum Buffer yard depth shall
not occur at the high activity areas of a project. These areas include, but are not limited to,
building entrances, drop-offs, and drive-thrus.
To determine the average depth of the minimum visual buffer, measurements shall be taken at
intervals not greater than ten (10) feet perpendicular to the property line. Side buffer areas
required by other sections of this Chapter and deep, narrow land areas shall not be used when
calculating the minimum visual buffer. Where lagoons and drainage swales occur in the minimum
visual buffer because of natural land forms or drainage patterns, additional buffer depth and
vegetation shall be required to augment the screening effect.
2. The intent of the minimum visual buffer is to leave the naturally occurring buffer vegetation
intact for its softening effect. This buffer may be enhanced or created, where such vegetation is
insufficient or non-existent, with trees and shrubs of a variety of species appropriate to Town
character. If the minimum visual buffer already has trees of protected size and species as noted
herein, their preservation is required. Where masses of native shrubs are present, their
preservation with minimum disturbance is strongly encouraged. While complete screening of a
project is not required, sufficient plant material shall be installed to accomplish the softening
effect required in 1 above. In order to maintain the screening effect, existing vegetation shall not
be limbed-up from the ground more than five (5) feet to the lowest branches. However, if
understory planting is planned, existing vegetation may, with the approval of the Zoning
Administrator, be limbed-up to a height that will provide adequate sunlight to those plants.
Minimum height and caliper of new trees shall be consistent with provisions of the tree protection
requirements in Section 146 above. Minimum height of new shrubs used to create the minimum
visual buffer shall be three feet. These plantings shall be shown on a master landscape plan
meeting the requirements of Section 299.
3. The buffer management requirements of Part III of the Article shall apply to the minimum visual
buffer on properties located in the Critical Area.
Section 148. Exemptions From Buffer Requirements
Exemptions, whether partial or total, from the buffer yard provisions may be granted by the Planning
Commission if it can be sufficiently demonstrated that such buffer yard will have a deleterious visual
effect upon an existing situation or that through the preservation of existing trees and/or other unique
natural vegetative resource, particular effort on the part of a developer in protecting the existing natural
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 174
environment warrants the relaxation of buffer yard requirements. The following outlines those anticipated
situations where the buffer yard requirement may be relaxed or removed.
1. Protection of existing visual environment. In the following cases where the characteristics of the
existing visual environment would be detracted from by the provision of a required buffer yard:
a. Views and Vistas of existing buildings which exhibit a high degree of aesthetic value
serving to heighten the visual experience, serve as important points of spatial
identification, contain value as important historical resources.
b. Views and Vistas of existing natural landscape/topographical features of a particular
locale which correspond to certain high points affording panoramic views, views to
settlement clusters, views of water, valleys, and other elements of the physical landscape.
c. Views and Vistas to existing recreational/open space areas, whether natural or man-made,
which serve to contribute to the overall visual environment. Uses such as golf-courses,
local parks, cemeteries.
d. Views and Vistas to which give the observer an awareness of a locations inherent
character related to views of farmland, pastures, water activities, such as docks or other
maritime activities specific to the area.
2. Protection of proposed visual environment. In the following cases, where a proposed
development intended to further enhance or protect the existing visual environment would be
visually affected by the required buffer yard:
a. A proposed development which by virtue of the characteristics of its structures indicates
innovation of design, a unique relationship with the site, represents a focal point,
establishes a particular identifying element for the locale.
b. A proposed development which exhibits innovative or unique uses of site landscaping, or
which combines in the use of the site open recreational areas such as described above.
3. Retention of existing natural attributes of the site. In this case, significant steps must be taken by
a developer to preserve significant tree stands, topographic characteristics, even in the event that
such elements are in locations where they are not wholly visible. The intent is to provide
incentives to retain the features of the existing natural environment rather than encourage its
destruction, and then to remedy the situation with new plantings.
4. Management of existing and proposed resources. In order to encourage management programs for
visual natural resources, so that the continuation of such resource is assured, buffer yard
requirements may be reduced or waived.
Section 149. Permitted Activity in Minimum Visual Buffer
1. No existing vegetation of any type, size, or origin shall be altered or removed unless it satisfies
the tree protection requirements of Section 146.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 175
2. Within the minimum visual buffer there shall be no development, clearing, grading, or
construction activity, except for the following:
a. Roadway and/or driveway access to the portion of the site not in the minimum visual
buffer provided that it is approximately perpendicular to right-of-way.
b. Provision for water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, electrical, telephone, natural gas,
cable, etc. service lines provided they are approximately perpendicular to the right-ofway.
In the event that utilities must be installed approximately parallel to the road rightof-
way, an equal amount of buffer may be required to substitute for the area of vegetation
removal. Permission for easement and right-of-way disturbance and clearing for such
services shall be more favorably considered when such activity is consolidated with
vehicular access routes.
c. Pedestrian and bicycle paths designed to provide continuous connection along the road
corridor, provided that they can be constructed without materially reducing the screening
and visual softening capacity of the vegetation buffer.
d. Lighting fixtures only for approved signs or if, for safety reasons, they cannot be placed
outside the buffer and then only when electric utility lines serving these fixtures and
necessary easements can be established and constructed without reducing the screening
and visual softening capacity of the vegetation buffer.
e. Signs in accordance with the sign regulations in Article XV reasonable effort should be
made to locate all signage outside of the buffer.
f. Clear sight distances at the permitted entrances and exits to any development as needed to
provide for reasonable traffic safety, in accordance with accepted traffic engineering
practices.
Section 150. Architectural Review
1. Guidelines. The compatible relationship of architecture along highway corridors is of public
concern. The intent of the architectural review is not to stifle innovative architectural design but
to assure respect for, and reduce incompatible and adverse impacts on, the visual experience from
the roadway. To accomplish this, the Planning Commission shall use the following guidelines in
reviewing proposed structures, site improvements, signs, and streetscape improvements:
a. Proposed development shall avoid excessive or unsightly grading, indiscriminate earth
moving or clearing of property, and removal of trees and vegetation that could cause
disruption of natural water courses or disfigure natural land forms.
b. Proposed development shall be located and configured in a visually harmonious manner
with the terrain and vegetation of the parcel and surrounding parcels. Structures shall
impede, as little as reasonably practical, scenic views from the main road or from existing
structures and the natural environment. Structures shall not dominate, by excessive or
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 176
inappropriate height or mass, any general development, adjacent building, or natural
landscape in an incompatible manner.
c. The architectural design of structures and their materials and colors shall be visually
harmonious with the overall appearance, history, and cultural heritage of the Town, with
natural land forms and existing vegetation and with other development plans approved by
the Town. Specific consideration shall be given to compatibility with adjacent properties
where such projects demonstrate the Town's character.
(1) Large work area doors or open bays shall not open toward or face the highway.
(2) Heating, ventilating, and air conditioning equipment, duct work, air compressors,
other fixed operating machinery shall be either screened from view or located so
that such items are not visible from the highway. Large trash receptacles,
dumpsters, utility meters, above-ground tanks, satellite dishes, antennas, etc.,
shall be similarly treated, as practicably as possible.
(3) Mobile homes and office-type mobile units shall be screened from view from the
highway and equipped with skirting on all sides.
(4) All development, including those in which the principal facade is oriented to the
interior of the lot, shall be designed so that all facades visible from the roadway
or from adjacent sites shall be completed in an aesthetically pleasing manner.
(5) No temporary structures are permitted except those used in conjunction with and
during construction projects.
(6) Fencing along the highway right-of-way is discouraged, but, if used, such fencing
shall be of quality materials (brick, stone, wood) and shall be landscaped to
minimize visibility from the highway.
(7) Long monotonous facade designs including, but not limited to, those
characterized by unrelieved repetition of shape or form or by unbroken extension
of line shall be avoided.
(8) Materials with similar texture and appearance as appropriate to the Town's
character.
(9) Generally, no more than three colors per building should be used. Semitransparent
stains are recommended for application on natural wood finishes.
(10) The location and dimensions of wall signs shall be indicated and shall maintain
compatibility with architectural features of the building.
(11) Architectural lighting shall be recessed under roof overhangs or generated from
concealed source, low level light fixtures.
(12) Building massing should reflect proportion and scale appropriate to the existing
Town design.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 177
d. The landscape plans for the proposed development shall provide visually harmonious and
compatible setting for structures on the same lot and on adjoining or nearby lots and shall
blend with the surrounding landscape. Natural appearing landscape forms are strongly
encouraged; formal plans and the appearance of straight hedges are discouraged.
Landscaping shall be required between buildings and sidewalks, parking lots and
driveways. The scale of the proposed landscaping shall be in proportion to the building.
e. Site lighting shall be of low-intensity from a concealed source, shall be of a clear white
light that does not distort colors, and shall not spill over into adjoining properties, buffers,
roadways, or in any way interfere with the vision of on-coming motorists.
f. To the extent that they relate to aesthetic considerations, the design and construction
techniques of the proposed development shall respond to energy consumption and
environmental quality considerations such as heat loss, heat gain, air emission, and runoff
water quality.
g. Streetscape Improvements and External Changes.
(1) Streetscape improvements include those architectural or functional facilities or
structures that occur on site but are not part of the building and that encourage
and facilitate human interaction with the environment. Examples include, but are
not limited to the following: decorative light fixtures, fountains, sculpture,
benches and tables, planters, retaining walls, pedestrian and bicycle paths,
bicycle parking structure, trash receptacles and enclosures, vendor areas,
bollards, and fences. These improvements shall be designed to be consistent with
all guidelines listed above, and shall be reviewed for aesthetic functionality and
compatibility with the Town's character.
(2) Decorative, low-level intensity, non-concealed source lighting that defines
vehicular and/or pedestrian ways may be acceptable if part of a lighting master
plan. It is strongly discouraged as general lighting for a development. The master
plan must show the relationship of the fixtures and the light patterns to each
other, to the project site, to unit development, and to the highway corridors.
(3) External changes to streetscape improvements and existing structures and sites
subject to review by the Planning Commission shall be consistent with all
guidelines and standards in this section. External changes of a minor nature
include external color and structural material changes, parking lot additions and
alterations, relocation of accessory structures, and similar minor changes as
determined by the Zoning Administrator.
h. Signs, permanent.
(1) Applicants for new or replacement signs in the Highway Corridor Overlay
District shall apply to the Planning Commission for review at the time of full
development review or as a separate application.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 178
(2) The Planning Commission is hereby authorized to approve or disapprove the
appearance of features of such proposed signs and the Administrator's approval
shall be given only after the Commission's approval is granted.
(3) All signs shall meet all requirements of Article XV.
(4) The amount of information on signs shall be no more than is necessary to provide
reasonable identification of the name of the business to the passerby. While
corporate logos that are part of a business name or business identification are
authorized within Article XV, color, size, and subject matter are reviewed under
subsection (1).
(5) An integrated sign system design shall be required for all new Planned
Developments (PDs), commercial and residential subdivisions, office complexes,
and shopping centers within the Highway Corridor District. The establishment of
integrated sign systems for existing developments is strongly encouraged. These
systems shall be reviewed for materials, colors, shapes, sizes, compatibility with
architecture, and establishment of unity of design for the development. Individual
signs shall be reviewed for conformance with such sign systems, whether newly
established or existing.
(6) Materials, colors, and shapes of proposed signs shall be compatible with the
related building(s). Size and proportions shall not be a dominant feature of the
site and shall be judged by sizes and proportions of signs on adjacent and nearby
properties that are compatible with the Town's character.
(7) Spot-lighting of signs shall be restricted to not more than one 150-watt light per
side for sign faces up to 40 square feet and nor more than two 150-watt lights per
sign faces over 40 square feet. The sign base and/or proposed landscaping shall
be designed to shield the light from on-coming motorists and to conceal the light
fixture.
i. Signs, temporary.
(1) Temporary signs within the Highway Corridor Overlay District shall comply
with the design guidelines set forth in this section for colors and materials and
with Article XV and shall be reviewed for such compliance by a committee of
staff members including the Zoning Administrator.
(2) In the case of multiple principals (for example, owner, developer, architect,
engineer, contractor, or real estate or leasing agent), all information shall be
contained on a single sign not to exceed the maximum size and height allowed in
Article XV.
(3) Temporary signs within the corridor shall not be lighted.
2. Following project completion, all design features required by the Town or shown on approved
plans shall be maintained in good condition by all subsequent owners of the property. Changes
proposed shall require approval by the Commission.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 179
Section 151. Waivers of Corridor Requirements
The Planning Commission may waive one or more of the specific requirements of the Special Overlay
District upon a showing by the applicant that these corridor regulations impose an undue hardship due to
the peculiar configuration, topography, or location of the tract, or that the proposed project demonstrates
the use of highly innovative architectural, site planning, or land use techniques. The Commission may
approve any waiver to the minimum extent necessary to allow the project to be constructed. The applicant
for any such waiver shall have the burden of showing that the proposed project, with such waiver granted,
will be as good or better than a project developed in compliance with the District regulations in terms of
environmental protection, aesthetic enhancement, land use compatibility, and traffic considerations. The
grant or denial of a waiver by the Commission pursuant to this section may be appealed to the Board of
Appeals.
Section 152. Planning Commission Review
1. Applicability. All development proposed in the Highway Corridor Overlay District and other
applicable projects shall submit an application to the Zoning Administrator for review by the
Planning Commission. Such application shall be reviewed for consistency with the guidelines and
standards found in this Article and according to the submission and review requirements in this
article. When a project lies within the jurisdiction of a private architectural review committee
(ARB), the Planning Commission shall receive such (ARB)'s written notice of action prior to
review.
2. Requirement of Complete Application; Minimum Items for Review. All applications for this
review shall be complete according to the requirements of this article before being reviewed by
the Zoning Administrator for conformance with all standards and guidelines of this Article. No
application for review shall be reviewed until the minimum items of submission required by this
article have been submitted in a format acceptable to the Zoning Administrator.
3. Application Content. Applications submitted for review shall be considered complete if they
conform to all provisions of Article IV, in addition to the information directly related to those
additional provisions to be addressed as part of the special overlay district review including:
a. tree survey and protection as described in section 146.
b. the boundaries of the Highway Corridor Overlay Zoning District.
c. required Buffer yard according to Section 147.
d. signage.
e. building elevations.
f. proposed streetscape drawings.
g. any additional information for consideration of performance criteria.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 180
h. comments from the Cecil County Technical Advisory Committee, as appropriate.
4. Filing fee.
5. Prior to review, written notice of action by the applicable private (ARB) shall be submitted to the
Administrator.
Section 153. Plan Review Procedures of Application for Corridor Review
All applications for special Highway Corridor District review shall be submitted and reviewed according
to the procedures set forth in this section.
1. Complete applications shall be submitted not less than 21 days before the Commission meeting at
which the applicant wishes to be reviewed.
2. The Commission shall act on an application within 60 days of its being found complete by the
Zoning Administrator.
3. Applicants shall be informed in writing of the outcome of their review. The Commission shall
direct its determination and findings to the Zoning Administrator and the applicant in writing not
more than ten (10) working days after taking action.
4. Upon review of a project within the jurisdiction of a private (ARB), the Commission may accept,
modify, or deny the (ARB's) action.
5. In addition to those items required elsewhere in this article, an application for development plan
approval shall be considered complete by the Zoning Administrator only when the Commission's
final approval with written recommendations and findings shall be received by the Zoning
Administrator, except when the 60 day period for action has been exceeded.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 181
ARTICLE X PERMISSIBLE USES
Section 154. Use of the Designations P, PC, SE and SC in the Table of Permissible Uses
[Amended 1/3/2017 by Ord No. 2016-21]
When used in connection with a particular use in the Table of Permissible Uses, the letter "P" means that
the use is permissible in the indicated zone with a zoning permit issued by the Zoning Administrator.
When used in connection with a particular use in the Table of Permissible Uses, the letter "PC" means
that the use is permissible in the indicated zone with a zoning permit issued by the Zoning Administrator
provided the conditions stipulated in Article XI are met. The letters "SC" mean the conditions of approval
stipulated in Article XII for the proposed use must be met and a special exception permit must be
obtained from the Board of Appeals. The letters "SE" mean a special exception permit must be obtained
from the Board of Appeals.
Section 155. Unclassified Uses
In the event an applicant wishes to use property for a use which is not specifically identified as a principal
permitted use or a special exception use and where such use is not specifically prohibited from the
district, the following provisions shall apply:
1. The Zoning Administrator shall submit to the Board of Appeals a written request for a
determination of the unclassified use.
2. The Board of Appeals shall review the request as submitted and determine if the proposed use is
of a similar character to the district in which it is proposed.
3. If the Board of Appeals determines that the use is of a similar character and meets the intent of
the principal permitted uses within the district, then it shall instruct the Zoning Administrator to
issue a zoning certificate.
4. In the event that the Board of Appeals determines that the proposed use in the district is
consistent with the character and intent of the uses permitted by special exception within the
district, then the applicant shall apply for a special exception in the normal manner.
5. In no event shall the provisions of this section be used to allow an incompatible use or a use
specifically prohibited by this Chapter within a certain district.
6. This section shall not apply to the residential districts.
7. Once a use has been allowed or disallowed by the Board, it shall then be considered classified
under the appropriate category in the district.
8. The Board of Zoning Appeals may use the 1997 North American Industrial Classification System
published by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget as a guide to determining the
appropriate classification of a proposed use.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 182
Section 156. Board of Appeals Jurisdiction
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, whenever the Table of Permissible Uses (interpreted
in the light of the applicable provisions contained in this article) provides that a use in a nonresidential
zone or a nonconforming use in a residential zone is permissible with a zoning permit, a special-exception
permit shall nevertheless be required if the Planning Commission finds that the proposed use would have
an extraordinary impact on neighboring properties or the general public. In making this determination, the
Planning Commission shall consider, among other factors, whether the use is proposed for an
undeveloped or previously developed lot, whether the proposed use constitutes a change from one
principal use classification to another, whether the use is proposed for a site that poses peculiar traffic or
other hazards or difficulties, and whether the proposed use is substantially unique or is likely to have
impacts that differ substantially from those presented by other uses that are permissible in the zoning
district in question.
Section 157. Permissible Uses and Specific Exclusions
1. The presumption established by this zoning Chapter is that all legitimate uses of land in the Town
are provided for within at least one zoning district in the Town's planning jurisdiction. Because
the list of permissible uses set forth in the Table of Permissible Uses cannot be all inclusive, those
uses that are listed shall be interpreted liberally to include other uses that have similar impacts to
the listed uses.
2. Notwithstanding Subsection 1., all uses that are not listed in the Table of Permissible Uses, even
given the liberal interpretation mandated by Subsection 1., are prohibited. Nor shall the Table of
Permissible Uses be interpreted to allow a use in one zoning district when the use in question is
more closely related to another specified use that is permissible in other zoning districts.
3. No building or tract of land shall be devoted to any use other than a use permitted hereinafter in
the zoning district in which such building or tract of land shall be located, with the exception of
the following:
a. Uses lawfully existing on the effective date of this Chapter.
b. Special exceptions, recommended by the Planning Commission and approved by the
Board of Appeals, in accordance with the provisions of Article IV, Part II of this Chapter.
4. Uses lawfully existing on the effective date of this Chapter and rendered non-conforming by the
provisions thereof shall be subject to the regulations of Article VIII of this Chapter.
5. The following uses are specifically prohibited in all districts:
a. Any use that involves the manufacture, handling, sale, distribution, or storage of any
highly combustible or explosive materials.
b. Stockyards, slaughterhouses, rendering plants.
c. Use of a travel trailer or accessory building as a temporary or permanent residence.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 183
c. Use of a motor vehicle parked on a lot as a structure in which, out of which, or from
which any goods are sold or stored, any services are performed, or other business is
conducted.
Section 158. No More Than One Principal Structure on a Lot
1. Every structure hereafter erected, reconstructed, converted, moved or structurally altered shall be
located on a lot of record and in no case shall there be more than one (1) principal structure on a
lot unless as provided in 2 below.
2. More than one principal structure may be located upon a lot in the following instances subject to
the lot, yard and density requirements and other provisions of this Ordinance:
a. Institutional buildings.
b. Public or semi-public buildings.
c. Multiple family dwellings.
d. Commercial or industrial buildings.
e. Manufactured Home Parks.
f. Campgrounds.
g. Additional principal structures in permitted mixed-use projects with the prior approval of
the Zoning Administrator.
h. Condominiums.
Section 159. Accessory Uses
1. The Table of Permissible Uses classifies different principal uses according to their different
impacts. Whenever an activity (which may or may not be separately listed as a principal use in
this table) is conducted in conjunction with another principal use and the former use (a)
constitutes only an incidental or insubstantial part of the total activity that takes place on a lot, or
(b) is commonly associated with the principal use and integrally related to it, then the former use
may be regarded as accessory to the principal use and may be carried on underneath the umbrella
of the permit issued for the principal use. For example, a swimming pool/tennis court complex is
customarily associated with and integrally related to a residential subdivision or multi-family
development and would be regarded as accessory to such principal uses, even though such
facilities, if developed apart from a residential development, would require a special-exception
permit.
2. The following activities, so long as they satisfy the general criteria set forth above, are
specifically regarded as accessory to residential principal uses:
a. Offices or studios within an enclosed building and used by an occupant of a residence
located on the same lot as such building to carry on administrative or artistic activities, so
long as such activities do not fall within the definition of a home occupation.
b. Hobbies or recreational activities of a noncommercial nature.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 184
c. Yard sales or garage sales, so long as such sales are not conducted on the same lot for
more than three days (whether consecutive or not) during any 90-day period.
3. The following activities shall not be regarded as accessory to a residential principal use and are
prohibited in residential districts.
a. Storage outside of a substantially enclosed structure of any motor vehicle that is neither
licensed nor operational.
b. Storage of more than one (1) recreation vehicle and/or boat and boat trailer on a
residential lot, except as may be permitted by the Board of Appeals as provided herein.
4. Except as herein provided, no accessory building shall project beyond a required yard line along
any street.
a. Filling station pumps and pump islands, where permitted, shall not occupy the required
yards.
b. An ornamental fence or wall not more than three and one-half (3½) feet in height may
project into or enclose any required front or side yard to a depth from the street line equal
to the required depth of the front yard. Ornamental fences or walls may project into or
enclose other required yards, provided that such fences and walls do not exceed a height
of six (6) feet.
c. Accessory swimming pools, open and unenclosed, may occupy a required rear or side
yard, provided that they are not located closer than six (6) feet to a rear lot line or ten (10)
feet to an interior side lot line. A walk space at least three (3) feet wide shall be provided
between pool walls and protective fences or barrier walls. Every swimming pool shall be
protected by a safety fence or barrier approved by the Administrator.
e. Permitted accessory storage of a boat, boat trailer or camp trailer shall not be conducted
in a front yard.
f. Accessory buildings which are not a part of the main building, although they may be
connected by an open breezeway, may be constructed in a rear yard, provided that such
accessory building does not occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of the area of the
required rear yard and provided that it is not located closer than five (5) feet to the rear lot
line, nor closer than five (5) feet to a side lot line.
g. Accessory buildings of one hundred fifty (150) square feet or less, attached or detached,
may be constructed in a side yard, provided that the accessory building is not located
closer than five (5) feet to the lot lines.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 185
Section 160. Permissible Uses Not Requiring Permits
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter, no zoning or special-exception permit is necessary
for the following uses:
1. Streets.
2. Neighborhood utility facilities located within a public right-of-way with the permission of the owner
(state or town) of the right-of-way.
Section 161. Permissible Uses Tables
1. More specific use controls. Whenever a development could fall within more than one use
classification in the Table of Permissible Uses, the classification that most closely and most
specifically describes the development controls.
2. Table of Permissible Uses (see separate document).
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 186
ARTICLE XI SUPPLEMENTARY USE REGULATIONS
This Article contains regulations to specific uses that supplement the requirements found in other articles
of this Chapter. The following specific supplementary use regulations are applicable to both specific uses
permitted by right and to uses permitted by special exception as indicated in Article X and in the Table of
Permissible Uses.
Section 162. Accessory Uses [Amended 1/3/2017 by Ord No. 2016-21]
1. Accessory uses shall be permitted in the R-1, R-2, R-3, PUD, TC, and NB districts as follows:
a. Accessory utility buildings of one hundred fifty (150) square feet or less as accessory
structures may be located in the side or rear yards.
b. Private garage.
c. The keeping of small animals, insects, reptiles, fish or birds (not poultry), but only for
personal enjoyment or household use and not as a business. Farm type animals such as
horses, goats, sheep, pigs, chickens, roosters and similar types of animals are not
permitted in any residential district.
d. Swimming pools and game courts, lighted or unlighted, for use of occupants and their
guests.
e. Accessory off-street parking, open or enclosed space, for one (1) commercial vehicle of
not more than 15,000 pounds gross vehicle weight and used by the occupant of a
dwelling shall be permitted as an accessory use.
2. Storage of recreational vehicles, detached caps, boats, and boat trailers not part of an approved
commercial use subject to the following limitations:
a. No more than one (1) recreational vehicle may be stored on a lot. No more than one (1)
boat and/or boat trailer may be stored on a lot. The Board of Appeals may permit storage
of one (1) additional recreational vehicle or up to two (2) boats and/or boat trailers as a
Special Exception on lots of one (1) acres or more.
b. The vehicle or boat shall not be used for living quarters nor shall any business be
conducted therefrom.
c. These vehicle may not be stored in front yards. They may be stored in rear or side yards
provided that they are at least three (3) feet from the property line and in the case of side
yard storage, provided that they are at least three (3) feet from the property line and are
situated at least ten (10) feet to the rear of a lateral projection of the front foundation of
the building. Such vehicle may be stored in any completely enclosed garage.
d. Such vehicle may be stored on a specially marked parking area of a multi-family rental or
condominium unit for residents only. Such areas must be screened from adjacent off-site
uses as required by the Zoning Administrator.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 187
e. A recreational vehicle may be parked on any portion of a residential or mixed
commercial property for a period not more than 24 hours during loading or unloading
only.
Section 163. Adult Bookstore, Adult Entertainment Center, Massage and
Conversation/Relaxation Parlor
Adult bookstores and/or entertainment center may be permitted by the Board of Appeals as a special
exception in the C-2 District provided:
1. That no such establishment shall be nearer than 1,500 feet to any church, school, hospital, or
similar institution for human care;
2. No adult store, center, or studio shall be nearer than 1,000 feet to another adult store, center or
studio; and
3. These establishments, as state above, shall not be permitted in any other zone.
Section 164. Animal Boarding Places, Kennel and Veterinary Hospitals
A veterinary hospital, kennel or animal boarding place may be permitted by the Board of Appeals as a
special exception in the C-2 District and shall be permitted in the L-1 and L-2 Districts provided that:
1. Such animal boarding place shall be located only on a lot having an area of two (2) acres or more;
and
2. No part of any building or area used for such purposes shall be located within 100 feet of any
street or road or the nearest property line, or, in the alternative, that the animals be kept in a
sound-proofed building from 8 PM to 8 am and that no part of any building or any area used for
such purposes shall be located within 50 feet of any street or road or the nearest property line or
within 150 feet from any dwelling other than the house of the owner or person in control of the
boarding place.
3. The Board of Appeals is hereby empowered to increase the restrictions herein provided and to
add others when it is deemed necessary in order to protect the health and safety of residents and
workers on adjoining properties and in the general neighborhood. Such a use shall be for a period
of two years, subject to renewal.
Section 165. Antenna or Tower Greater Than 50 Feet in Height and Associated Substation
[Amended 1/3/2017 by Ord No. 2016-21]
An antenna or tower greater than 50 feet in height and associated substations (radio, television,
microwave broadcasting, etc.) may be permitted as a special exception by the Board of Appeals in any
district provided:
1. All structures shall be located at least 200 feet from an existing dwelling.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 188
2. A minimum 10-foot landscape strip shall be required and maintained around all property lines
exterior to any fence or wall.
3. Any proposed broadcasting tower shall have a setback of one foot from all property lines for
every foot of height of the tower, provided that any broadcasting tower lawfully existing prior to
the effective date of this Chapter shall be exempt from the setback limitations imposed by this
subsection and may be continued, structurally altered, reconstructed, or enlarged provided that no
structural change, repair, addition, alteration, or reconstruction shall result in increasing the height
of such tower above the then existing structurally designed height.
4. The applicant shall demonstrate that a diligent effort has been made to locate the proposed
communication facility on an existing structure or in a non-residential zoning district, and that
due to valid considerations, including physical constraints and economic or technical feasibility,
no other appropriate location is available. An alternative analysis prepared by the applicant shall
address the following:
a. All reasonably feasible alternative locations or facilities that would provide the proposed
communication service;
b. An analysis indicating whether an existing facility can be structurally modified to
accommodate the applicant’s proposed use and coverage;
c. The potential for co-location at an existing or a new site and the potential to locate
facilities as close as possible to the intended service area;
d. The rationale for the selection of the proposed site in view of relative merits of any
feasible alternatives;
e. A system design plan that shall include:
1) Radio frequency parameters;
2) Tower height;
3) Number of antennas that the proposed tower can accommodate at capacity;
4) Radio frequency output; and
5) Effective radiated power and azimuth antenna type.
f. Demonstration of a good faith effort to co-locate with other carriers including a survey of
all existing structures that may be reasonable for co-location and contacts with other
service providers in the county.
Section 166. Antique Shops
An antique shop shall be permitted in TC, C-2, and NB Districts in an existing building or part of an
existing building provided that the original character of the building be maintained; that such use shall not
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 189
constitute a nuisance because of traffic, noise, type of physical activity, or any other element that is
incompatible with the character of the surrounding neighborhoods; and that signs shall be limited to
identification signs – the location and design of the signs shall be subject to the provisions contained in
Article XV.
Section 167. Art or Cultural Centers [Amended 1/3/2017 by Ord No. 2016-21]
An art or cultural center shall be permitted with conditions in the TC, RM, CEMUD and C-2 Districts
upon a finding that the proposed use will not constitute a nuisance because of traffic, noise, number of
persons, or physical activity. Such use may consist of one or more buildings or structures to be devoted
entirely to the furtherance of the arts or culture, including, but not limited to, a theater, museum,
classrooms, or any combination thereof, and may provide for a restaurant or snack bar designed solely for
service of food or refreshments to people using the facilities of the proposed center.
Section 168. Assisted Living Facilities
The Board of Appeals may permit an assisted living facility as a special exception in the R-1, R-2, R-3
and TC districts provided:
1. The maximum number of residents/client is limited to no more than ten (10).
2. The facility is licensed by the State of Maryland and complies with and continues to comply will
all applicable Federal, State and local laws and regulations.
3. The facility shall comply with following minimum requirements unless Federal, State or County
laws or regulations require a higher standard:
a. a minimum of 80 square feet of functional space shall be provided for single occupancy
and 120 square feet for double occupancy rooms;
b. no more than two residents may share a room;
c. facilities previously licensed as domiciliary care homes must provide a minimum of 70
and 120 square feet for single and double occupancy, respectively;
d. buildings must provide at least one toilet for every four occupants and larger buildings
must also have at least one toilet on each floor;
e. showers/baths must be available for every eight (8) occupants;
f. residents/clients shall be provided adequate indoor common areas were social and
recreation activities may occur, including access to television; and
g. where smoking is only permitted or required outside of the building(s), the applicant shall
provide a designated smoking area that is protected from the elements, e.g., overhead
protection from rain.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 190
4. Facilities not complying with current State laws and regulations shall be found to be in violation
of the terms of the special exception and shall cease to operate.
Section 169. Automobile Filling Stations and Emission Testing Facilities
1. An automobile filling station or emission testing facility shall be permitted in the C-2 and L-2
districts, upon a finding, that:
a. The use will not constitute a nuisance because of noise, fumes, odors, or physical activity
in the location proposed.
b. The use at the proposed location will not create a traffic hazard or traffic nuisance
because of its location in relation to similar uses, necessity of turning movements in
relation to its access to public roads or intersections, or its location in relation to other
buildings or proposed buildings on or near the site and the traffic pattern from such
buildings, or by reason of its location near a vehicular or pedestrian entrance or crossing
to a public or private school, park, playground or hospital, or other public use or place of
public assembly.
c. The use at the proposed location will not adversely affect nor retard the logical
development of the general neighborhood or of the industrial or commercial zone in
which the station is proposed, considering service required, population, character,
density, and number of similar uses.
2. In addition, the following requirements shall be complied with:
a. Signs, product displays, parked vehicles, and other obstructions that adversely affect
visibility at intersections or to station driveways shall be prohibited.
b. Lighting, including permitted illuminated signs, shall be arranged so as not to reflect or
cause glare into any residential zone.
c. When such use occupies a corner lot, the ingress or egress driveways shall be located at
least 20 feet from the intersection of the front and side street lines of the lot and such
driveways shall not exceed 45 feet in width, provided that in areas where no master plan
of highways has been adopted the street line shall be considered to be at least 40 feet
from the center line of any abutting street or highway.
d. Gasoline pumps or other service appliances shall be located on the lot at least 10 feet
behind the building line, and all service storage or similar activities in connection with
such use shall be conducted entirely within the building. There shall be at least 20 feet
between driveways on each street, and all driveways shall be perpendicular to the curb or
street line.
e. Light automobile repair work may be done at an automobile filling station, provided that
no major repairs, spray paint operation, or body or fender repair is permitted.
f. Vehicles shall not be parked so as to overhang the public right-of-way.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 191
g. Adequate vehicle stacking is provided so as not to impair access from the street or
pedestrian traffic in the area.
Section 170. Automobile, Motorcycle, and Motor Vehicle Repair and Maintenance, not Including
Body Work
A motor vehicle repair and maintenance shop is limited to the sale, installation, repair, replacement,
modification, adjustment, or servicing of the power plant or drive-train of a vehicle may be permitted as a
special exception by the Board of Appeals in the C-2 District and L-2 districts subject to the following
standards:
1. The minimum lot size shall be 20,000 square feet.
2. All activity and storage of parts with the permitted use shall occur entirely within a completely
enclosed building. Any vehicle storage shall be temporary, in side or rear yards, and screened
from adjacent properties.
3. No building or structure shall be located in any required yard or setback.
4. Wall openings in structures are permitted in those walls directly facing an existing Commercial or
Industrial zoning district. Wall openings necessary for ventilation, fire exits, and light, pursuant to
the standards of the Building Code and the Fire Safety Code, shall be permitted.
5. The maximum permitted total floor area shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of total lot
area.
6. A minimum ten (10) foot wide landscape strip shall be provided adjacent to and completely
across all property lines. Curb cuts shall be minimized.
7. No outdoor display of merchandise sold, serviced, or rented is permitted.
8. Vehicles shall not be parked so as to overhang the public right-of-way.
9. Lubrication Equipment and Outdoor Storage and Refuse Areas. Hydraulic racks and service pits
shall be located within the main structure. Any outdoor storage or refuse area shall be fenced or
screened from view and must be approved as to location and design. The site plan shall indicate
the disposal methods to be used for all waste material including recycling of waste oil generated
by the operation.
10. No maintenance or repair work on motorized vehicles or equipment shall be performed after the
hour of 9:00 PM within any residential zone.
11. Any use of an acetylene torch comprising of welding, cutting or burning shall require a permit
from the Zoning Administrator.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 192
Section 171. Automobile Painting and Body Work
An automotive painting and body shop limited to the painting, repair, or alteration of the auto body may
be permitted as special exception by the Board of Appeals in the C-2 and L-2 districts subject to the
following standards:
1. Minimum lot size shall be 20,000 square feet.
2. All activity and storage associated with the permitted use shall occur entirely within a completely
enclosed building. Vehicles may be temporarily stored in side or rear yards if completely
screened from adjacent properties.
3. No building or structure shall be located in any required yard or setback.
4. Wall openings in structures are permitted in those walls directly facing an existing Commercial or
Industrial zoning district. Wall openings necessary for ventilation, fire exits, and light, pursuant to
the standards of the Building Code and the Fire Safety Code, shall be permitted.
5. The maximum permitted total floor area shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of total lot
area.
6. The minimum ten (10) foot wide landscape strip shall be provided adjacent to and completely
across all property lines. Curb cuts shall be minimized.
7. No outdoor display of merchandise sold, serviced, or rented is permitted.
8. Vehicles shall not be parked so as to overhang the public right-of-way.
9. Buffer yards shall be required to adequately separate this use from adjacent uses or properties in
order to eliminate or minimize potential nuisances such as dirt, litter, noise, glare of lights, signs,
and unsightly buildings or parking areas, or to provide spacing to reduce impacts of noise, odor,
or danger from fires or explosions. Separation from adjacent properties shall be adequate to
address any impact from noxious fumes or odors.
10. Automobile painting and body workshops shall be separated from each other or similar uses such
a distance as to eliminate the combined effects of odors or concentration of fumes.
Section 172. Automobile and Light Truck Storage Lots
An automobile and light truck storage lot may be permitted in the C-2 and L-2 District for use in
connection with a towing operating, but not for the storage of junked cars.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 193
Section 173. Automobile, Truck, and Trailer Rentals, Outdoors
1. A lot for the storage and rental of only the following rental vehicles: automobiles, light trailers of
such limited size and capacity so as to be capable of being safely towed by a passenger motor
vehicle designed for carrying less than 10 passengers, and light and medium duty trucks may be
permitted as a special exception by the Board of Appeals in the C-2 and L-2 Districts upon a
finding that:
a. The use will not constitute a nuisance because of noise, fumes or odors, or physical
activity in the location proposed.
b. The use at the proposed location will not create a traffic hazard to traffic nuisance
because of its location in relation to similar uses, necessity of turning movements in
relation to its access to public roads or intersections, or its location in relation to other
buildings or proposed buildings on or near the site, and the traffic pattern from such
buildings, or by reason of its location near a vehicular or pedestrian entrance or crossing
to a public or private school, park, playground, hospital, or other public use or place of
public assembly.
c. The use at the proposed location will neither adversely affect nor retard the logical
development of the general neighborhood or of the commercial zone in which the lot is
proposed considering service required, population, character, density, and number of
similar uses.
2. In addition, the following requirements shall be complied with:
a. Unless the use is accessory to motor vehicle-related fuel sales, gasoline pumps and other
service appliances shall not be permitted, except that not more than one gasoline pump
shall be permitted, but only for the fueling of rental vehicles. No major repairs, spray
paint operation, or body or fender repair shall be permitted.
b. Vehicles shall be stored or parked only on a surface area constructed of material that will
assure a surface resistant to erosion and adequately treated to prevent dust emission,
surround by a raised curb. The curb shall be located so that no vehicle can be parked or
stored within 15 feet of any street line, nor within 15 feet of any property line adjoining
land in a residential zone, nor with three feet of any property line. In a Commercial zone,
the entire lot shall be on or near grade with the most traveled abutting street or highway.
c. There shall be at least 20 feet between access driveways on each street, and all driveways
shall be perpendicular to the curb or street line.
d. When such a use occupies a corner lot, no access driveway shall be located less than 20
feet from the intersection of the front and side street lines of the lot and no such driveway
shall exceed 45 feet in width. In areas where no master plan of highways has been
adopted, the street line shall be considered to be at least 40 feet from the centerline of any
abutting street or highway.
e. Signs, product displays, parked vehicles, and other obstructions that would adversely
affect visibility at intersection or to driveways shall be prohibited.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 194
f. Lighting shall be low level and so arranged as not to reflect or to cause glare into any
residential zone.
g. When such use abuts a residential zone or institutional premises and is not effectively
screened by a natural terrain feature, the use shall be screened by a solid wall or a
slightly, substantial solid fence not less than five feet in height, together with a three-foot
planting strip on the outside of such wall or fence, planted in shrubs and evergreens. The
failure of the owner and/or operator to maintain any required planting so that they exist in
a flourishing and healthy condition is grounds for revocation of the occupancy permit.
Section 174. Bed and Breakfasts, Country Inns
Bed and breakfasts and country inns may be permitted as a special exception by the Board of Appeals in
the R-2, R-3, and TC districts subject to the following standard:
1. The use is temporary, for a period of not more than three years, subject to renewal.
2. The proposed establishment shall have direct access from a publicly owned and maintained road
or street.
3. One off-street parking space shall be provided for each guest room and shall be located at the rear
of the site. Furthermore parking areas shall be 50 feet from any adjacent residentially zoned
property or shall be adequately screened.
4. The Board of Appeals may require the establishment be owner/manager occupied and managed
5. Accessory commercial activities such as weddings, graduation, and similar parties are allowed
only if included as part of the special exception application.
6. Facilities for dining shall be in the location customarily used by a single family in the structure.
7. No separate kitchen shall be provided.
8. All requirements of the Town Building Code shall be met if required.
9. The Board of Appeals may permit the bed and breakfast or country inn to include a small retail
shop located in the principal building and primarily serving guests of the facility. The floor area
dedicated to retail shop use shall be shown on an accompanying floor plan and shall be limited to
the area shown and approved by the Board of Appeals. Additional parking shall be provided at
the rate of one parking space per 300 square feet of gross floor area dedicated to retail use.
Section 175. Campgrounds and Recreational Vehicle Parks
Campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks may be permitted as a special exception in the C-2 zone
provided:
1. Such use shall be located only on a lot having an area of two (2) acres or more.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 195
2. The maximum density does not exceed twenty (20) campsites per acre.
3. Each camp shall make available an adequate potable water supply and a sewage disposal system
at such locations and of such construction as may be required by the Cecil County Health
Department.
4. Each camp shall provide facilities for sanitary and health purposes in accordance with Health
Department requirements.
5. A minimum of thirty (30) percent of the total camp area shall be reserved for open space. For
campgrounds in the Critical Area, a minimum of sixty (60) percent open space shall be provided.
Open space areas shall not include areas required for individual campsites, roads, or service areas.
6. Garbage and trash collection stations shall be provided in such numbers and at such locations so
as to provide for the convenient and sanitary storage and collection of garbage and trash. Such
facilities shall be screened from view. Screening, fencing and other designed considerations shall
be designed so as to contain all trash and garbage in the collection station and prevent littering in
the vicinity of the facilities. Servicing of garbage and trash collection facilities shall be the
responsibility of the park owner/operator and will not be provided by the Town.
7. Each park shall provide such fire protection equipment as may be required by the County or State
Fire Marshall.
8. Interior roadways serving individual campsites in campgrounds shall be a minimum of twenty
(20) feet in width and interior collector roads shall be a minimum of forty (40) feet in width. All
roads shall be constructed of a durable surface to adequately serve all campsites.
9. All sites shall be setback a minimum of fifty (50) feet from adjacent property lines and State and
County roads. All sites shall be set back twenty (20) feet from all interior roads.
10. All campgrounds shall be surrounded by a buffer yard meeting the C standard in Appendix B.
Existing natural vegetation, if appropriate, may be utilized to satisfy this requirement.
11. Each site shall contain a stabilized parking pad of shell, marl, paving, or other suitable material.
No part of any unit placed on a campground site shall be closer than five (5) feet to a site line.
Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of the campground shall be paved, or covered with stone
screening or other solid material, or protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of
preventing soil erosion and of eliminating objectionable dust.
12. There shall be at least three (3) off-street parking spaces designated for each two campground
sites. Such parking may be provided in common areas or on individual sites.
13. All campgrounds, including all facilities, roadways, and landscaping thereon shall be maintained
in a neat, orderly and attractive appearance.
14. Commercial uses may be permitted subject to site plan review and approval of the building
design and location, but shall be limited such uses as grocery stores and laundry establishments to
serve the users of the campground. No such commercial establishment shall be larger than five
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 196
(5) square feet for each campsite and such establishments shall be shown on the approved site
plan.
15. A major site plan shall be submitted to and approved by the Town.
16. Campgrounds may only operate from April 1 through October 31. All camper units and
recreation vehicles must be legally licensed and highway ready at all times.
Section 176. Car washes and Automobile Laundries
Car washes and automobile laundries, automatic or otherwise, may be permitted by the Board of Appeals
in the C-2 district as a special exception provided reservoir space for not less than ten (10) vehicles for
each washing lane of an employee-operated facility is provided.
Section 177. Cargo Trailers and Closed-Body Trucks Used As Storage Structures
Use of cargo trailers and closed-body trucks for temporary storage structures may be permitted by the
Board of Appeals as a special exception use in the C-2 District and shall be permitted in the I-1 and I-2
Districts provided:
1. No such vehicle shall be parked in a commercial area for more than two (2) consecutive working
days unless a permit is obtained from the Zoning Administrator.
2. This permit shall be valid for a period of not more than six (6) months and may not be extended.
Section 178. Cemeteries
Cemeteries, including a crematorium, may be permitted by the Board of Appeals as a special exception in
the C-2 district provided that:
1. The minimum area of the cemetery shall be ten (10) acres, unless associated with a church or
limited to use by a family.
2. Arrangements are made satisfactory to the Town Attorney for perpetual maintenance of the
cemetery.
3. A crematorium shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from the boundaries of the
cemetery.
4. Cemeteries for pets may be permitted in the C-2 district provided:
a. The minimum area of the cemetery shall be five (5) acres.
b. Arrangements are made satisfactory to the Town Attorney for perpetual maintenance of
the cemetery.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 197
Section 179. Construction Trailers, Temporary Storage Trailers, and Temporary Sales Offices
Temporary storage trailers, construction trailers and temporary sales office trailers may be permitted by
the Zoning Administrator in any zoning district for a period of not to exceed six (6) months provided:
1. No trailer is located in the front of a residential structure.
2. All applicable setback requirements for the district are met.
3. The Zoning Administrator may grant a one-time extension of up to six (6) months.
Section 180. Child or Elderly Care Centers and Nursing and Care Facilities
1. Child or elderly care centers serving between seven (7) and thirty (30) children or elderly persons
may be permitted as a special exception in the C-2 and child or elderly care centers serving no
more than seven (7) persons shall be permitted in R-1, R-2, R-3, NB, and TC districts subject to
the following:
a. The proposed facilities meet all applicable requirements of County, State and/or federal
regulations.
b. The applicant shall provide 100 square feet of usable outdoor recreation area for each
child that may use this space at any one time. Such usable outdoor recreation area shall
be identified on the site plan and shall be sufficiently buffered from adjacent residential
area. Usable outdoor recreation areas shall be limited to the side and rear yard of the
property. Recreational areas shall not include the required front yard of the property or
any off-street parking areas.
c. All such uses shall be located so as to permit the safe pickup and delivery of all people on
this site.
d. Such use shall not constitute a nuisance because of traffic, insufficient parking, number
of individuals being cared for, noise, or type of physical activity; and
e. The area of the property shall contain no less than 1,000 square feet per client being cared
for.
f. The Board may prescribe specific conditions determined necessary to minimize effects of
use on neighboring properties given identification of concerns specific to a particular site.
g. Hours of operation are limited to 6 AM to 7 PM daily.
h. The requirements of these sections shall not apply to child or elderly day care facilities or
centers that are operated by a non-profit organization in buildings, structures, or on
premises owned or leased by a religious organization and which premises are regularly
used as a place of worship or are located on premises owned or leased by a religious
organization adjacent to premises regularly used as a place of worship, or are used for
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 198
private parochial educational purposes that are exempted under the provisions of this
section for private educational institutions or are located in publicly owned school
buildings.
2. Nursing care home, institutions, intermediate care institutions, handicapped or infirm institutions,
child care institutions for more than seven (7) people may be permitted as special exception by
the Board of Appeals in the C-2 district provided:
a. The proposed facilities meet all applicable requirements of County, State and/or federal
regulations and meets the minimum requirements set forth in 1 above.
b. The Board finds that such use will not constitute a nuisance because of traffic, noise, or
number of patients or people being cared for; that, except for buildings completed prior to
the time of adoption of this section and additions thereto, such use will be housed in
buildings architecturally compatible with other buildings in the surrounding
neighborhood; that such use will not adversely affect the present character or future
development of the surrounding residential community; and that such use can and will be
developed in conformity with the following minimum area, density, coverage, frontage,
setback, access, and screening requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area, as stated in the applicable zone, but in no case less than one
acre.
(2) Maximum density.
(a) One bed per 800 square feet of net lot area in any residential zone.
(b) One bed per 600 square feet of net lot area in commercial zones.
(3) Minimum lot frontage, as stated in the requirements for the applicable zone.
(4) Minimum setbacks.
(a) Front yards, as specified for the applicable zone, except that, for
purposes of this section, all yards facing a street shall be considered front
yards.
(b) Side yards. The following minimums are in addition to those otherwise
required in the various zones:
(1) 1.0 feet for each side yard for each bed in a residential zone.
(2) 1.0 feet for each side yard for each bed in commercial and
planned development zones.
(3) In no case shall any minimum side yard be required to be greater
than 50 feet more than would otherwise be required in the
applicable zone.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 199
(c) Back yards: one-half of the total of both side yards as required in
paragraph (b) above, but not less than the minimum required in the
applicable zone.
(5) Minimum screening, as determined by the Board with special attention given to
off-street parking and loading areas in accordance with Articles XVII and in no
case less than buffer yard `C' as shown in Appendix B.
(6) The Board shall increase the number of off-street parking spaces required for
nursing or care homes under Article XVII where the operation or method of
operation, or type of care to be provided, indicates such increase will be needed.
Section 181. Drive-in Banks
Drive-in/ banks may be permitted as a special exception by the Board of Appeals in the TC and NB
districts and shall be permitted in the CEMUD, C-2, L-1 and L-2 Districts provided:
1. The use will not constitute a nuisance because of noise, illumination, fumes, odors, or physical
activity in the location proposed.
2. The use at the proposed location will not create a traffic hazard or traffic nuisance because of its
location in relation to similar uses, necessity of turning movements in relation to its access to
public roads and intersections, or its location in relation to other buildings or proposed buildings
on or near the site and the traffic patterns from such buildings or cause frequent turning
movements across sidewalks and pedestrian ways, thereby disrupting pedestrian circulation
within a concentration of retail activity. A traffic impact study shall be required.
3. The use of the proposed location will not pre-empt frontage on any highway or public road in
such manner so as to substantially reduce the visibility and accessibility of an interior commercial
area zoned or proposed for commercial use that is oriented to the same highway or public road.
4. When such use abuts a residential zone or institutional premises the use shall be screened by a
solid wall or a substantial, slightly, solid fence, not less than five feet in height, together with a
three-foot wide planting strip on the outside of such wall or fence, planted in shrubs and
evergreens three feet high at the time of original planting and which shall be maintained in good
condition. Location, maintenance, vehicle sight distance provision, advertising, and parking areas
pertaining to screening shall be as provided for in this Chapter.
5. When such use occupies a corner lot, the ingress or egress driveways shall be located at least 20
feet from the intersection of the front and side street lines of the lot and such driveways shall not
exceed 25 feet in width, provided that, in areas where no master plan of highways has been
adopted, the street line shall be considered to be at least 60 feet from the centerline of any
abutting street or highway.
6. Drive through lanes shall be marked with distinctive pavement markings and/or special striping
and shall not block exit or entry to building or to off-street parking spaces otherwise required on
the site.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 200
7. Adequate spaces for stacking (line-up) at drive through facilities shall be provided. Specifically,
five for first station plus two for each additional station.
8. Vehicular access shall not be by means of any street internal to a subdivisions for single-family
dwellings.
Section 182. Drive-in/Fast Food Restaurants
Drive-in/fast food restaurants shall be permitted in the C-2 District provided:
1. The use will not constitute a nuisance because of noise, illumination, fumes, odors, or physical
activity in the location proposed.
2. The use at the proposed location will not create a traffic hazard or traffic nuisance because of its
location in relation to similar uses, necessity of turning movements in relation to its access to
public roads and intersections, or its location in relation to other buildings or proposed buildings
on or near the site and the traffic patterns from such buildings or cause frequent turning
movements across sidewalks and pedestrian ways, thereby disrupting pedestrian circulation
within a concentration of retail activity. A traffic impact study shall be required.
3. The use of the proposed location will not pre-empt frontage on any highway or public road in
such manner so as to substantially reduce the visibility and accessibility of an interior commercial
area zoned or proposed for commercial use that is oriented to the same highway or public road.
4. No buildings shall be located closer than seventy-five (75) feet to any residential dwelling unit.
5. When such use abuts a residential zone or institutional premises the use shall be screened by a
solid wall or a substantial, slightly, solid fence, not less than five (5) feet in height, together with
a three-foot wide planting strip on the outside of such wall or fence, planted in shrubs and
evergreens three feet high at the time of original planting and which shall be maintained in good
condition. Location, maintenance, vehicle sight distance provision, advertising, and parking areas
pertaining to screening shall be as provided for in this Chapter.
6. When such use occupies a corner lot, the ingress or egress driveways shall be located at least 20
feet from the intersection of the front and side street lines of the lot and such driveways shall not
exceed 25 feet in width, provided that, in areas where no master plan of highways has been
adopted, the street line shall be considered to be at least 60 feet from the centerline of any
abutting street or highway.
7. Drive through lanes shall be marked with distinctive pavement markings and/or special striping
and shall not block exit or entry to building or to off-street parking spaces otherwise required on
the site.
8. Adequate spaces for stacking (line-up) at drive through facilities shall be provided. Specifically,
seven per station, five of which must be before the ordering station (intercom).
9. Vehicular access shall not be by means of any street internal to a subdivisions for single-family
dwellings.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 201
Section 183. Dwelling - Manufactured Home - Double-wide
1. Double-wide manufactured homes shall be permitted as a principal structure in the MHCD
provided:
a. The home has a length not less than 40 feet and a width not less than 24 feet;
b. The pitch of the home's roof has a minimum vertical rise of three (3) feet for each twelve
(12) feet of horizontal run, and the roof is finished with a type of shingle that is
commonly used in standard residential construction with a minimum four (4) inch roof
overhang;
c. The exterior siding consists of wood, hardboard, or aluminum (vinyl covered or painted,
but in no case exceeding the reflectivity of gloss white paint) comparable in composition,
appearance, and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in standard residential
construction;
d. The home is permanently affixed to a continuous, permanent masonry foundation,
unpierced except for required ventilation and access, is installed under the home; and
e. The tongue, axles, transporting lights, and removable towing apparatus are removed after
placement on the lot and before occupancy.
2. Double-wide manufactured homes may be permitted as a special exception in the C-2, LI-1 and
LI-2 zones as on-site security provided that the unit is not on a permanent foundation.
Section 184. Dwelling - Manufactured Home - Single-wide
A single-wide manufactured home may be permitted by the Board of Appeals as a special exception in
the LI-1 and LI-2 zones provided that the manufactured home is for the purposes of providing security for
a business or industry conducted on the parcel where the manufactured home is to be located.
Section 185. Education Institutions, Private
Private education institutions may be permitted as a special exception by the Board of Appeals in any
residential district and the TC district and shall be permitted in the C-2 district provided:
1. That such use will not constitute a nuisance because of traffic, number of students, noise, type of
physical activity, or any other element that is incompatible with the environment and character of
the surrounding neighborhoods; and
2. That, except for buildings and additions thereto completed, or for which building permits have
been obtained prior to the time of adoption of this section, such use will be housed in buildings
architecturally compatible with other buildings in the surrounding neighborhoods, and, in the
event that such building is to be located on a lot, tract, or parcel of land of two acres or less, in
either an undeveloped area or an area substantially developed with single-family homes, that the
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 202
exterior architecture of such building will be of a residential home design and at least comparable
to existing residential homes, if any, in the immediate neighborhood; and
3. That such use will not, in and of itself or in combination with other existing uses, affect adversely
or change the present character or future development of the surrounding residential community;
and
4. That such use can and will be developed in conformity with the following area, density, building
coverage, frontage, setback, access, and screening requirements, where specified:
a. Area, frontage, and setback. As shall be specified in a site plan of development approved
by the Planning Commission, provided that in no event shall such standards be less than
the area regulations for the zone in which the private educational institution is proposed
to be located; and
b. Access building coverage and screening. As shall be specified in a site plan of
development approved by the Planning Commission; and
c. Density. Such density, being the allowable number of pupils per acre permitted to occupy
the premises at any one time, as shall be specified by the Board upon consideration of the
following factors:
(1) Traffic patterns, including:
(a) Impact of increased traffic on residential streets;
(b) Existence of arterial highways; and
(c) Noise or type of physical activity;
(2) Character, percentage, and density of existing development and zoning within the
community; and
(3) Topography of the land to be used for the special exception, provided that in no
event shall a special exception be granted for a density in excess of 87 pupils per
acre.
5. If the school offers general academic instruction below college level, an outdoor play area (or
other outdoor activity area) shall be required that shall have a usable space of at least 100 square
feet per student. The area shall be located at least 25 feet from any adjoining lot.
6. Exemptions. The requirements of this section shall not apply to the use of any lot, lots, or tract of
land for any private educational institution or parochial school that is located in a building or on
premises owned or leased by any church or religious organization, the government of the United
States, the State of Maryland, or any agency thereof, Cecil County, or the Town of Perryville.
7. Non-conforming uses. Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent any existing private educational
institution that obtained a special exception prior to the effective date of this Chapter from
continuing its use to the full extent authorized under the resolution granting the respective special
exception.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 203
Section 186. Excavation, Borrow Pits, Extraction, Removal of Sand, Gravel or Stone, Stripping
of Topsoil
Excavation, borrow pits, extraction, removal of sand, gravel or stone, stripping of topsoil (but not
including stripping of sod), other than for construction of spools and foundations for buildings and other
than those approved in connection with a street, subdivision or planned residential development may be
permitted by the Board of Appeals in the I-2 district as a special exception provided that:
1. The use shall be for a period not to exceed three (3) years.
2. Operations shall be limited in their hours of operation from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday.
3. No material may be brought from off the site for processing, mixing or similar purposes.
4. The excavating or extraction operation shall be controlled to offer reasonable protection to
surrounding properties and the neighborhood, particularly as regards use of any residential streets
for access to the site.
5. The operation shall be conducted so as not to be ecologically detrimental to the wetlands,
streams, rivers and other essential waterways.
6. The location of the excavation or extraction with respect to property lines, the depth of excavation
and relation to the water table or flood criteria and the slope of the sides of the excavation shall be
controlled to prevent a continuing, unsightly, hazardous or wasteful condition of the land.
7. At the conclusion of the operation, the operator of such use shall be required to reestablish a
uniform contour of the ground level and shall provide a suitable ground cover.
Section 187. Festivals, Events of Public Interest or Special Events, Occasional, Outdoor
[Amended 1/3/2017 by Ord No. 2016-21]
Occasional outdoor festivals or special events, including, but not limited to horse shows, carnivals, dog
shows, arts and crafts shows, music festivals, etc., and seasonal business use may be permitted in any
district by the Zoning Administrator provided that fees are paid and licenses obtained as required by the
Town of Perryville and further provided:
1. The proposed site shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the use without adversely affecting
adjacent land uses.
2. No temporary sanitary facility or trash receptacle may be located within 200 feet of an existing
dwelling; no tent shall be located within 250 feet of an existing dwelling.
3. A drawing to scale shall accompany the application and shall accurately depict the standards of
this section.
4. Non-recurring festivals or events shall not exceed seven days in any 12 consecutive months.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 204
5. Seasonal business uses shall not exceed a total of 90 days in any 12 consecutive months.
6. A maximum continuous sound level of 60 db and a maximum peak sound level of 75 db shall not
be exceeded adjacent to land used for residential purposes, and operations shall cease not later
than 11:30 PM.
7. Activity areas shall be at least 500 feet from a residential district.
8. Vehicular access shall be derived only from an arterial or major collector highway or street.
9. A minimum of one parking space shall be provided for every 500 square feet of ground area.
10. In cases where it is deemed necessary, the applicant may be required to post a bond to ensure
compliance with the conditions of the conditional-use permit.
11. If the permit applicant requests the Town to provide extraordinary services or equipment or it is
otherwise determined that extraordinary services or equipment should be provided to protect the
public health or safety, the applicant shall be required to pay to the Town a fee sufficient to
reimburse the Town for the costs of these services. These requirements shall not apply if the
event has been anticipated in the budget process and sufficient funds have been included in the
budget to cover the costs incurred. In addition, the applicant shall be required to maintain
adequate liability insurance coverage as may be deemed appropriate.
Section 188. Funeral Parlors, Undertaking Establishments, or Mortuaries
1. The use of a tract or parcel of land or buildings for a funeral parlor or undertaking establishment
may be permitted as a special exception by the Board of Appeals in the NB District and shall be
permitted in the C-2 District provided that:
a. The use will not constitute a nuisance because of noise, traffic, or type of physical
activity. Such use shall be devoted to services usually incident to funeral parlor and
undertaking establishment operation including, but not limited to, transportation of
human remains to and from the premises; embalming, cosmeticing, and casketing of
remains; visiting of the premises by decedents' families and the general public for the
purpose of viewing the remains and conducting business with the establishment; delivery
and storage of caskets, including a room or area devoted to display thereof, provided the
cremation of remains is expressly prohibited. In any residential zone, the premises shall,
and, in any commercial zone, may maintain either as a separate building or a portion of
the main building one dwelling unit, which shall be occupied by the owner or an
employee of the establishment.
b. The property and building shall conform to the following:
(1) The percentage of the lot covered by buildings shall not exceed 25 percent.
(2) Minimum lot area: one acre.
(3) Minimum front yard setback: 75 feet.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 205
(4) Minimum side yard setback: 25 feet each side.
(5) Minimum rear yard setback: 25 feet.
(6) Building height limit: same as specified in the applicable zone.
(7) Minimum frontage at the building line: 100 feet.
(8) The grounds and exterior of all buildings shall be kept and maintained in
conformity with the prevailing standards of the community.
(10) The following additional requirements shall also be met:
(a) Special conditions, such as provisions for additional fencing or planting
or other landscaping, additional setback from property lines, location,
arrangement of lighting, and other reasonable requirements deemed
necessary to safeguard the general community interest and welfare, as
may be invoked by the Planning Commission and/or the Board of
Appeals as requisites to the approval.
Section 188.1. Gaming Establishment [Amended 2-18-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-1]
Gaming establishments shall be a permitted use in an approved CEMUD Floating Zone provided that
their approval is subject to the design conditions established as part of the approved Preliminary and Final
Site Plans.
Section 189. Greenhouses, Commercial Nurseries
A horticultural nursery or commercial greenhouse may be, together with buildings incidental thereto,
permitted as a special exception in the NB District and shall be permitted in the C-2, L-1 and L-2
Districts, upon a finding that such use will not constitute a nuisance because of traffic, noise, or other
factors. The sale of plants, trees, shrubs, seeds, fertilizers, plant foods, hand tools, hand spraying and
watering equipment, and pesticides directly related to residential gardening shall be permitted, provided
that such tools and equipment are not displayed outdoors. Nothing herein shall be construed to permit the
sale or storage of general hardware or power equipment. No such horticultural nursery or commercial
greenhouse shall be located on a tract of land containing less than two acres and no part of any building
thereon shall be less than 50 feet from the nearest property line. Greenhouses shall have a minimum
setback of twice the height of the building, and storage of all materials which produce odors or attract
pests shall be effectively covered.
Section 190. Golf Courses and Country Clubs
1. A golf course, country club, private club, or service organization including community buildings,
may be permitted as a special exception by the Board of Appeals in the R-1 and R-2 districts
upon a finding that the proposed use will not adversely affect surrounding residential uses
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 206
because of noise, traffic, number of people, or type of physical activity, providing that the
following standards and requirements can be met:
a. The provision of food, refreshments, and entertainment for club or organization members
and their guests may be allowed in connection with such use, provided the availability of
such services is not reasonably expected to draw an excessive amount of traffic through
local residential streets.
b. All buildings shall conform to the height, coverage, and setback regulations of the zone in
which they are located, and all facilities shall be so located as to conform to other special
exception standards.
c. All outdoor lighting shall be located, shielded, landscaped, or otherwise buffered so that
no direct light shall constitute an intrusion into any residential area. A comprehensive
lighting plan shall accompany any application for a golf course and/or county club.
d. A minimum 100-foot setback for all buildings and parking areas shall be provided
adjacent to single-family dwelling districts or uses.
e. Vehicular access shall be derived from an arterial street.
f. Twenty parking spaces shall be provided per nine holes and one space per 500 square feet
of club floor area.
g. A minimum 50-foot buffer shall be provided adjacent to the clubhouse/office and parking
areas when said facilities are located adjacent to single-family dwelling districts or uses.
h. A minimum 25-foot buffer shall be provided adjoining single-family zoning or uses not
part of the golf course development.
i. Off-street parking and loading areas, tennis courts, golf tees, and maintenance facilities
may require additional screening as determined by the Board.
2. A golf course, including miniature golf courses, putting greens, driving ranges and similar
activities operated as a business, and including a building for a golf shop, locker room and snack
bar as an accessory use to a permitted golf course may be permitted by the Board of Appeals as
special exception in the C-2 district provided:
a. No such building is located closer than one hundred (100) feet to adjoining property
lines.
b. Practice greens and tees may accompany a standard nine-hole or eighteen-hole golf
course occupying at least seventy-five (75) acres.
Section 191. Golf Driving Range
A golf driving range may be permitted as a special exception by the Board of Appeals in the C-2 District,
provided that the surrounding area is predominantly undeveloped. Such a use shall be for a period of not
more than two years, subject to renewal.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 207
Section 192. Home-Based Business
1. The Town recognizes the desire and/or need of some citizens to use their residence for business
activities in order to reduce travel and to provide another economic development tool, but also
recognizes the need to protect the surrounding areas from the adverse impacts generated by these
business activities. The standards in this section ensure that the home-based business remains
subordinate to the residential use, and that the residential character of the dwelling unit is
maintained. The standards recognize that many types of jobs can be done in a home with little or
no effects on the surrounding neighborhood.
a. A type 1 home-based business shall be permitted by the Zoning Administrator in the R-1,
R-2, R-3, TC, and NB districts.
b. A type 2 home-based business shall be permitted by the Zoning Administrator in the TC
and NB districts and may be permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals as a special
exception in the R-1, R-2, and R-3 districts provided that such use shall conform to the
following standards which shall be the minimum requirements:
a. Description of Type 1 and Type 2 Home-Based Businesses. There are two types
of home-based businesses, Type 1 and Type 2. Uses are allowed as home-based
businesses only if they comply with all of the requirements of this Chapter.
(1) Type 1. A type 1 home-based business is one wherein the residents use
their home as a place of work; however, no employees or customers
come to the site. Examples include, but are not limited to, artists, crafts
people, writers and consultants. Type 1 home-based businesses also
provide an opportunity for a home to be used as a business address but
not as a place of work.
(2) Type 2. A type 2 home-based business is one where either one employee
or customers/clients come to the site. Examples are counseling, tutoring,
and other such instructional services.
(3) Determination of whether or not a proposed home-based business is a
type 1 or type 2 home-based business shall be made by the Zoning
Administrator.
b. Permitted Home-Based Businesses. Examples of permitted home-based
businesses include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following:
(1) Offices for such professionals as, but not limited to, architects, brokers,
counselors, clergy, doctors, draftspersons and cartographers, engineers,
land planners, insurance agents, lawyers, real estate agents, accountants,
editors, publishers, journalists, psychologists, contract management,
graphic design, construction contractors, landscape design, surveyors,
cleaning services, salespersons, and manufacturer’s representatives,
travel agents.
(2) Instructional services, including music, dance, art and craft classes.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 208
(3) Studios for artists, sculptors, photographers and authors.
(4) Workrooms for tailors, dressmakers, milliners, and craft persons,
including weaving, lapidary, jewelry, making cabinetry, and
woodworking.
c. Prohibited Home-Based Businesses. Prohibited home-based businesses include, but are
not necessarily limited to, the following:
(1) Kennels, stables, veterinary hospitals, animal grooming
(2) Medical and dental clinics, hospitals
(3) Restaurants, clubs, drinking establishments
(4) Motor vehicle/small engine repair, vehicle body work, and gasoline stations
(5) Undertaking and funeral parlors
(6) Bed and breakfast and country inn
(7) Retail sales of goods not made on the premises
(8) Adult uses
(9) Group homes
(10) Assisted living
(11) Private educational institutions,
(12) Gift shops, grocery stores,
(13) Beauty shops, barbershops, nail salons
d. Operational Standards
(1) Customer/client visits to a Type 2 home-based business are limited to the hours
from 8:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M. Conditions of approval established by the Board of
Zoning Appeals shall specify the maximum number of customer/client visits that
may occur in any one day and the maximum number of customers/clients that
can be present at any one time.
(2) A Type 2 home-based business shall have no more than one (1) nonresident
employee on the premises at any one time. The number of nonresident employees
working at other locations other than the home-based business is not limited.
(3) The home-based business shall be limited to the parking/storage of one (1)
commercial vehicle on the premises, not exceeding a 15,000 pounds gross
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 209
vehicle weight. Such vehicle shall not be parked in any required front yard or in
front of any residential structure.
(4) Type 1 Home Based Businesses are not required to provide any additional
parking beyond what is required for the residential use. Type-2 Home Based
Businesses shall provide two (2), hard, dust-free parking areas located outside of
the front and side yards.
(5) The equipment used by the home-based business and the operation of the homebased
business shall not create any vibration, heat, glare, dust, odor, or smoke
discernable at the property lines, generate noise exceeding 60 decibels at the
property line from 8:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M., generate any noise discernable by the
human ear at the property lines from 6:00 P.M. to 8:00 A.M., create electrical,
magnetic or other interference off the premises, consume utility quantities that
negatively impact the delivery of those utilities to surrounding properties, or
use/or store hazardous materials in excess of the quantities permitted in a
residential structure.
e. Site Related Standards
(1) Outdoor activities.
(a) All activities must be in a completely enclosed structures.
(b) Exterior storage or display of goods or equipment is prohibited.
(2) Appearance of structure and site. The dwelling and site must remain residential
in appearance and characteristics. Internal or external changes which will make
the dwelling appear less residential in nature or function are prohibited.
Examples of such prohibition alterations include construction of parking lots,
paving a required setbacks, or adding commercial exterior lighting.
(3) Signage shall be limited to one sign not exceeding four (4) square feet in area
mounted flush with and on the front facade of the dwelling unit.
Section 193. Hospitals, Clinics and Other Medical Treatment Facilities [Amended 1/3/2017 by
Ord No. 2016-21]
1. Medical clinics of less than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area may be permitted by the Board
of Appeals in the TC and NB district and shall be permitted C-2 district subject to the following:
a. Site requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area, 40,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum frontage, 200 feet.
(3) Minimum setback, 40 feet from all property lines.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 210
(4) Maximum building height, as specified in zone.
(5) Location of access on business district street, arterial, or major highways.
(6) Located at least 1,000 feet from any structure used as a house of worship or
school.
(7) Located at least 1,000 feet from any residential district.
(8) A narrative shall be provided that describes the method and type of treatment to
be administered as well as the clientele proposed to use the facility. The narrative
will need to provide a description of the hours of operation, number of clients, drugs
to be used and the symptoms, addiction, dependency, and/or illness targeted for
treatment, the demonstration of effectiveness in managing other clinics, and plans for
addressing medical or other emergencies that may arise.
(9) All State permits and licenses required to operate the clinic shall be obtained and
copies submitted prior to use and occupancy approval.
b. Disposal of waste shall be through approved, safe means and shall be separate from
regular trash disposal.
c. Accessory services, including laboratories and pharmacies for the use of patients visiting
medical practitioners in the clinic, shall be permitted as part of the clinic facility, subject
to the following specific conditions:
(1) All entrances to parts of the building in which these accessory services are
provided shall be from within the building and any direct access from the street is
prohibited.
(2) The hours during which these services are provided shall be the same as those
during which medical practitioners are receiving patients.
2. Hospitals, clinics of 10,000 square feet or more, and other medical treatment facilities may
permitted as a special exception by the Board of Appeals in the C-2 District subject to the
following:
a. A lot or parcel or tract of land to be used for a hospital or sanitarium building may be
allowed, upon a finding by the Board that such use will not constitute a nuisance because
of noise, traffic, or number of people being cared for; that such use will not affect
adversely the present character or future development of the surrounding residential
community; and, if the lot, parcel, or tract of land on which the buildings to be used by
such institution are located, conforms to the following minimum area, frontage, and
setback requirements, off-street parking, green area requirements, and building height
limit:
(1) Total area: five acres minimum.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 211
(2) Frontage: 200 feet minimum.
(3) All structures shall be located at least 200 feet from any adjacent residential lot
and 50 feet from any other use.
(4) All parking areas shall be located at least 50 feet from any adjacent residential lot
and shall be limited to a minimum of parking in the front yard.
(5) Accessory uses may include recreational and educational services, therapy areas,
retail stores, personal and professional services, and health services, provided
that use of these facilities is limited to on-site patients and their guests.
(6) A minimum of 40 percent of the gross site area shall be open space. The open
space shall be generally continuous, accessible to the patients, and protective of
natural features.
(7) The Board or the applicant shall request a recommendation from the Planning
Commission with respect to a site plan, submitted by the applicant, achieving and
conforming to the objectives and requirements of this section for off-street
parking and green area.
(8) Building height limit: as determined by the Board of Appeals but in no case more
than 100 feet.
(9) A resolution approving the establishment by the Health Department shall be filed
with the petition for a special exception.
(10) The applicant shall locate amenities such as lighting, seating, shelter, and
landscaping into attractive groupings that provide for safe and unobstructed
pedestrian movement.
(11) Located at least 1,000 feet from any structure used as a house of worship or
school.
(12) Located at least 1,000 feet from any residential district.
(13) A narrative shall be provided that describes the method and type of treatment to
be administered as well as the clientele proposed to use the facility. The narrative
will need to provide a description of the hours of operation, number of clients, drugs
to be used and the symptoms, addiction, dependency, and/or illness targeted for
treatment, the demonstration of effectiveness in managing other clinics, and plans for
addressing medical or other emergencies that may arise.
(14) All State permits and licenses required to operate the clinic shall be obtained and
copies submitted prior to use and occupancy approval.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 212
Section 194. Hotels and Motels
A hotel, motel, or inn may be allowed as a special exception by the Board of Appeals in the TC or CM
districts and shall be permitted in the C-2 district provided:
1. All the requirements imposed in the zone are met and provided further that special conditions --
such as for additional fencing and/or planting or other landscaping, additional setback from
property lines, location and arrangement of lighting, and other reasonable requirements deemed
necessary to safeguard the general community interest and welfare -- may be invoked by the
Board as requisites to the grant of special exception.
2. Accessory uses may include gift shop, beauty shop, barber shop, restaurant, cocktail lounge/night
club, auditorium/meeting facilities, and similar retail stores and commercial establishments. The
Planning Commission may require studies of the market for specific accessory uses as well as the
principal use.
3. Circulation and parking shall be adequate to fulfill requirements of all proposed uses, principal
and accessory. A traffic analysis shall be provided by the applicant demonstrating adequacy of
the system to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission.
4. The applicant shall design the building roof to screen mechanical equipment from public view
and to contribute to an attractive streetscape.
5. The applicant shall develop the public streetscape between the street-front building and the street
curb as a safe and convenient pedestrian movement.
6. The applicant shall locate amenities such as lighting, seating, shelter, and landscaping into
attractive groupings that provide for safe and unobstructed pedestrian movement.
7. The applicant shall design fences and retaining walls that are consistent in materials and quality
to that of the building and the adjacent properties.
8. The applicant shall design and locate signs so that their illumination is directed away from
adjacent neighbors.
9. The applicant shall integrate ground signs into the design of the site and the streetscape.
10. Vehicular access to the subject property shall not be by means of any street internal to a
subdivision for one-family dwellings.
Section 195. Housing for the Elderly or Handicapped [Amended 1/3/2017 by Ord No. 2016-21]
Housing for the elderly and handicapped may be permitted as a special exception by the Board of Appeals
in the C-2 and in a Planned Unit Development subject to the following:
1. The proposed facilities meet all applicable requirements of County, State and/or Federal law and
regulations, including age-based occupancy restrictions and limitations under Federal or State law
that would qualify the housing to be exempt from prohibitions against discriminating against
families with children.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 213
2. The minimum site area shall be one and one-half (1.5) acres.
3. Maximum density - One residential unit per each 1,500 square feet of lot area.
4. Maximum coverage: as required in the applicable zone.
5. Parking. There shall be off-street parking as required in Article XVII.
6. The Board shall grant the application only upon a finding that such use will not affect adversely
the use or development of the surrounding area and shall require annual permit renewals subject
to the compliance with all applicable federal, state, county and town regulations and the
requirements of this section.
Section 196. Marinas and Yacht Clubs
Marinas and yacht clubs, including related repair and service activities, may be permitted by the Board of
Appeals as a special exception in the RM, CM-1 and CM-2 districts provided that:
1. The marina or yacht club complies with all other codes, regulations, laws and ordinances,
including those relating to the establishment of bulkhead lines.
2. The proposed design is satisfactory as regards such safety features as location of fueling points,
fuel storage effect on navigation and possibilities for water pollution.
3. The marina or yacht club is properly located with respect to access roads and existing and future
developed areas.
4. The necessary approval is obtained from the United States Army Corps of Engineers.
5. In addition to any other applicable criteria, dry stack storage may only be permitted in the RM,
CM-1 and CM-2 districts if the Board of Appeals determines that the location and size of any
proposed structure maintains adequate public views of the Susquehanna River from adjacent and
nearby streets, sidewalks, trails, parks and other similar public spaces.
6. Accessory marine related repairs and service may be permitted in a commercial marina in the RM
district provided such uses are conducted within a completely enclosed building and service and
repair activities are only conducted during day light hours.
7. Limited on-land storage of watercraft, not including high and dry or dry-stack storage, may be
permitted as an accessory use in the RM district provided such storage does not reduce or
interfere with the minimum required parking for existing permitted residential or retail uses.
Section 197. Spas and Health Clubs [Amended 1/3/2017 by Ord No. 2016-21]
A place of business with equipment and facilities for exercising and improving physical fitness and
similar uses shall be permitted in TC, CEMUD and C-2 districts.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 214
Section 198. Reserved
Section 199. Mini-warehouses
A mini-warehouse may be permitted as a special exception by the Board of Appeals in the C-2, and L-2
Districts provided:
1. At least 75 percent of the total on-site storage space shall be contained in individual enclosed
stalls containing no more than 500 square feet each and no greater than 10 feet high.
2. No activities other than the dead storage or transfer of non-volatile goods or leasing of storage
space are permitted. Prohibited uses include, but are not limited to, miscellaneous sales;
fabrication or repair of vehicles, equipment, or other goods; transfer-storage business based on
site; residential uses (other than the resident manager's apartment), or any use that creates a
nuisance due to noise, odor, dust, light, or electrical interference.
3. An on-site manager or resident manager shall be required and shall be responsible for the
operation of the facility in conformance with conditions of approval. A resident manager's
apartment shall be included in the use permit.
4. Adequate access and parking shall be provided. Parking for storage purposes shall be provided
via a driving/parking land adjacent to each storage space/stall, with a minimum 30-foot width for
one-way routes where accessed on one side of the land and a 45-foot width for a two-way route or
where accessed on both sides.
5. Adjoining properties used or zoned for residential/dwelling purposes:
a. Non-street-facing property lines shall be improved with a minimum six-foot high, 100
percent opaque, solid wooden fence or masonry wall along the entire length (except for
approved access crossings); said improvements are to be located outside any public rightof-
way and interior to a minimum 50-foot natural undisturbed buffer.
b. Street-facing property lines shall require a minimum six-foot, 100 percent opaque,
wooden fence or masonry wall along the entire length (except for approved access
crossings); said improvements are to be located outside any public right-of-way and
interior to a minimum 20-foot landscape strip.
6. Adjoining all properties used or zoned for other than residential/dwelling purposes:
a. Non-street-facing property lines shall be improved with a minimum six-foot high, 100
percent opaque, solid wooden fence or masonry wall along the entire length, interior to a
10-foot landscape strip.
b. Street-facing property lines shall be provided with a minimum 20-foot landscape strip or
buffer as specified in Appendices B and C and a minimum six-foot high, 100 percent
opaque, wooden fence or masonry wall along the entire length (except for approved
access crossings) located outside any public right-of-way and interior to any required
landscape strips and/or buffers.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 215
7. No structure may be located within one-hundred (100) feet of a residential property.
Section 200. Neighborhood Motor Vehicle Service Station or Garage
A motor vehicle service station or garage that is limited in the intensity of use to serve primarily the
immediately surrounding neighborhood may be permitted by the Board of Appeals as a special exception
in a PUD provided:
1. Such facilities shall be limited to two fuel dispensers serving no greater than four motor vehicles
at any one time.
2. No more than two indoor service bays servicing no greater than two motor vehicles at any one
time may be permitted.
Section 201. Nurseries in Residential Districts
Nurseries for growing or propagation of plants, trees or shrubs, farms, truck gardens and orchards,
including temporary stands for seasonal sales of products raised on the premises, but not including the
raising for sale of poultry, birds, bees, rabbits or other animals, fish or other creatures may be permitted in
the R-1 district provided that such uses are not objectionable to surrounding residences by reason of odor,
dust, noise or other factors, and provided that no retail or wholesale business, office or store is
permanently maintained on the premises.
Section 202. Pet Shops
Pet shops shall be allowed in the NB and C-2 Districts and may be permitted as a special exception in the
TC district provided that the actual store or premises in which the pet shop is located is at least 75 feet
from any lot in any residential zone; that the proposed use shall not be incompatible with, or detrimental
to, any existing uses on abutting lots in a NB, TC or C-2 zone; that no animals may be kept for boarding;
that no animals may be kept for breeding; that only animals for retail sale shall be maintained or kept on
the premises; that all animal pens shall have glass enclosed fronts and each pen or cage shall be connected
to any outside ventilating system or other appropriate air filtration system. The provision shall not apply
to birds that may be maintained in bird cages. There shall be no space on the exterior of that building for
the maintaining or for the use of the animals, and all animals shall be maintained within the pet shop.
Section 203. Public Utility Buildings and Public Utility Structures
In any zone, a public utility building or public utility structure not otherwise permitted, including radio
and television broadcasting stations and towers (but not including electric power transmission or
distribution lines carrying in excess of 69,000 volts, which findings shall be controlled only by subsection
8 hereunder may be permitted as a special exception by the Board of Appeals provided:
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 216
1. The proposed building or structure at the location selected is necessary for public convenience
and service.
2 The proposed building or structure at the location will not endanger the health and safety of
workers and residents in the community and will not substantially impair or prove detrimental to
neighboring properties.
3. Public utility buildings in any permitted residential zone shall, whenever practicable, have the
exterior appearance of residential buildings and shall have suitable landscaping, screen planting,
and fencing, wherever deemed necessary by the Board.
4. Signs in connection with a public utility building or structure shall be governed by the provision
of this Chapter.
6. Any proposed broadcasting tower shall have a setback of one foot from all property lines for
every foot of height of the tower, provided that any broadcasting tower lawfully existing prior to
the effective date of this Chapter shall be exempt from the setback limitations imposed by this
subsection and may be continued, structurally altered, reconstructed, or enlarged provided that no
structural change, repair, addition, alteration, or reconstruction shall result in increasing the height
of such tower above the then existing structurally designed height.
7. Examples of public utility buildings and structures for which special exceptions are required
under this section are buildings and structures for the occupancy, use, support, or housing of
switching equipment, regulators, stationary transformers, and other such devices for supply
electric service; telephone offices; railroad, bus, trolley, air, and boat passenger stations; radio or
television transmitter towers and stations.
8. In any residential zone, overhead electric power and energy transmission and distribution lines
carrying in excess of 69,000 volts may be permitted where the Board finds:
a. The proposed use does not have an unduly adverse effect on the general plan for the
physical development of the district as embodied in this Chapter and in the
comprehensive plan or portion thereof adopted by the Town Commissioners;
b. The proposed use will not adversely affect the health and safety of the residents or
workers in the area;
c. There is a public necessity for the proposed building, structure, or facility at the location
selected; and
d. The proposed use will have the least possible detrimental effect to the use of development
of adjacent properties or the general neighborhood.
In making such findings, the Board shall consider the following factors, and such other factors as
the Board may find to be necessary or important to effectuate its review:
e. Points at which the proposed line crosses heavily traveled highways or streets, or other
arteries of transportation, either existing or proposed;
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 217
f. Proximity of the line to schools, churches, theaters, clubs, museums, fair grounds, or
other places of assembly, either existing or proposed;
g. The amount and probability of low-level flying over the line and nearness of the line to
airports and/or heliports, either existing or proposed;
h. Any fire hazard or interference with firefighting equipment due to the location and
construction of the proposed line;
i. Proximity of the line to public parks and recreational areas, either existing or proposed;
j. Effect upon property values of those who will not be compensated for a taking under the
laws of the state;
k. The effect upon environmental quality and ecological balance of protected watersheds,
planned open space between corridors of development and green belt areas surrounding
satellite community development; and
l. Proximity of the line to historic sites and structures.
9. In addition to the authority granted by this section, the Board may attach to any grant of a special
exception under this section other conditions that it may deem necessary to protect the public
health, safety, or general welfare.
10. Petitions for special exception under this section may be filed on project basis. A petitioner under
this section shall be considered an interested person for purposes of filing a request for a special
exception if he states in writing under oath that he has made a bona fide effort to obtain a
contractual interest in the subject property for a valid consideration without success and that he
intends to continue negotiations to obtain the required interest or, in the alternative, to file
condemnation proceedings should the special exceptions be granted.
Section 204. Recreational Uses
Recreational uses, such as follows, may be permitted by the Board of Appeals as special exception in the
R-1, R-2, R-3 and TC districts provided:
1. Swimming, tennis and athletic clubs shall be limited to those for games and uses such as
swimming, shuffleboard, croquet or tennis. Activity areas and buildings shall not be located
closer than fifty (50) feet to any lot line. All such facilities must be located on a site having a
minimum of two (2) acres.
2. Recreational uses such as tennis courts, swimming pools, and other similar activities operated
exclusively for the use of private membership and not for commercial purposes, provided that no
such use, structure or accessory use is located closer than fifty (50) feet to any adjoining property
line unless such property line fronts a public street or waterway with rights-of-way not less than
thirty (30) feet, in which instance the required setback need not exceed thirty (30) feet and
provided, further, that all such facilities must be located on a site having a minimum of two (2)
acres.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 218
Section 205. Residential Structures - Single-Family Attached and Multiple Units [Amended 9-2-
2008 by Ord. No. 2008-2; 11-4-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-04; 1/3/2017 by Ord No. 2016-21]
1. Two-family dwellings shall be permitted in R-2, R-3 and PUD districts and may be permitted by
the Board of Appeals as a special exception in the TC district provided:
a. Each dwelling unit of a two-family dwelling must comply with the minimum lot area per
dwelling unit specified in the Section 238, Schedule of Zone Regulations .
b. The dwelling units and individual lots of a two-family dwelling may be sold separately if
separate utilities systems are provided and if separate lots for all dwelling units in a
building are created at the same time and in conformance with the subdivision
regulations. In addition, all two-family townhouse units offered for sale shall have party
walls of at least eight (8) inches of masonry construction extending from the footings to
the roof of the structure.
2. Townhouses shall be permitted in the R-3 District and shall be permitted by Special Exception in
the TC and RM Districts provided:
a. The townhouse building shall comply with minimum lot requirements contained in the
Section 238, Schedule of Zone Regulations, but each dwelling unit of a townhouse need
not be located on a lot complying with minimum lot-area-per-family requirements in the
table, provided that the average for all dwelling units in the building equals or exceeds
the minimum requirements and provided that no lot is created with lot area less than
eighteen hundred (1,800) square feet.
b. Both sides of rear yards may be screened with a privacy type fence or hedge of six (6)
feet maximum height approved by the Planning Commission and extending not less than
fifteen (15) feet from the rear building wall and in the case of interior end units, shall not
extend three (3) feet forward of the rear building wall.
c. A minimum of twenty (20) percent of the site shall be maintained in common open space
areas exclusive of front, side, or rear yards in a location approved by the Planning
Commission. Provision satisfactory to the Planning Commission and approved by the
Town Attorney shall be made to assure that nonpublic areas for the common use and
enjoyment of occupants of townhouses, but not in individual ownership by such
occupants, shall be maintained in a satisfactory manner without expense to the general
public.
d. All areas not occupied by buildings, roads, parking areas, service areas, or other required
or permitted uses, including open spaces and usable recreation areas shall be landscaped
by lawns, trees, shrubs, gardens, or other suitable ground cover.
e. A landscaping plan and a schedule of planting shall be included with the site plan.
Landscaping plans shall meet the requirements of the sediment control Chapter and other
applicable regulations.
f. Building requirements and relationship.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 219
(1) Dwelling units per townhouse structure and length of structure. No more than
eight (8) dwelling units shall be contained in a single townhouse structure
without a setback between structures as specified below.
(2) For the purpose of the side yard regulations, a townhouse building shall be
considered as one (1) building on one (1) lot, with side yards required for end
units only, in accordance with Section 238, Schedule of Zone Regulations. Any
side yard adjacent to the line of a lot occupied by a detached single-family
dwelling or a lot in a single-family residential district shall not be less than
twenty-five (25) feet.
(3) Setback between buildings. The minimum distance between any two unattached
townhouse structures shall be twenty-five (25) feet. Setback between buildings
in Townhouse projects designed in a courtyard fashion may be approved on a
case-by-case basis.
(4) Distance to service areas. No townhouse structure shall be closer than twenty
(20) feet to any interior driveway or closer than fifteen (15) feet to any off-street
parking area excluding garages built into an individual townhouse unit.
(5) Code requirements. All structures shall comply with all Town, County and State
Codes.
(6) All public ways or other common facilities within a townhouse cluster shall be
maintained by the property owners within the townhouse cluster.
(7) A public way intended for pedestrian circulation and fire protection shall be
provided between abutting rear lot lines.
(8) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Article
XVII of this Chapter.
(9) No detached garage or carport or other detached accessory building over one
hundred twenty (120) square feet shall be permitted on a lot occupied by a
townhouse.
(10) The front and rear facades of dwelling units in a townhouse shall be varied by
changed yards of not less than three (3) feet and variation in materials or design
so that no more than three (3) abutting units will have the same front yard depth
and the same or essentially the same architectural treatment of facades and
rooflines.
(11) Required off-street parking shall be provided on the lot or within one hundred
fifty (150) feet of the lot.
3. Apartments and other multi-family development residential units shall be permitted in the R-3,
RM and PUD district, with conditions, and may be permitted as a special exception in the TC
district provided:
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 220
a. Maximum density. The density shall not exceed the maximum permitted density for the
Zoning District as averaged for the total area.
b. Open area. A minimum of thirty (30%) percent of the total tract area shall be maintained
as open area. This required open area shall not be devoted to service driveways, off-street
parking, or loading spaces. It is further provided that twenty-five (25%) of the abovereferenced
open area be suitable for usable recreational space and each such recreational
space shall be at least fifty (50) feet in the least dimension with a minimum area of five
thousand (5,000) square feet.
c. Code requirements. All structures will comply with all Town, County and State codes.
d. Setbacks.
(1) R-3 District - All buildings and structures shall be set back a minimum of fifty
(50) feet from the right-of-way line of any public street or adjacent property
lines. This setback shall be exclusively devoted to landscaping and open area and
shall not be occupied by any building, structure, or off-street parking area.
(2) PUD District - All buildings and structures shall be set back according to
approved site plans.
(3) TC District - Buildings and structures shall have a minimum front set back
according to the prevailing front yard characteristics in the areas, as determined
by the Planning Commission.
(4) PUD District - All buildings and structures shall be set back a minimum of twohundred
(200) feet from the right-of-way line of any public street or adjacent
property lines in PUDs of twenty-five acres or more..
(5) The minimum setback between any two principal buildings on the same lot shall
be twenty-five (25) feet.
(6) RM District – The minimum lot and yard requirements are set forth in Section
238, Schedule of Zone Regulations.
e. Area to be landscaped. All lot area not occupied by principal and accessory structures,
required off-street parking and loading, access and circulation facilities, or other required
areas shall be landscaped by lawns, trees, shrubs, ground cover, and other appropriate
materials. Within the required setback areas, there shall be a landscaped buffer yard
meeting Buffer yard Standard C in Appendix B.
f. Building height. The building height requirements are set forth in Section 238, Schedule
of Zone Regulations. When a building height exceeds 35 feet the setback between
buildings on the same lot shall increase one foot for every foot of height over thirty-five
(35) feet. Accessory structures. No accessory structure shall exceed twenty (20) feet in
height.
g. Signs. Signs shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions of Article XVI.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 221
h. Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be required for each use in accordance with
the provisions of Article XVII.
4. Commercial apartments may be permitted in a commercial structure in the NB, TC, and C-2
Districts provided:
a. No apartment is situated at the street level in the NB and TC districts.
b. All apartment units meet applicable building and livability codes.
Section 206. Restaurants, Standard and Carry-out/Delivery [Amended 1/3/2017 by Ord No.
2016-21]
Standard Restaurants shall be permitted in the TC, RM, CM, NB and C-2 districts provided:
1. When such use abuts a residential zone or institutional premises the use shall be screened by a
buffer yard meeting the C standard in Appendix B.
2. Vehicular access shall not be by means of any street internal to a subdivision for single-family
dwellings.
3. In the TC district approval shall be conditioned on meeting the special design standards
applicable to this district.
4. Standard restaurants are permitted in the RM and CM districts only as an accessory use in a
marina.
Section 207. Restaurant Accessory Uses [Amended 1/3/2017 by Ord No. 2016-21]
Restaurants as permitted in Section 206 may apply for approval and renewal of a permit for the following
accessory use each year:
1. Sidewalk Café – An outdoor food service area situated on a public sidewalk, operated adjacent to and
in conjunction with a restaurant, where food and beverages sold by the restaurant are served for
public consumption.
a. An application for a Sidewalk Café must include a scaled drawing depicting the sidewalk abutting
the business, locations of proposed tables and chairs, and unobstructed accessible passageways
for pedestrians.
b. A Sidewalk Café approval shall specify the authorized location of tables and chairs and whether
they must be removed at the close of business each day, and approved unobstructed accessible
passageways for pedestrians.
c. A Sidewalk Café shall be operated in accordance with its approval and other provisions of this
Section.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 222
d. A Sidewalk Café may not encroach upon any part of the sidewalk frontage of adjacent properties,
or of a right-of-way or alley.
e. Each Sidewalk Café shall comply with all building, health, safety, fire, zoning and environmental
standards as applicable to such uses.
f. Alcoholic beverages may not be sold or consumed in a Sidewalk Café except as authorized by the
Cecil County Board of Liquor License Commissioners. No alcoholic beverages may be
removed from the Sidewalk Café, except to the interior of the restaurant.
g. A Sidewalk Café shall not be detrimental to the health, safety and/or general welfare of persons
residing, working or otherwise in the vicinity.
h. A Sidewalk Café shall not obstruct any fire exit, fire escape, fire hydrant, building sprinkler
systems, fire receptacle or any other required ways or means of ingress and egress.
i. The operation of, or placement of tables, chairs and equipment for a Sidewalk Café may not
obstruct access to any bus stop, crosswalk, mailbox, curb cut or other public property, and shall
not obstruct the clear view of any traffic signal, regulatory sign or street sign.
j. The entity operating the restaurant and Sidewalk Café shall fully insure, indemnify, defined and
hold harmless the Town of Perryville and it’s officers, agents, and employees, from and against
any and all claims and damages in any way arising out of or through the acts or omissions of the
permit holder or its employees in the construction, operation, maintenance, use, placement or
condition of the Sidewalk Café. The applicant for a Sidewalk Café shall provide proof of such
insurance before a permit may be issued or renewed.
k. The following are prohibited in the area of the Sidewalk Café: cooking of food; unshielded trash
or refuse storage; advertisements exclusive of menus intended to be read by the patrons in the
Café; and outdoor entertainment, music speakers, or public address systems.
l. A Sidewalk Café permit may be suspended or revoked by the Town, after notice to the owner and
operator of the restaurant and a hearing, for a violations of the permit or for a violation of any
Federal or State law or regulations, and/or local Ordinance or regulation, related to the operation
of the Sidewalk Café and the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages.
m. The issuance of a Sidewalk Café permit and the initiation of a Sidewalk Café use does not grant
any vested right to the continuation of such use if the Town eliminates authorization for the
operation of Sidewalk Cafes.
Section 208. Taverns, Bar, Places Serving Alcoholic Beverages [Amended 1/3/2017 by Ord No.
2016-21]
Service of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted in the CEMUD and C-2 districts and may be permitted
as a special exception in the TC, RM, CM and NB districts provided:
1. No such establishment is located nearer than 1,000 feet to any principal structure used as a
hospital, church, or school.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 223
2. In all districts the service of alcoholic beverages in a restaurant is permitted only as an accessory
use to a standard restaurant provided all required approvals and licenses are obtained for the
service of alcoholic beverages from Cecil County Board of Liquor License Commissioners.
3. In the TC district approval shall be conditioned on meeting the special design standards applicable
to this district.
4. An establishment that possesses a State of Maryland Class 6 Pub-Brewery License or a Class 7
Micro-Brewery License is permitted as an accessory use to a standard restaurant in all districts.
Section 209. Retail Establishments in a Group of Multiple-family Dwellings
Retail sales and personal service establishments in a group of multi-family dwellings may be permitted as
a special exception by the Board of Appeals in the R-3 district subject to the following requirements:
1. Only the following types of establishments shall be permitted:
a. Banks or saving and loan offices
b. Barber and beauty shops
c. Book stores
d. Drug stores
e. Dry-cleaning and laundry pick-up stations
f. Florists
g. Food and beverage stores
h. Gift shops
i. Jewelry stores
j. Laundromats
k. Newsstands
l. Office, banking
m. Restaurants
n. Variety and dry goods stores
2. The establishments shall be primarily for the service of the residents of the building or complex in
which it is located, and no deliveries shall be made except to such residents.
3. The establishments shall not be located on any floor above the ground-level, except that a
restaurant may be located on a top floor or penthouse.
4. The establishments shall be located and constructed as to protect tenants of the building from
noise, traffic, odors, and interference with privacy.
Section 210. Retail Establishments in an Office Building
Retail sales and personal service establishments in an office building shall be permitted in the TC and C-2
Districts subject to the following requirements:
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 224
1. The establishments shall be primarily for the service of the tenants and employees of the building
or group of buildings on the same lot or group of contiguous lots in common ownership or
control.
2. Such establishments shall occupy not more than 30 percent of the total floor area of the building
or group of buildings.
3. The establishments shall be so located and constructed as to protect tenants of the building from
noise, traffic, odors, and interference with privacy.
Section 211. Satellite Dish Antennas or Receive-only Earth Stations
1. A satellite dish may be located in a residential district provided it complies with the following
conditions:
a. It is not located in a front yard or side yard, said yard to be measured from any portion of
the principal building to the front or exterior side of the property line.
b. It complies with the setback requirements of the underlying zone for accessory structures.
c. It does not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height above the existing grade if ground mounted.
d. It shall be adequately screened from any adjacent residential zone, right-of-way, or
private street easements, at horizontal grade level to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Administrator if ground mounted.
e. Only one satellite dish shall be permitted per dwelling unit located on the lot.
f. It shall not be located on the front facade of any building.
g. A zoning certificate shall be required.
2. All satellite dish antennas in all zones shall comply with the following:
a. Under no circumstances shall a satellite dish be utilized as a sign in any zone.
b. Satellite dish antennas and their appurtenances shall be neutral in color or painted such a
color as to blend in with the surrounding environment.
c. Satellite dish antennas, appurtenances, landscaping and screening shall be kept and
maintained in good condition.
d. The antennas shall be permanently mounted. No antenna shall be installed on a portable
or movable structure, such as a recreational vehicle.
e. No ground-mounted antenna shall exceed an overall diameter of six (6) feet or an overall
height of fifteen (15) feet above the existing grade.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 225
f. Satellite dish antennas shall be of non-combustible and corrosive resistant materials
erected in a secure wind resistant manner to protect the safety and welfare of the
community.
Section 212. Shopping Centers and Malls
Shopping centers shall be permitted in the C-2 District provided:
1. The shopping center shall be constructed according to an approved Comprehensive Site Plan. The
Plan shall make adequate provisions for access, utilities, and adequate protection of the
surrounding properties, subject to approval by the Planning Commission. As a minimum, the
Comprehensive Site Plan shall contain the following information in addition to the information
required in Appendix A. All site plans or plan elements shall be clearly titled, and numbered.
a. A Site Plan Element is required indicating the proposed location of all buildings, parking
areas, open space, signage, vehicular and pedestrian access, and landscaping and their
relationship to natural features of the site.
b. The Site Plan Element is required which includes the proposed location and dimensions
of all structures, and related areas, setbacks from property lines and other buildings,
utility right-of-ways, streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, lighting, and fire protection
measures. The Plan shall contain a tabular summary indicating:
(1) total area of the site;
(2) land area devoted to open space;
(3) land area devoted to buildings;
(4) land area devoted to parking - and total spaces;
(5) number of stores by use and square footage.
c. A copy of proposed deed restrictions, covenants, by-laws or other instruments designed
to provide for continuing maintenance and control of common areas.
d. The architectural design of buildings shall be shown by front elevations, photographs or
architectural renderings. Where a variety of designs are proposed, each design shall be
shown.
e. If in the opinion of the Planning Commission, Zoning Administrator, or any Town
department head, additional information is required to aid in the review of the project,
additional elements shall be prepared.
2. General Design Standards
a. Buildings shall be designed so that facades, signs and other appurtenances will have an
integrated and harmonious and attractively arranged, and in a manner which will not
adversely affect the appearance of surrounding developments.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 226
b. Shopping centers shall be located where traffic congestion does not then exist on roads
used for immediate access to the center, and where congestion is not likely to be created
by the proposed center; or where such congestion will be alleviated by currently
scheduled improvements to access roads, by demonstrable provision for proper exits and
entrances, and by internal provision for parking and traffic circulation.
c. Shopping centers shall be served by underground community sewer, gas, water, and
electric facilities.
d. Passenger parking areas and freight loading areas shall be separately located and safety
provisions must be made for the protection of pedestrians, including appropriate location
of roadways, parking areas, sidewalks, islands, entrances, exists, crossovers and
underpasses which are provided with drainage, lighting, directional signs, and
supervision as may be required.
e. Copies of any master lease between the shopping center developers and prospective
tenants must be provided. Provisions of the lease must make adequate provision for
annual maintenance, security and public conveniences either with individual tenants or as
the responsibility of the developer.
f. All roadways, parking areas and pedestrian walks shall be paved with concrete or
blacktop which shall be maintained in good condition at all times and shall be properly
illuminated when in use after dark in such a manner as to prevent the direct transmission
of light into adjacent residential properties.
g. Whenever a shopping center is located adjacent to a residential development or zone
district, a permanent solid fence or planted area with trees or shrubs meeting the standard
of Buffer yard E in Appendix B shall be provided on the side or sides adjacent to such
residential area sufficient to act as a buffer to the transmission of light and sound from the
center. (See Article XVIII, Part I)
h. All signs within the center shall be controlled by written agreement between the owners
and tenants of the center, so as to avoid excessive advertising and insure attractive and
harmonious appearance throughout the center. Signs should be uniform in appearance
and shown on the Site Plan.
Section 213. Social, Fraternal Clubs and Lodges, Philanthropic Institutions
Social, fraternal clubs and lodges, philanthropic institutions may be permitted as a special exception by
the Board of Appeals in the NB, TC or C-2 Districts upon a finding that the proposed use will not
constitute a nuisance because of noise, traffic, number of people, or type of physical activity, subject to
the following minimum lot area, frontage, and setback requirements:
1. Total lot area: 25,000 square feet minimum
2. Frontage: 150 feet minimum
3. Setback: 25 feet from all property lines.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 227
Section 214. Development Standards in the TC District
1 Purpose
It is the intent of the standards established for the TC Town Center District to:
a. Accommodate growth in the Town of Perryville by encouraging and facilitating new
development on vacant, bypassed and underutilized land where such development is
found to be compatible with the existing neighborhood.
b. Encourage efficient use of land and public services in the context of existing
communities.
c. Stimulate economic investment and development in older established neighborhoods.
d. Provide developers and property owners flexibility so that they can achieve high quality
design and develop infill and redevelopment projects that strengthen existing
neighborhoods.
e. Create a high quality neighborhood compatible with the community environment.
f. Implement the goals, objectives, and policies of the Perryville Comprehensive Plan and
the Lower Susquehanna Heritage Greenway Management Plan.
g. Improve approval certainty for infill and redevelopment by providing clear development
standards.
h. Encourage compact development that is pedestrian-scaled and, if applicable, transitoriented.
These standards are not intended to restrict imagination or variety but rather to assist in focusing
on design principles that can result in creative solutions that will develop a satisfactory visual
appearance within the Town. The district standards encourage appropriate development of
underutilized properties and consolidation of developable land where it will achieve a more
efficient land use and improved site design. Design standards promote compatible infill and
redevelopment by, among other things, allowing development on sites that may not meet
minimum land area and dimension requirements.
2. Applicability
The development standards contained in this section shall apply to all development in the TC
Town Center District. Where the proposed development is other than a detached single family
dwelling or two-family dwelling, or the applicant has requested relief from any of the basic
standards for the district contained in Section 238, the Planning Commission or Board of Appeals
shall not grant approval except as provided in Section 5.k .
3. General Requirements
Development plans shall incorporate the following elements to enhance compatibility with the
surrounding community:
a. Sidewalks that connect to the adjacent sidewalk system;
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 228
b. Public streets that connect to the adjacent street pattern;
c. Preservation of architecturally significant structures whenever feasible;
d. Inclusion of, or relationship to, civic spaces;
e. Street furniture, lighting and landscaping that is primarily oriented to pedestrian use; and
f. Building types, setbacks, building envelopes, use and parking compatible with the
surrounding community.
All new buildings (except accessory structures) shall have the primary entrance oriented to the
street or public walkway, with direct, barrier-free and convenient pedestrian connections.
4. Permitted Uses
a. Permitted uses, permitted uses with conditions and special exception uses shall be as
provided in Section 161.
5. Development standards
a. General: Density, design, materials, use and scale should reflect local style, climate,
heritage and materials unique to the Town of Perryville.
b. Flexible development standards to reduce lot areas, widths and yards and to increase
building heights may be permitted for infill or redevelopment at the discretion of the
Planning Commission, subject to proof of good cause and benefit to the development and
the community and to address difficult sites which incorporate infill and redevelopment
or rehabilitation. Building height and coverage may vary so long as the project average is
consistent with the neighborhood scale and architectural rhythm and does not constitute a
disruptive condition in the identity of the area (See Section g).
c. Density: Density may exceed the underlying zone for the purpose of creating a
neighborhood having a variety of housing types.
(1) Total number of dwelling units as well as location to be established at the time of
preliminary plan approval.
(2) Lot Size. Lot areas established in the preliminary plan shall be dependent on
proposed densities, floor area, setbacks, building heights and community
compatibility.
d. Building Height:
(1) Buildings restricted to the height limit established for the district, or the average
of adjacent buildings along the block face.
(2) If the average of adjacent buildings is greater than the maximum height allowed
in the district, the proposed building or structure must meet the following criteria
for community compatibility:
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 229
(a) Neighborhood scale
(b) Privacy
(c) Light and shadow
(d) Views
(e) Architectural compatibility
e. Building Setback.
(1) For each block in the overlay zone, the Planning Commission may designate a
build-to line based on the average established front yard setback along the block
face. The build-to line shall establish the front yard setback for the lots on the
block. Infill and redevelopment structures shall be located within two (2) feet
either side of the build-to line, except that no structure shall be located closer
than five (5) feet to street or public right-of-way.
(2) The Planning Commission may rrelax side yard requirements to facilitate
interesting and innovative design solutions, provided that the encroachment into
the setback does not adversely affect storm drainage, privacy, sunlight or views
of the adjacent property, nor restrain the potential of the adjacent property for
future development.
f. Bulk and Scale. Building bulk and scale shall be similar to and consistent with the
surrounding neighborhood as evaluated by the bulk of buildings adjacent, abutting and
surrounding the proposed development. Larger buildings should be designed to adhere to
the existing architectural pattern of the surrounding neighborhood.
g. Compatibility standards
(1) General: Provides exemplary site design, architectural design and high quality
materials that are compatible with, and does not negatively alter the character of,
the existing neighborhood.
(2) All permitted uses conform to the purposes of the Ordinance and are compatible
with existing uses in the general vicinity of the proposed development. The
following requirements shall apply:
(a) Building Size, Height, Bulk, Mass, Scale. Buildings should be similar in
height and size or be designed in such way that they appear similar in
height and size, creating an overall mass that is consistent with the
prevalent mass of other structures in the area, e.g., by dividing walls into
units of similar proportions to adjacent structures.
(b) Building Orientation. Primary facades and entries face the adjacent street
with a connecting walkway that does not require pedestrians to walk
through parking lots or across driveways and that maintains the integrity
of the existing streetscape.
(c) Privacy. Optimize privacy of residents and minimize infringement on the
privacy of adjoining land uses by considering appropriate buffer yards,
the placement of windows and door entrances. Create opportunities for
interactions among neighbors in common pedestrian circulation areas of
the project.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 230
(d) Building Materials shall be similar to materials of the surrounding
neighborhood or use other characteristics such as scale, form,
architectural detailing, etc., to establish compatibility.
(3) All planned uses, building types, and landscaping will be included on the
preliminary plan and will demonstrate the relationships of the proposed
development with existing off-site development in the context of the adjacent
community. Compliance with these requirements shall in and of itself be deemed
to create a presumption of compatibility.
(4) All planned uses shall comply with the Perryville Critical Area and floodplain
regulations.
h. Open Space and Landscaping - All open space, recreational amenities and landscaped
areas shall be shown on the plan.
i. Public Facilities and Utilities
(1) General: Existing and planned public facilities should be shown on development
plans.
(2) All public streets, walkways and alleyways shall be shown on development
plans. All through streets and walkways must be public. The local street and
walkway system shall be safe, efficient, convenient, attractive, and shall
accommodate use by all segments of the population.
(3) The street and walkway system provides multiple, direct and continuous intraand
inter-neighborhood connections between destinations.
(4) The street network shall include sidewalks on both sides of the street.
(5) Closed street systems are prohibited, but short cul-de-sacs less than 220 feet long
that connect to the main grid system are allowed when consistent with the
surrounding community.
(6) Street widths should be consistent with the surrounding community and sized to
promote walkability and multi-modal use i.e., pedestrians, bikes, cars, trucks,
buses, etc.).
(7) Roads, lighting, sidewalks, street furniture, utilities and other public facilities
should enhance pedestrian circulation.
j. Parking
(1) General: Flexibility for the number of parking spaces shall be considered if the
project is pedestrian-oriented.
(2) Parking for private automobiles is provided based on safety, convenience,
pedestrian and vehicular circulation, and proximity of public parking and public
transportation.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 231
(3) The parking plan may provide a combination of off-street and on-street spaces.
(4) Shared parking is encouraged. Shared drives serving no more than two (2)
dwellings may be permitted.
(5) As is practicable, at-grade off-street parking areas should be provided on the
proposed development site. When possible, off-street parking should be located
at the rear of the dwelling with alley access. When off-street parking cannot be
located to the rear of the dwelling, it should be provided in a manner that is
consistent with existing off-street parking patterns along the block face or
immediate surrounding area.
(6) All parking spaces shall be shown on the site plan.
(7) Bicycle spaces shall be provided for commercial/employment and mixed-use
projects.
(8) A portion of the minimum parking requirements can be waived where ample
public parking is available in close proximity within 300 feet of the proposed
development site.
k. Findings Required
The Planning Commission or the Board of Appeals shall approve the plan upon finding
that:
(1) The plan accomplishes the purposes, objectives and minimum standards and
requirements of the district;
(2) The plan is in accordance with the Perryville Comprehensive Plan;
(3) The plan is internally and externally compatible and harmonious with existing
and planned land uses in the area;
(4) Existing or planned public facilities are adequate to service the proposed
development; and
(5) The development staging program is adequate in relation to the provision of
public facilities and private amenities to service the proposed development.
Section 215. Special Development Standards for the NB Neighborhood Commercial District
1. Food stores limited to no more than five thousand (5,000) square feet shall be permitted.
2. Professional offices limited to no more than five thousand (5,000) square feet shall be permitted.
3. Groups of vending machines shall be contained in a completely enclosed building.
4. Automobile parking lots and garages shall be permitted, but not used car lots or other lots used
for automobile sale or storage.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 232
5. Gas pumps shall be permitted so long as bulk storage of flammable liquids is underground.
6. Bakeries occupying more than five thousand (5,000) square feet of floor area shall be permitted.
7. Dry-cleaning and pressing pickup stations or shops occupying not more than two thousand five
hundred (2,500) square feet of floor area and using no cleaning fluid whose base is petroleum or
one (1) of its derivatives shall be permitted.
8. Shoe-repairing shops occupying not more than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of
floor area shall be permitted.
9. Shops for the sale, service or repair of home appliances, office machines, electrical equipment
and television and radio equipment, and occupying not more than two thousand five hundred
(2,500) square feet of floor area shall be permitted.
10. Wholesale establishments with not more than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of
accessory storage per establishment shall be permitted.
Section 216. Special Development Standards in the C-2 Commercial District [Amended 1/3/2017
by Ord No. 2016-21]
1. Amusement places and theaters, including open-air drive-in theaters shall be permitted.
2. Automobile and truck sales, service and repair, but not auto salvage or junk, shall be permitted
provided that any major repair or storage of equipment, materials or damaged vehicles shall be
inside a completely enclosed building or enclosed by a masonry wall, screening fence or hedge,
not less than six (6) feet in height and subject to approval by the Planning Commission.
3. Bakeries occupying not more than five thousand (5,000) square feet of floor area shall be
permitted.
4. Bottling works, dyeing and cleaning works or laundries, plumbing and heating shops, painting
shops, upholstering shops not involving furniture manufacture, tinsmithing shops, tire sales and
service (including vulcanizing and recapping but no manufacturing), appliance repairs and
general service and repair establishments similar in character to those listed in this subsection
shall be permitted provided there is no outside storage of materials and permitted uses in this item
shall occupy more than six thousand (6,000) square feet of floor area.
5. Boat and boat trailer sales and storage, but not marinas, shall be permitted.
6. Farm implement sales, service, rental and repair, but not salvage or junk, shall be permitted
provided that major repair or storage of materials or damaged or unusable implements or vehicles
shall be inside a completely enclosed building.
7. Material storage yards in connection with a permitted use shall be permitted where storage is
incidental to the approved occupancy of the building, provided that all products and materials
used or stored are in a completely enclosed building or enclosed by a masonry wall, screening,
fence or hedge not less than six (6) feet in height and subject to the approval of the Commission.
Storage of all materials and equipment shall not exceed the height of the wall. Storage of cars and
trucks used in connection with the permitted trade or business is permitted within the walls or
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 233
screen. Storage of heavy equipment, such as road-building or excavating equipment, shall not be
permitted.
8. Monument sales establishments with incidental processing to order shall be permitted, but not
including the shaping of headstones.
9. Radio and television stations and studios and recording studios shall be permitted, but not towers
more than one hundred fifty (150) feet in height.
10. New and used car sales and storage shall be permitted subject to state regulations.
11. Wholesale establishments with not more than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of
accessory storage per establishment shall be permitted.
12. Automatic ice-distribution stations or other drive-in automatic vending machine stations shall be
permitted. Groups of vending machines shall be contained in a completely enclosed building.
13. Banks, drive-in or otherwise, shall be permitted so long as driveway space shall be provided off
the street for at least five (5) vehicles waiting for drive-in service.
14. Bakeries occupying no more than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of floor area
shall be permitted provided that all products produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on
the premises.
15. Dry-cleaning and pressing pickup stations or shops occupying not more than two thousand five
hundred (2,500) square feet of floor area and using no cleaning fluid whose base is petroleum or
one (1) of its derivatives shall be permitted.
16. Filling stations shall be permitted so long as bulk storage of flammable liquids is underground.
17. Green houses incidental permitted flower shops shall be permitted.
18. Frozen-food lockers for individual or family use shall be permitted.
19. Laundries occupying not more than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of floor area
shall be permitted.
20. Laundry and dry-cleaning establishments (combined operation) occupying not more than five
thousand (5,000) square feet of floor area and using no cleaning fluid whose base is petroleum or
one (1) of its derivatives shall be permitted.
21. Shoe-repair shops occupying not more than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of
floor area shall be permitted.
22. Shops for the sale, service or repair of home appliances, office machines, electrical equipment
and television and radio equipment and occupying not more than two thousand five hundred
(2,500) square feet of floor area shall be permitted.
23. Storage of office supplies or merchandise normally carried in stock in connection with a
permitted office, business or commercial use shall be subject to applicable district regulations.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 234
24. Apartments within a principal commercial, office or business buildings limited to three (3) units
per lot, as an accessory to a permitted use shall be permitted provided there shall be a minimum
of three thousand four hundred (3,400) square feet of land area per apartment unit.
Section 217. Special Development Standards in the L-1 Limited Industrial District
Generally those light manufacturing uses similar to those listed in the Table of Permitted Uses which do
not create any more danger to health and safety in surrounding areas and which do not create any more
offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat or glare, than that which is generally associated with
light industries may be permitted in this district. The uses permitted in the I-1 Limited Industrial District
shall be subject to the following special conditions:
1. All uses shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building with no open storage of raw,
in-process or finished material and supplies or waste material. Finished or semi-finished products
manufactured on the premises may be stored in the open or screened from the street by
landscaping, fences or walks.
2. Notwithstanding the yard regulations for the district, no part of any building, accessory structure
or sign shall be located closer than one hundred (100) feet to any residential district boundary.
3. All main plant buildings shall be of concrete, structural steel or masonry construction and limited
to forty (40) feet in height unless otherwise approved by the Board of Appeals.
4. Adequate parking and loading space shall be provided off the street for all employees and traffic
to the building, if necessary, in excess of the minimum requirements of Article XVI.
5. Loading operations shall be conducted at the sides or rear of buildings. Service drives or other
areas shall be provided for off-street loading in such a way that, in the process of loading or
unloading, no truck will block the passage of other vehicles on the service drive or extend into
any other public or private drive or street used for traffic circulation.
6. No parking or storage of material or products shall be permitted in the required front yard.
7. All yards shall be landscaped with trees, grass, shrubs or pedestrian walks and maintained in a
neat and attractive condition and shall meet the requirements of Article XVII.
8. All fencing shall have a uniform and durable character and shall be property maintained.
9. Beverage blending or bottling, bakery products, candy manufacture, dairy products and ice
cream, fruit and vegetable processing and canning, packing and processing of fish, meat and
poultry products shall be permitted but not distilling of beverages or slaughtering of poultry or
animals, or processing or bulk storage of grain or feeds for animals or poultry.
10 Filling station, located in a district of fifty (50) acres or more and limited in land area to one (1)
acre, and not including truck or trailer storage or mechanical servicing of trucks or trailers may be
permitted.
11. Laboratories, research, experimental or testing shall be permitted, but not testing combustion
engines or explosives.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 235
12. Permitted accessory uses shall be limited to storage of goods used in or produced by permitted
commercial and industrial uses or related activities, subject to applicable district regulations.
13 A single-family dwelling accessory to a farm of ten (10) acres or more may be permitted.
Section 218. Special Development Standards in the L-2 Light Industrial District
The uses permitted in the I-2 Light Industrial District shall be subject to the following special conditions:
1. Dwellings for resident watchmen and caretakers employed on the premises shall be permitted.
2. Open or enclosed building materials (cement, lime in bags or containers, sand, gravel, stone,
lumber, structural or reinforcing steel, steel fabricating, pipe and the like) storage and sales shall
be permitted but not manufacture of steel or junk storage.
3. Fertilizer storage in bags or bulk storage of liquid or dry fertilizer in tanks or in a completely
enclosed building shall be permitted but not manufacture or processing.
4. Industrial vocational training schools, including internal-combustion engines, shall be permitted.
5. Blending only of insecticides, fungicides, disinfectants and related industrial and household
chemical elements shall be permitted.
6. Experimental research laboratories shall be permitted but not including combustion engine
testing.
7. Leather goods manufacture shall be permitted but not including tanning operations.
8. Meat products, packing and processing shall be permitted by not slaughtering.
9. Oleomargarine compounding and packing only shall be permitted.
10. Railroad switching yards, primarily for railroad service in the district, team tracks and spur tracks
shall be permitted.
11. Accessory storage of goods or materials shall be limited those used in or produced by permitted
industrial uses or related activities, subject to applicable district regulations.
12. A single-family dwelling accessory may be permitted on a farm of ten (10) acres or more.
Section 219. Swimming Pools, Commercial
A commercial swimming pool, including accessory buildings, may be permitted as a special exception by
the Board of Appeals in the C-2 District upon a finding that such a use will not constitute a nuisance
because of traffic, noise, or physical activity, provided that the following minimum lot area, frontage, and
setback requirements shall be complied with:
1. Lot Area: five acres.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 236
2. Frontage: 300 feet.
3. Swimming pools, recreation areas, and buildings shall be at least 200 feet from any residential
zone.
4. Setback: 50 feet from the front property line, 35 feet from the rear line, and 25 feet from each side
property line in all other zones.
Section 220. Swimming Pools, Community
A community swimming pool may be permitted as a special exception by the Board of Appeals in any
residential zone upon a finding by the Board that such use will not adversely affect the present character
or future development of the surrounding residential community and that such use of land will conform to
the following minimum requirements:
1. The swimming pool, including the apron and any buildings, shall not at any point be closer than
75 feet to the nearest property line nor closer than 125 to any existing single-family or two-family
dwelling, provided that where the lot upon which it is located abuts a railroad right-of-way,
publicly owned land or land in a commercial or industrial zone such pool may be constructed not
less than 25 feet at any point from such railroad right-of-way, publicly owned land, or
commercial or industrial zone. Any buildings erected on the site of any such pool shall comply
with the yard requirements of the zone in which the pool is located.
2. A public water supply shall be available and shall be used for the pool. A private supply of water
for the pool may be permitted by the Planning Commission if use of a private supply of water will
not adversely affect the water supply of the community.
3. When the lot on which any such pool is located abuts the rear or side lot line of, or is across the
street from, any land in a residential zone, other than publicly owned land, a wall, fence, or
shrubbery shall be erected or planted so as to substantially screen such pool from view from the
nearest property of such land in a residential zone.
4. Special conditions deemed necessary to safeguard the general community interest and welfare,
such as provisions for off-street parking, additional fencing or planting or other landscaping,
additional setback from property lines, location and arrangement of lighting and other reasonable
requirements, including a showing of financial responsibility by the applicant, may be required by
the Board as a requisite to the grant of a special exception. Financial responsibility shall not be
construed to mean a showing of a 100 percent cash position at the time of application, but shall be
construed to mean at least 60 percent.
Section 221. Temporary Emergency Construction, or Repair of Residence
1. Temporary residences used on construction sites of non-residential premises shall be removed
immediately upon the completion of the project.
2. Permits for temporary residences to be occupied pending the construction, repair, or renovation of
the permanent residential building on a site shall expire within six (6) months after the date of
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 237
issuance, except that the Administrator may renew such permit for one additional period not to
exceed three (3) months if he determines that such renewal is reasonably necessary to allow the
proposed occupants of the permanent residential building to complete the construction, repair,
renovation, or restoration work necessary to make such building habitable.
3. Under the provisions of this section a single-wide manufactured home may be permitted for
purposes of temporary emergency construction or during repair of residence.
Section 222. Highway Corridor Unified Development [Amended May 6, 2014 Ordinance 2014-02]
1. The purpose of Highway Corridor Unified Development is to provide for a comprehensive and
coordinated site-wide approach to site and building design and ongoing maintenance for
properties in the Highway Corridor Overlay District that desire to develop or redevelop jointly
and whose lot widths, when combined, meet or exceed the minimum lot width requirement in the
Highway Commercial C2 District, but one or more of which, individually, have less than the
minimum required lot width.
2. Highway Corridor Unified Development is allowed as a Special Exception in the Highway
Corridor Overlay District of the Highway Commercial C2 Zoning District in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
3. An application for a Special Exception shall be filed by the owners of all lots that seek to be
developed jointly as a Highway Corridor Unified Development. The application shall comply
with the requirements of this section and shall contain sufficient information and documentation
to demonstrate to the Board of Appeals that the proposed development will satisfy the
requirements of this section.
4. Concurrently with, and as a part of, filing an application for a Special Exception, the applicants
also shall file an application for Highway Commercial Overlay District site plan review by the
Planning Commission as set forth in Section 152 of this Chapter. The Special Exception and
Highway Commercial Overlay District site plan review applications shall include the same lots
and treat those lots as one development site.
5. After the Planning Commission has completed its review of the proposed site plan as provided in
Section 153 of this Chapter, the Planning Commission shall submit a written report and
recommendation to the Board of Appeals. The Planning Commission’s report and
recommendation shall address:
A. Whether the Planning Commission finds that the site plan, either as proposed by the
applicants or with conditions as recommended by the Planning Commission, would
comply with the requirements for development in the Highway Corridor Overlay District
as set forth in Part VI of this Chapter if the Board of Appeals grants the requested Special
Exception; and
B. Whether the Planning Commission recommends that the Board of Appeals grant, grant
with conditions, or deny the requested Special Exception.
6. The Board of Appeals may not grant a Special Exception for Highway Corridor Unified
Development unless:
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 238
A. The Planning Commission finds that the proposed site plan, either as proposed or with
conditions as recommended by the Planning Commission, would comply with the
requirements for development in the Highway Corridor Overlay District as set forth in
Part VI of this Chapter if the Special Exception is granted;
B. The Board finds that the Special Exception will satisfy the requirements of this Section;
and
C. The Board finds that the Special Exception will satisfy all of the requirements and
conditions of Section 57 of this Chapter.
7. As authorized by Section 57-1.8 of this Chapter, the Board of Appeals may impose conditions
when it grants a Special Exception for Highway Corridor Unified Development, except that the
Board shall include as part of its grant of a Special Exception all conditions recommended by the
Planning Commission necessary for the site plan to comply with the requirements for
development in the Highway Corridor Overlay District as set forth in Part VI of this Chapter.
8. Before the Board of Appeals may grant a Special Exception for Highway Corridor Unified
Development, the applicants must demonstrate and the Board must find all of the following:
A. The lots that are proposed for Highway Corridor Unified Development:
1) Are located in the Highway Corridor Overlay District;
2) Are adjacent and contiguous to each other;
3) All have frontage abutting U.S. Route 40;
4) Collectively have a highway frontage that meets the minimum required lot width
in the Highway Commercial C2 Zoning District; and
5) Are suitable for Highway Corridor Unified Development taking into
consideration the sizes, shapes, dimensions and topography of the lots, other lot
or development site features, the availability and suitability of consolidated
highway access for the development, and the nature of adjacent properties.
B. The proposed Highway Corridor Unified Development and related site plan will be a
comprehensive and coordinated site-wide approach to site and building design and
ongoing maintenance for the lots included on the site plan. This includes considering and
addressing the following on a site-wide basis as part of the site plan and in related
development documents:
1) Entrances shall be consolidated or shared by the lots subject to State Highway
Administration Access Permit approval;
2) Parking;
3) Vehicular and pedestrian circulation;
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 239
4) Storm water management and storm drainage;
5) The provision of public water and sewer and other utilities to serve the
development;
6) Forestation and reforestation;
7) Building architecture;
8) Building and site signage;
9) Landscaping;
10) Exterior site lighting; and
11) Assurances for perpetual coordinated property maintenance for the development.
C. The lots that are part of a Highway Corridor Unified Development will be subjected to
perpetual easements, cross-easements, covenants, restrictions and similar legal
instruments as the Board of Appeals deems necessary to provide for comprehensive and
coordinated site-wide treatment of the items described in Subsection 8.B.
9. The Board’s granting of a Highway Corridor Unified Development Special Exception shall be
subject to the condition, whether or not expressly stated in the Board’s decision, that before the
Town may issue any permits for the development the applicants shall:
A. Submit all easements, cross-easements, covenants, restrictions and other legal
instruments referred to in Subsection 8.C. to the Town Attorney for review and approval,
at the applicant’s expense; and
B. Record in the County Land Records, at applicant’s expense, all such easements, crosseasements,
covenants, restrictions and other legal instruments, and provide the Town
Attorney with proof of such recording.
10. The grant of a Special Exception for a Highway Corridor Unified Development also includes
approval of the site plan submitted with the application, or as may be modified during the
application process, subject to any conditions that the Board of Appeals imposes as part of the
grant of the Special Exception.
11. Except as expressly provided in Subsection 12 of this Section, the design, development and use of
the proposed Highway Corridor Unified Development shall comply with all applicable
requirements of this Chapter for development in the Highway Commercial C2 Zoning District
and the Highway Corridor Overlay District.
12. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Chapter:
A. A lot that is developed as part of a Highway Corridor Unified Development need not
meet the minimum lot width required in the Highway Commercial C2 Zoning District.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 240
B. Buffer yards are not required along common lot lines separating lots that are part of a
Highway Corridor Unified Development.
13. A Highway Corridor Unified Development may include any permitted use or, subject to
additional approval by the Board of Appeals, any Special Exception use, allowed in the Highway
Commercial C2 Zoning District.
14. All owners of the lots included as part of a Highway Corridor Unified Development Special
Exception must join in any application to modify the Special Exception or approved site plan.
Section 223. Tattoo Services [Amended 1/3/2017 by Ord No. 2016-21]
Tattoo services as a business establishment in which tattooing is carried out professionally as permitted in
CEMUD and C-2 Districts, provided:
1. No tattoo services shall be located nearer than 1,000 feet to another entity providing similar
service.
2. Business entity must be registered with the State of Maryland and provide proof of good standing
for Town file.
3. All personnel must adhere to rules set by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration
(OSHA) and Centers for Disease Control & Prevention (CDC).
4. Operations shall be in compliance with all applicable laws, regulations, and ordinances of local
and County Governments and the State of Maryland.
5. Routine inspections for compliance to hygiene and safety standards shall be completed as
required by the local Health Department and copy of reports provided to the Town.
Section 224. Reserved
Section 225. Reserved
Section 226. Reserved
Section 227. Reserved
Section 228. Reserved
Section 229. Reserved
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 241
ARTICLE XII DENSITY AND DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
Section 230. Minimum Lot Size
1. Subject to the exceptions listed below all lots shall have at least the amount of square footage
indicated for the appropriate zone.
2. If the owner of a lot in any district does not own a parcel or tract of land immediately adjacent to
such lot, and if the deed or instrument under which such owner acquired title to such lot was of
record prior to the application of any zoning regulations and restrictions to the premises, and if
such lot does not conform to the requirements of such regulations and restrictions as to width of
lots and lot area per family, the provisions of such lot-area-per-family and lot-width regulations
and restrictions shall not prevent the owner of such lot from erecting a single-family dwelling or
making other improvements on the lot, provided that such improvements conform in all other
respects to applicable zoning regulations and restrictions.
3. Requirements for lot area per family do not apply to dormitories, fraternities, sororities and other
similar living quarters which are accessory to a permitted use and which have no cooking
facilities in individual rooms or apartments.
4. Requirements for lot area per family do not apply to rental units in a hotel, motel, or motor lodge.
Section 231. Residential Density
1. Subject to Subsection 2 and 3, every lot developed for residential purposes shall have the
minimum number of square feet of land area per dwelling unit as required by the Schedule of
Zone Regulations (Section 238).
2. In determining the number of dwelling units permitted on a tract of land, fractions shall be
rounded to the nearest whole number.
3. Exceptions. In the layout of a subdivision, to permit flexibility of design and to encourage the
most efficient use of land, up to 50% of the lots may be as much as 50% less than the required
minimum lot area; provided, however, that the total area of all lots divided by the total number of
lots shall average the minimum lot area required within the district.
4. Unless expressly provided for herein, no more than one principal use or structure shall be
permitted per lot.
Section 232. Minimum Lot Widths
1. No lot may be created that is so narrow or otherwise so irregularly shaped that it would be
impracticable to construct on it a building that:
a. Could be used for purposes that are permissible in that zoning district, and
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 242
b. Could satisfy any applicable setback requirements for that district.
2. The Schedule of Zone Regulations (Section 238) indicates minimum lot widths and depths that
are recommended and are deemed presumptively to satisfy the standard set forth in Subsection 1.
3. No lot created after the effective date of this Chapter that is less than the recommended width
shall be entitled to a variance from any building setback requirement.
4. Lot Shape. Excessive depth in relation to width should be avoided, with a proportion of 2.5 to 1
normally considered a desirable maximum for lot widths of 60 feet or greater with the shorter
dimension oriented to the street frontage. Pointed or very irregular-shaped lots shall be avoided
where possible. Additional depth of at least 20 feet over the minimum lot depth shall be required
on lots that through lots.
Section 233. Building Requirements [Amended 1/3/2017 by Ord No. 2016-21]
1. Subject to other provisions of this section, no portion of any building or any freestanding sign
may be located on any lot closer to any lot or property line than is authorized in the table set forth
in this Section 238.
a. If the lot or property line is not readily determinable (by reference to a recorded map, set
irons, or other means), the setback shall be measured from the boundary line of any
adjacent right-of-way. If the boundary line of the right-of-way is not readily determinable
the setback shall be measured from the centerline of the right-of-way and half the width
of the right-of-way shall be added to the minimum setback requirement.
b. As used in this section, the term "lot boundary line" refers to lot boundaries other than
those that abut streets.
c. As used in this section, the term "building" includes any substantial structure which by
nature of its size, scale, dimensions, bulk, or use tends to constitute a visual obstruction
or generate activity similar to that usually associated with a building. Without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, the following structures shall be deemed to fall within this
description:
(1) Gas pumps and overhead canopies or roofs.
(2) Fences running along lot boundaries adjacent to public street rights-of-way if
such fences exceeds six feet in height and are substantially opaque.
d. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, a sign may be erected on or affixed
to a structure that (1) has a principal function that is something other than the support of
the sign (e.g., a fence), but (2) does not constitute a building as defined in this Chapter,
only if such sign is located so as to comply with the setback requirement applicable to
freestanding signs in the district where such sign is located.
e. Whenever a lot abuts upon a public alley, the alley width may not be considered as a
portion of the required yard.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 243
f. Where these regulations refer to side streets, the Zoning Administrator shall be guided by
the pattern of development in the vicinity of the lot in question in determining which of
two (2) streets is the side street.
g. Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky, except as authorized by this
Chapter and except ordinary projections of sills, belt courses, window air-conditioning
units, chimneys, cornices and ornamental features which may project to a distance not to
exceed twenty-four (24) inches into a required yard.
2. Front Yards.
a. Averaging setbacks for existing alignment. In any zone, when the average depth of front
yard of existing buildings located within 200 feet of each side of a lot in the same block
front is less than the least front yard depth prescribed for a building on such lot, then the
least front yard of any building or structure on such lot shall not be greater than the
average depth of said existing front yards, but shall be at least eight (8) feet. In no event
shall any building be constructed closer than any setback established on a plat of record.
b. Yard on street side of lot adjoining or facing residence zone. On a lot in any nonresidential
zone sharing the same block front with a lot in any residential zone the
minimum front yard required shall equal in depth the front yard required for that
residential zone.
c. Front yards not parallel to the building. Where the front wall of a building is not parallel
with the front lot line or is broken or otherwise irregular, the average depth of the front
yard shall not be less than the otherwise required front yard, provided however, that such
front wall shall at all points be within five (5) feet of the otherwise required front yard
depth.
d. The Planning Commission may establish a “build-to line” in existing residential
neighborhoods and the PUD District where the majority of existing residences are or will
be located close to the street. Where established, the “build-to line shall dictate the
placement of a building or structure from the street right-of-way line on which the
building fronts. On a corner lot, the build-to line applies to both sides of the lot which
have street frontage. The front porch shall be placed on the build-to line. Variations of 25
percent of the distance from the street right-of-way to the build-to line may be permitted
to create variety in streetscape. Whenever a building does not front on a right-of-way, the
build-to line shall be measured from the edge of the pavement of an access way in front
of or on the side of the building.
e. Where an official line has been established for the future widening or opening of a street
or major thoroughfare upon which a lot abuts, then the depth of a front or side yard shall
be measured from such official line. Unless otherwise provided, the right-of-way of any
arterial street, so designated on the transportation plan, shall be assumed to extend forty
(40) feet on each side of the center line of the existing right-of-way for the purpose of
measuring front yards required by this Chapter.
f. On through lots, the required front yard shall be provided on each street.
g. There shall be a front yard of at least fifteen (15) feet on the side street of a corner lot in
any district; provided, however, that the buildable width of a lot of record at the time of
passage of this Chapter shall not be reduced to less than twenty-eight (28) feet.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 244
h. Open, unenclosed porches, platforms or paved terraces, not covered by a roof or canopy
and which do not extend above the level of the first floor of the building, may extend or
project into the front or side yard not more than six (6) feet.
3. Side Yards
a. In the case of attached dwelling units, the entire structure shall be considered as a single
building with respect to side yard requirements.
b. Where a building in a commercial district is subject to the height, area and bulk
requirements applicable to residential development under Section 238, the side yard
requirements for residential development shall be applied only to the lowest floor (and all
floors above it) which contains more than twenty-five percent (25%) of its area used for
dwelling. All floors shall be subject to side yards required by these regulations for
commercial buildings adjacent to residential districts.
c. For the purpose of the side yard regulations, a group of business or industrial buildings
separated by common or party walls shall be considered as one (1) building occupying
one (1) lot.
d. The minimum width of side yards for schools, libraries, churches, community houses and
other public and semi-public buildings in residential districts shall be twenty-five (25)
feet, except where a side yard is adjacent to a business or industrial district, in which case
the width of that yard shall be as required in Section 238, Schedule of Zone Regulations
for the district in which the building is located.
4. Rear yards
a. Where the rear wall of a building is not parallel with the rear lot line or is broken or
otherwise irregular, the average depth of the rear yard shall not be less than the otherwise
required rear yard provided however, that such rear wall shall at all points be within five
(5) feet of the otherwise required rear yard depth.
b. Open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes, outside stairways and balconies opening upon fire
towers and the or projections of chimneys and flues, may project into the required rear
yard for a distance of not more than five (5) feet, but only where the same are so placed
as not to obstruct light and ventilation.
5. Yard requirements adjoining a more restrictive zone. Where a property adjoins the side or rear
yard of a lot in another zone, the side or rear yard in the zone with the less restrictive yard
requirements shall equal the adjoining side or rear yard (as appropriate) of the zone with the more
restrictive yard requirements.
6. Setback distances shall be measured from the property line or street right-of-way line to a point
on the lot that is directly below the nearest extension of any part of the building that is
substantially a part of the building itself and not a mere appendage to it (such as a flagpole, etc.).
7. Whenever a private road that serves more than three lots or more than three dwelling units or that
serves any nonresidential use tending to generate traffic equivalent to more than three dwelling
units is located along a lot boundary, then:
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 245
a. If the lot is not also bordered by a public street, buildings and freestanding signs shall be
set back from the centerline of the private road just as if such road were a public street.
b. If the lot is also bordered by a public street, then the setback distance on lots used for
residential purposes shall be measured from the inside boundary of the traveled portion of
the private road.
8. Walls and Fences.
a. Definitions
(1) Fence - Any structure regardless of composition, except a living fence, that is
erected or maintained for the purpose of enclosing a piece of land or to divide a
piece of land into distinct portions.
(2) Fence Height - The distance measured from the existing grade to the top of the
fence.
b. Approval Required - No fence, wall or other type of construction shall be erected without
the approval of the Zoning Administrator.
c. Application for Permit - Any person or persons, corporation, firm or association
intending to erect a fence or wall shall, before any work is commenced, make application
for permit. Application shall be accompanied by a plan or sketch showing the proposed
location of any fence, the material proposed to be used, which must be in accordance
with this Chapter, and be accompanied by an appropriate fee. Upon approval by the
Zoning Administrator, a permit shall be issued which will be in effect for a period of one
(1) year from the date thereon.
d. No sign, fence, wall, hedge, planting or other obstruction to vision, extending to a height
in excess of three (3) feet above the established street grade, shall be erected, planted or
maintained within the area of a corner lot that is included between the lines of the
intersecting streets and a straight line connecting them at points twenty (20) feet distant
from the intersection of the street lines.
e. Height Limitations - An ornamental fence or wall not more than three and one-half
(3½)feet in height may project into or enclose any required front or side yard to a depth
from the street line equal to the required depth of the front yard. Ornamental fences or
walls may project into or enclose other required yards, provided that such fences and
walls do not exceed a height of six (6) feet.
f. Location Restrictions - Any fence erected under this Chapter may be located on the
property line except in the front yard. Any fence erected in a front yard shall be placed at
least one (1) foot back from the front line and/or property line. No front yard fences are
allowed in townhouse projects. The Planning Commission or Board of Appeals, as
appropriate, may permit fences in excess of the maximums herein established in the CM-
1, CM-2, C-2, LI-1,and the LI-2 Districts if determined that a taller fence is necessary for
safety, security or screening purposes.
g. Materials and Composition
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 246
(1) Any fence, wall or similar structure, which may cause a nuisance, a fire hazard or
a dangerous condition or an obstruction affecting the public safety is prohibited.
Further, no fence shall be erected in a front yard in a residential district or along a
public right-of-way unless the fence is uniformly less than fifty percent (50%)
solid.
(2) The following fences and fencing materials are specifically prohibited:
(a) Barbed wire.
(b) Pointed fences less than three (3) feet in height.
(c) Canvas fences.
(d) Cloth fences.
(e) Electrically charged fences.
(f) Wiring fencing.
(g) Temporary fences such as snow fences.
(h) Expandable fences and collapsible fences, except during construction of
a building.
(3) Approvals or permits for wire fences will be at the discretion of the Zoning
Administrator. The Zoning Administrator will check for adequacy and safety.
(4) All chain link fences erected shall be erected with the closed loop at the top of
the fence.
(5) All entrances or gates shall open into the property.
(6) A permit may be issued for the construction of a security fence for commercial
and industrial properties, upon application.
(7) All fences or walls must be erected so as not to encroach upon a public right-ofway
or easements unless a waiver is granted by the Town Commissioners of
Perryville with the stipulation that the fence be removed or relocated upon
request by appropriate town officials. All fences or walls must be erected with
the property line, and none shall be erected so as to interfere with vehicular or
pedestrian traffic or interfere with visibility on corner lots and/or other structures
or vehicles, whether stationary or transitory, on public or private property.
h. Powers and Duties of the Zoning Administrator - The Zoning Administrator shall have
the authority to direct, in writing, the removal or modification of any fence, wall, hedge
or other structure on private or public property wherever the same shall interfere with
adequate visibility of operators of motor vehicles at street intersections or curbs. Any
person who shall refuse or neglect to comply with the written direction of the Zoning
Administrator shall be guilty of a violation of this Chapter and shall be subject to its
penalties.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 247
i. Violation and Penalties - Any violator of any of this provision of this Chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in the Article VII.
j. Appeals - Any change, other than provided in the provision of this Chapter, as to height,
area, size, location or materials uses, shall not be allowed unless approved by the Board
of Appeals.
9. Projections.
Chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, cornices, eaves,
gutters, and the like may extend no more than 24 inches into any required yard.
Section 234. Building Height Limitations [Amended 11-16-2007 by Res. No. 2007-17]
1. For purposes of this section:
a. Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be
erected or altered to a height greater than the maximum specified for the respective zone.
b. The "height" of a wall or structure or a part of a building is the vertical distance from the
highest point of a structure, excepting chimney or antenna on a building, to the average
ground level of the grade where the walls or other structural elements intersect the
ground.
Where a lot abuts on two or more streets or alleys, of different average established grades
in front of the lot, the higher of such grades shall control.
c. A point of access to a roof shall be the top of any parapet wall or the lowest point of a
roof's surface, whichever is greater. Roofs with slopes greater than 75 percent are
regarded as walls.
2. Subject to the remaining provisions of this section, building height limitations in the various
zoning districts shall be as indicated in The Schedule of Zone Regulations.
3. Exceptions to height limits. Notwithstanding other regulations in this Article or the maximum
specified for the respective zone, the height limits of this Zoning Chapter shall not apply to the
following:
a. Church spires, belfries, and cupolas, not for human occupancy; water towers, chimneys,
flag poles, radio tower, masts, and aerials.
4. Television antennas are allowed in all zoning districts.
5. Where more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total floor area of any building in a
commercial district is used for dwelling purposes in a building which may also contain
nonresidential uses, the minimum height, area and bulk requirements for residential development
applicable in the district in which such building is located shall apply, subject to the side yard
modification for mixed uses contained section 233.3. Where twenty-five percent (25%) or less of
the total floor area of such building is used for dwelling purposes, the building shall be subject to
the height, area and bulk requirements applicable to nonresidential buildings in the district. These
provisions apply in all districts except the TC Town Center Commercial District.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 248
6. Except within an area defined as an Airport Approach Zone by the Federal Aviation Agency,
public and semipublic or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools, when
permitted in a district, may be erected to a height not exceeding sixty (60) feet, and churches and
temples may be erected to a height not exceeding seventy-five (75) feet when the required
adjacent yards are each increased by at least one (1) foot for each one (1) foot of additional
building height above the height regulations for the district in which the building is located.
7. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter, no places of public assembly, including,
but without limitation, schools, churches, hospitals, theaters and assembly halls, shall be erected
or otherwise located within any area which would be classified as an Airport Approach Zone
within a distance of eleven thousand (11,000) feet from the end of any airport runway.
8. Notwithstanding the maximum building height specified in The Schedule of Zone Regulations in
Section 238, in the L-2 Light Industrial District, where the average ground level of the lot or
parcel of land upon which the building or structure is to be erected is less than one hundred fifty
(150) feet above sea level the maximum height of a building or structure may be increased to not
more than one hundred twenty (120) feet subject to and in accordance with the following:
(a) The required adjacent yards shall be increased by ten (10) feet for each ten (10) feet, or
fraction thereof, of building or structure height in excess of seventy-five (75) feet.
(b) Not more than thirty percent (30%) of the gross horizontal area of the building or
structure measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls at ground level (the
building “footprint”) may exceed a height in excess of seventy-five feet.
Section 235. Density on Lots Where Portion Dedicated to the Town
1. Subject to the other provisions of this section, if (1) any portion of a tract lies within an area
designated on any officially adopted Town plan as part of a proposed public park, greenway, or
bikeway, and (2) before the tract is developed, the owner of the tract, with the concurrence of the
Town, dedicates that portion of the tract so designated, then when the remainder of the tract is
developed for residential purposes, the permissible density at which the remainder may be
developed shall be calculated in accordance with the provisions of this section.
2. If the proposed use of the remainder is a single-family detached residential subdivision, then the
minimum lot size and minimum setbacks in such subdivision may be reduced, as determined
appropriate by the Planning Commission to achieve the development, and the permitted density
shall be calculated by regarding the dedicated portion of the original lot as if it were still part of
the lot proposed for development.
3. If the proposed use of the remainder is a two-family or multi-family project, then the permissible
density at which the remainder may be developed shall be calculated by regarding the dedicated
portion of the original lot as if it were still part of the lot proposed for development.
4. If the portion of the tract that remains after dedication as provided in Subsection 1. is divided in
such a way that the resultant parcels are intended for future subdivision or development, then
each of the resultant parcels shall be entitled to its pro rata share of the "density bonus" provided
for in Subsections 2. and 3.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 249
Section 236. Reserved
Section 237. Reserved
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 250
Section 238. Schedule of Zone Regulations [Amended 9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-2]
Minimum Lot Requirements Minimum Yard Height
Use
Total
Per
Family
Width
(feet)
Depth
(feet)
Front
(feet)
Side
(feet)
Aggregate
(feet)
Rear
(Feet)
Feet
Stories
RESIDENTIAL
R-1Single Family
- 1 Family 10000 10000 70 100 30 10 20 30 35 21/2
R-2 Single Family
- 1 Family 7000 7000 50 100 20 8 20 20 35 21/2
- 2 Family 12000 6000 50 100 20 -- 20 20 35 21/2
R-3 Multi-Family
- 1 Family 5000 5000 50 80 15 8 16 -- 35 --
- 2 Family 10000 5000 50 80 15 8 16 -- 40 --
- Apartments 40000 3400 125 100 25 20 40 -- 40 --
- Townhouses 40000 2000 18 100 15 -- -- -- 40 --
MIXED-USE
TC Town Center Mixed-Use
- Commercial -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 50 4
- 1 Family 5000 5000 40 80 10 5 12 15 35 21/2
- 2 Family 10000 5000 50 80 10 5 12 15 35 21/2
- Townhouse 10000 2000 18 100 15 -- -- -- 35 21/2
RM Residential Marine
- Commercial Marina -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 50 4
- 1 Family 5000 5000 40 80 10 5 12 15 35 21/2
- Townhouse 10000 2000 18 100 15 -- -- -- 35 21/2
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 251
- Multi-Family Apartments 40,000 3,400 125 100 25 20 40 40 40 --
COMMERCIAL
NB Neighborhood Business 20000 100 100 25 10 25 12 35 21/2
C-2 Highway Commercial 40000 300 100 20 10 25 12 40 3
CM- 1 Commercial Maritime 20000 100 100 25 10 25 12 40 --
CM- 2 Commercial Maritime 20000 100 100 25 10 25 12 40 --
INDUSTRIAL
L-1 40000 150 150 50 20 50 50 50 --
L-2 20000 250 250 50 75 200 50 75 --
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 252
ARTICLE XIII RECREATIONAL FACILITIES AND OPEN SPACE
Section 239. Neighborhood Parks Required
In order to implement the Open Space and Recreation objectives for Perryville, all residential
subdivisions shall provide recreation opportunities according to the following subsections:
1. Subject to Subsection 3., all residential developments in the Town shall provide, at a minimum,
recreational areas in the form of neighborhood parks in an amount equal to the standards set forth
in Subsection 2.
2. For purposes of this section, neighborhood park areas shall be 0.005 acres per residential unit and
shall not be less than 5,000 square feet.
3. The Town Commissioners may permit payment of a fee in-lieu, dedication, reservation or a
combination whenever the requirements in Subsections 1. and 2. cannot adequately meet the open
space and recreation responsibilities of the development or if the development is less than 30
homes or within 1,500 feet from another park or playground. The fee in-lieu shall be on a perdwelling-
unit basis as established by the Town of Perryville. The fee shall be listed with the
annual schedule of fees for the Town and may change from time to time. Fees will be collected
upon application for a building permit. The fee shall be deposited only in a designated account
with funds expended only for planned park and recreation facilities.
4. In the case of large proposed developments, which are hereafter defined as any developments
over 50 dwelling units, the Planning Commission may require a combination of improved park
and recreational property and playgrounds, at the minimum rate of 0.015 acre per dwelling unit,
and an impact fee in order to meet the planned Town open space and recreation objectives.
5. When park or recreational facilities approved for dedication are completed and accepted, a deed
shall be conveyed to the Town of Perryville, after which the supervision and maintenance shall be
the responsibility of the Town. When park or recreational facilities are reserved, the developer
shall establish conditions as to ownership, maintenance, and use of such areas as deemed
necessary by the Planning Commission to assure preservation of its intended purposes.
Section 240. Neighborhood Parks: Purpose and Standards
1. The purpose of the neighborhood park is to provide adequate active recreational facilities to serve
the residents of the immediately surrounding neighborhood within the development. The
following are illustrative of the types of facilities that shall be deemed to serve active recreational
needs and therefore to count toward satisfaction of the neighborhood park requirements of this
article: tennis courts, racquetball courts, swimming pools, sauna and exercise rooms, meeting or
activity rooms within clubhouses, basketball courts, swings, slides, and play apparatus.
2. Each development shall satisfy its neighborhood park requirement by installing the types of
recreational facilities that are most likely to be suited to and used by the age bracket of persons
likely to reside in that development. However, unless it appears that less than 5 percent of the
residents of any development are likely to be children under 12, then at least 15 percent of the
neighborhood park must be satisfied by the construction of "tot lots" (i.e., areas equipped with
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 253
imaginative play apparatus oriented to younger children as well as seating accommodations for
parents).
3. Neighborhood parks shall be attractively landscaped and shall be provided with sufficient natural
or man-made screening or buffer areas to minimize any negative impacts upon adjacent
residences.
4. Each neighborhood park shall be centrally located and easily accessible so that it can be
conveniently and safely reached and used by those persons in the surrounding neighborhood it is
designed to serve.
5. Each neighborhood park shall be constructed on land that is relatively flat, dry, free of nontidal
wetlands, and capable of serving the purposes intended by this article.
Section 241. Provision of Common Open Space
The minimum common open space that shall be provided is as specified in Section 240. Open space
(spaces designed and intended for the use and enjoyment of all residents of the development) may contain
such complimentary structures, improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the use, benefit and
enjoyment of residents of the development. Common open space areas shall meet the following
requirements:
1. Common open space areas shall:
a. Be exclusive of tidal wetlands and road rights-of-ways/parking areas;
b. Equal or exceed remaining percentages of the gross site area (maintenance of areas of
productive farmland may serve to meet open space requirements);
c. No more than 40 percent of the open space required shall consist of those areas
designated as nontidal wetlands.
2. Common open space may serve recreational purposes, preserve significant site features, and
preserve open space. The uses authorized shall be appropriate to the purposes intended to be
served. Open space designed to serve recreational purposes shall be appropriate to the scale and
character of the cluster development, considering its size, density, expected population, and the
number and type of dwelling units proposed.
3. Common open space will be suitably improved for its intended use, except that common open
space containing natural features worthy of protection may be left unimproved. The buildings,
structures, and improvements to be permitted in the common open space must be appropriate to
the uses which are authorized for the common space.
Section 242. Open Space Requirement - Ownership
1. Private Ownership. If joint use facilities are not dedicated to public use, they shall be protected by
legal arrangements, satisfactory to the Planning Commission, sufficient to assure their
maintenance and preservation for whatever purpose they are intended. Covenants or other legal
arrangements shall specify ownership of the open space, method of maintenance, maintenance
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 254
taxes and insurance, compulsory membership and compulsory assessment provisions and
guarantees that any association formed to own and maintain open space will not be dissolved
without the consent of the Planning Commission.
2. Open Space. Unless the Planning Commission finds that the size, location, type of development,
or cost of development or maintenance of such open space or the availability of public open space
would make public use desirable and necessary, open space shall not be made available for the
use of all residents of the Town. The Planning Commission generally will require dedication of
all areas indicated for acquisition in the adopted County or Town Open Space and Recreation
Plan.
Section 243. Management of Common Open Space Property
The developer shall insure that the common open space and improvements not dedicated and accepted for
public ownership are maintained and cared for, and the developer shall provide for and establish an
organization for the ownership, maintenance and preservation of open space which shall conform to the
following standards and procedures:
1. The organization shall be established by the developer before sale or rental of dwelling units in
the development, and prior to final approval of the development plan by the Planning
Commission.
2. The financial and organizational structures, rules of membership, and methods of cost assessment
of the organization shall be devised to insure the successful fulfillment of the maintenance,
preservation and improvement responsibilities of the organization.
3. The organization responsible for maintenance, preservation, and improvement of common open
space lands, and all property owners within the cluster development shall be permitted to
participate in such organization.
4. Areas set aside to meet the open space requirements hereof shall be adequately described.
Instruments in the form of deed restrictions and/or covenant shall be provided to insure the
purpose for which the open space is provided will be achieved. Said instruments shall be
approved by the Planning Commission, and Public Works Department prior to recordation among
the Land Records of Cecil County.
Section 244. Bond for Improvements
Prior to the issuance of a building permit, there shall be delivered by the owner or developer some form of
surety acceptable to the Town in an amount as specified by the Town, which shall be submitted with the
final subdivision plat, as described in the Perryville Subdivision Regulations, which surety shall secure an
agreement to construct such required physical improvements as identified in the Proposed Plan of
Development.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 255
Section 245. Homeowners Associations
Homeowners associations or similar legal entities that, pursuant to Section 243, are responsible for the
maintenance and control of common areas, including recreational facilities and open space, shall be
established in such a manner that:
1. Provision for the establishment of the association or similar entity is made before any lot in the
development is sold or any building occupied;
2. The association or similar legal entity has clear legal authority to maintain and exercise control
over such common areas and facilities;
3. The association or similar legal entity has the power to compel contributions from residents of the
development to cover their proportionate shares of the costs associated with the maintenance and
upkeep of such common areas and facilities; and
4. Each purchaser of a lot or unit is given adequate and specific notice of the homeowner association
requirements and the association’s authority to compel compliance.
Section 246. Flexibility in Administration Authorized
1. The requirements set forth in this article concerning the amount, size, location, and nature of
recreational facilities and open space to be provided in connection with residential developments
are established by the Town as standards that presumptively will result in the provision of that
amount of recreational facilities and open space that is consistent with officially adopted Town
plans. The Town recognizes, however, that due to the particular nature of a tract of land, or the
nature of the facilities proposed for installation, or other factors, the underlying objectives of this
article may be achieved even though the standards are not adhered to with mathematical
precision. Therefore, the permit-issuing body is authorized to permit minor deviations from these
standards whenever it determines that: (a) the objectives underlying these standards can be met
without strict adherence to them; and (b) because of peculiarities in the developer's tract of land
or the facilities proposed it would be unreasonable to require strict adherence to these standards.
2. Whenever the permit-issuing board authorizes some deviation from the standards set forth in this
article pursuant to Subsection 1., the official record of action taken on the development shall
contain a statement of reasons for allowing the deviation.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 256
ARTICLE XIV UTILITIES AND IMPROVEMENTS
Section 247. Utility Ownership and Easement Rights
In any case in which a developer installs or causes the installation of water, sewer, electrical power,
telephone, or cable television facilities and intends that such facilities shall be owned, operated, or
maintained by a public utility or any entity other than the developer, the developer shall transfer to such
utility or entity the necessary ownership or easement rights to enable the utility or entity to operate and
maintain such facilities.
Section 248. Underground Utilities
1. All electric power lines (not to include transformers or enclosures containing electrical equipment
including, but not limited to, switches, meters, or capacitors which may be pad mounted),
telephone, gas distribution, and cable television lines in subdivisions constructed after the
effective date of this Chapter shall be placed underground in accordance with the specifications
and policies of the respective utility service providers.
2. Whenever an unsubdivided development is hereafter constructed on a lot that is undeveloped on
the effective date of this Chapter, then all electric power, telephone, gas distribution, and cable
television lines installed to serve the development that are located on the development site outside
of a previously existing public street right-of-way shall be placed underground in accordance with
the specifications and policies of the respective utility companies.
Section 249. Utilities To Be Consistent With Internal and External Development
1. Whenever it can reasonably be anticipated that utility facilities constructed in one development
will be extended to serve other adjacent or nearby developments, such utility facilities (e.g., water
or sewer lines) shall be located and constructed so that extensions can be made conveniently and
without undue burden or expense or unnecessary duplication of service.
2. All utility facilities shall be constructed in such a manner as to minimize interference with
pedestrian or vehicular traffic and to facilitate maintenance without undue damage to
improvements or facilities located within the development.
Section 250. Electric Service
Every principal use and every lot within a subdivision shall have available to it a source of electric power
adequate to accommodate the reasonable needs of such use and every lot within such subdivision.
Compliance with this requirement shall be determined as follows:
1. If the use is not a subdivision and is located on a lot that is served by an existing power line and
the use can be served by a simple connection to such power line (as opposed to a more complex
distribution system, such as would be required in an apartment complex or shopping center), then
no further certification is needed.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 257
2. If the use is a subdivision or is not located on a lot served by an existing power line or a
substantial internal distribution system will be necessary, then the electric utility service provider
must review the proposed plans and certify to the Town that it can provide service that is
adequate to meet the needs of the proposed use and every lot within the proposed subdivision.
Section 251. Lighting Requirements
1. All entrances and exits in substantial buildings used for nonresidential purposes and in twofamily
or multi-family residential developments containing more than four dwelling units shall be
adequately lighted to ensure the safety of persons and the security of the buildings.
2. Excessive Illumination. Lighting within any lot that unnecessarily illuminates any other lot and
substantially interferes with the use or enjoyment of such other lot is prohibited. Lighting
unnecessarily illuminates another lot when it substantially interfere with the use or enjoyment of
neighboring properties.
3. Street lights shall be decorative and blend with the architectural style of the community.
4. Streets and sites shall provide adequate lighting while minimizing adverse impacts, such as glare
and overhead sky glow, on adjacent properties and the public right-of-way. House side shields
shall be provided where abutting a residential use.
5. Along all commercial or mixed use streets, parking areas, sidewalks, walkways, courtyards,
community greens, and interior open spaces in a planned unit developments, twelve foot high
decorative lamp posts shall be provided at regular intervals. Posts shall be spaced at no greater
than 80 feet on center on both sides of a commercial or main street. Lighting on residential
streets should be confined to intersections and corners. Lighting standards shall be consistent
throughout the development.
6. In parking lots, post heights may be extended to a maximum of sixteen feet.
7. Use of minimum wattage metal halide or color corrected sodium light sources is encouraged.
Non-color corrected low pressure sodium and mercury vapor light sources are prohibited in
residential districts, the CM, NB and TC Districts.
8. Porch light and yard post lighting shall be incorporated into the street lighting design in
residential developments.
Section 252. Lighting Standards
1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the spill-over of light and glare on operators of
motor vehicles, pedestrians, and land uses in the proximity of the light source. With respect to
motor vehicles in particular, safety considerations are the basis of the regulations contained
herein. In other cases, both the nuisance and hazard aspects of glare are regulated. This section is
not intended to apply to public street lighting.
2. Site lighting shall be of low-intensity from a concealed source, shall be of a clear white light
which does not distort colors and shall not spill over into adjoining properties, buffers, roadways,
or in any way interfere with the vision of oncoming motorists.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 258
3. Exemption for specified outdoor recreational uses. Because of their unique requirements for
nighttime visibility and their limited hours of operation, ball diamonds, playing fields, and tennis
courts are exempted from the exterior lighting standards of Subsection 2. above upon satisfying
the Planning Commission during a site plan review that the site plan indicates that these outdoor
recreational uses meet all other requirements of this section and of this Chapter and the following
conditions:
a. The outdoor recreational uses specified above shall not exceed a maximum permitted
post height of 40 feet.
b. The outdoor recreational uses specified above may exceed a total cutoff angle of 90
degrees, provided that the luminaire is shielded in either its orientation or by a landscaped
buffer yard to prevent light and glare spill-over to adjacent residential property. The
maximum permitted illumination at the interior buffer yard line shall not exceed 2 footcandles.
4. Additional regulations. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the contrary:
a. No flickering or flashing lights shall be permitted.
b. Light sources or luminaires shall not be located within buffer yard areas except on
pedestrian walkways.
5. Exterior lighting plan. At the time any exterior light is installed or substantially modified, and
whenever a zoning certificate is sought, an exterior lighting plan shall be submitted to the Town
in order to determine whether the requirements of this section have been met and that adjoining
property will not be adversely impacted by the proposed lighting.
Section 253. Sites For and Screening of Dumpsters
1. Every new development constructed from the effective date of this Chapter that is or will be
required to provide one or more dumpsters for solid waste collection shall provide sites for such
dumpsters that are:
a. Located so as to facilitate collection and minimize any negative impact on persons
occupying the development site, neighboring properties, or public rights-of-way, and
b. Constructed according to specifications established by the Town to allow for collection
without damage to the development site or the collection vehicle.
2. All such dumpsters shall be screened if and to the extent that, in the absence of screening, they
would be clearly visible to:
a. Persons located within any dwelling unit on residential property other than that where the
dumpster is located.
b. Occupants, customers, or employees located within any building on nonresidential
property other than that where the dumpster is located.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 259
c. Persons traveling on any public street, sidewalk, or other public way.
3. When dumpster screening is required under this section, such screening shall be constructed,
installed, and located to prevent or remedy the conditions requiring the screening.
Section 254. Curbs and Gutters
The Planning Commission shall require curbs and gutters on the entire street frontage of any parcel or lot
developed as a commercial, industrial or institutional use. Curbs and gutters shall be built to the
construction standards and specifications currently in use by the State Highway Administration of
Maryland. Curb cuts and driveways shall be built according to the following schedule:
1. There shall be a maximum of two (2) curb cuts per parcel or lot per street frontage, unless the
parcel or lot has over three hundred (300) feet of width as measured at the street line.
2. Curb cuts shall be no less than eighteen (18) feet wide for one-way operation or no less than
twenty-four (24) feet wide for a two-way operation; maximum width per curb cut shall be thirty -
five (35) feet. In no case shall over sixty percent (60 %) of the street frontage per parcel be
allowed as curb cuts for any entrances or exits into commercial, industrial or institutional uses.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 260
ARTICLE XV SIGNS [Amended 7-10-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-3]
Section 255. General Regulations
No sign shall be erected, placed, attached, altered, reconstructed or modified until an application has been
filed, and until a permit for such action has been issued, except as otherwise provided in Section 262 and
Section 263, and must conform to all State and Federal requirements, if applicable. At a minimum, all
applications shall include a scale drawing specifying dimensions, materials, illumination, letter sizes,
colors, support system, and location on land or building with all relevant measurements and shall conform
to the following regulations:
1. No flashing or rotating signs, or tethered inflatable signs, such as soda cans, merchandise, logos,
etc., or signs containing reflective elements which sparkle or twinkle in the sunlight shall be
permitted in any district.
2. No sign shall be fastened to, and supported by, or on the roof of a building; and no projecting sign
shall extend over or above the roof or a parapet wall of a building.
3. All real estate signs advertising property for sale shall be removed within thirty (30) days
following the sale of the property.
4. Public service, civic organization and political signs shall be permitted, provided:
a. The signs are unlighted or indirectly lighted;
b. The sign area is less than fifteen (15) square feet;
c. The signs meet all applicable state and federal regulations;
d. Political signs shall be removed not later than fifteen (15) days following the election.
No political signs shall exceed 16 square feet of surface area.
e. Temporary sale signs are permitted in commercial and industrial zones without obtaining
a permit if the business does not exceed the overall maximum sign area allowed for the
property under this Chapter. If the property owner seeks to exceed the maximum
allowable signage, then the Planning Commission may grant a temporary permit for such
use. Sign must be removed fifteen (15) days after the event. If the sign is not removed
after 15 days, the Town shall send a notice of violation of the provisions of this
subsection to the property owner. If, after twenty-four (24) hours after the service of
notice, the sign has not been removed, the property owner shall be liable for penalty
under this Chapter.
5. Every sign shall have good scale and proportion in its design and in its visual relationship to
buildings and surroundings.
6. Every sign shall be designed as an integral architectural element of the building and site to which
it principally relates.
7. The colors, materials, and lighting of every sign shall be restrained and harmonious with the
building and site to which it principally relates.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 261
8. The number of graphic elements on a sign shall be held to the minimum needed to convey the
sign's major message and shall be composed in proportion to the sign face.
9. Each sign shall be compatible with the signs on adjoining premises and shall not compete for
attention.
10. Identification signs of a prototype design and corporation logos shall conform to the criteria for
all other signs.
11. Signs may be subject to additional requirements of Article IX, Part VI, Highway Corridor
Overlay District.
Section 256. Permitted Signs and Standards for the R-1, R-2, and R-3 Districts
Signs permitted in the Residential Zones R-1, R-2, and R-3 shall be limited to the following:
1. An unlighted real estate signs not exceeding four (4) square feet in area.
2. One on-site, indirectly illuminated sign not to exceed fifteen (15) square feet in area identifying
an apartment structure having a minimum of one hundred (100) feet of street frontage. The
maximum height of the sign shall be six (6) feet.
3. One on-site indirectly illuminated sign not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area shall be
permitted in conjunction with a building of a public or semi-public nature. The maximum height
of the sign shall be six (6) feet.
4. One sign, not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet in area is permitted in conjunction with an
approved special exception use except where signage is provided for in other sections of this
Chapter.
5. Banners and pennants are prohibited except as provided for in Section 211 - Special Event Signs.
Section 257. Permitted Signs and Standards for the NB District
Signs permitted in the Neighborhood Business district (NB) shall be limited to the following:
1. Unlighted real estate signs not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area.
2. One on-site free standing sign not to exceed one (1) square foot of area for each one (1) linear
foot of street frontage; however, such sign shall not exceed sixty-four (64) square feet in area nor
need be smaller than twenty (20) square feet. The maximum height of such sign shall be twentyfive
(25) feet.
3. A flat sign, not projecting more than nine (9) inches from the side of the building and not
exceeding a maximum of 64 square feet of signage. One flat sign is permitted of sign area per
street frontage.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 262
4. Projecting signs extending not more than seventy two (72) inches from the front of the building.
Signs may not be larger than 12 square feet, and must be at least 7 feet from the ground. The sign
shall advertise only the business conducted in the building to which it is attached.
Section 258. Permitted Signs and Standards for the TC and RM Districts
Signs permitted in the Town Center (TC) and Residential Marine (RM) districts shall be limited to the
following:
1. Unlighted real estate sign not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area.
2. One indirectly lit freestanding sign not exceeding nine (9) square feet in area or one directly lit
projecting sign extending not more than seventy two (72) inches from the front of the building.
Signs may not be larger than nine (9) square feet in area and must be at least seven (7) feet from
the ground. The sign shall advertise only the business conducted in the building to which it is
attached. Corner lots having a minimum of 100 feet of street frontage may install one indirectly
lit freestanding sign not exceeding twenty-four (24) square feet in area in lieu of preceding
signage. Additionally, freestanding sign must be set back ten (10) feet from the property line.
3. One indirectly lit flat sign, not projecting more than nine (9) inches from the side of a building.
The sign area is not to exceed one (1) foot of area per linear foot of street frontage or 64 square
feet, whichever is less.
4. Signs for non-residential uses shall comply with the guidelines in Section 214 Development
Standards in the TC District. Plastic signs are discouraged unless they are being used under the
provisions of Section 171 as a banner or pennant.
5. In addition to the freestanding sign permitted in 2. above, one sandwich board or pedestal sign
provided:
a. Only one sandwich board or pedestal sign shall be allowed for any single building;
provided, however, that where more than one (1) business occupies a building, each
business may have a sandwich board or pedestal sign;
b. Notwithstanding (5)(a), a minimum separation of twenty (20) feet shall be maintained
between sandwich boards or pedestal signs;
c. Sandwich boards or pedestal signs on public or private property shall not exceed twentyfour
(24) inches in width and thirty-six (36) inches in height; provided, however, that a
minimum unobstructed sidewalk width of forty-two (42) inches shall be maintained;
d. No sign shall be placed in a manner which obstructs the vision clearance at a street
intersection; and
e. Sandwich boards or pedestal signs located within a public right-of-way shall be placed
within that portion of the public right-of-way which abuts the building containing the
business or use, provided an encroachment permit has been secured from the Zoning
Administrator.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 263
6. A-Frame Signs. A-frame signs are permitted for retailed businesses that 1) primarily sell
perishable goods; or 2) are not visible from a public street and have no options available to
provide signage visible from a public street. A-frame signs shall meet the following
requirements:
a. Each business shall not have more than one (1) A-frame sign;
b. A-frame signs shall be placed on private property and shall be located on the same parcel
as the business which qualifies for said sign;
c. A-frame signs shall be removed during non-business hours; and
d. The area of an A-frame sign shall not exceed ten (10) square feet.
7. An awning sign may be permitted by the Zoning Administrator under the following conditions:
a. No sign shall project from an awning.
b. Awning graphics may be painted or affixed flat to the surface of the front or sides, shall
indicate only the name and/or address of the enterprise or premises.
c. Awning graphics shall be a single line of lettering not exceeding six (6) inches in height,
but if over three (3) inches in height, shall be debited against the permitted wall sign
surface area.
d. No awning sign shall be internally illuminated.
8. Projecting Signs
a. A wall-mounted sign perpendicular to the building surface.
b. If flat, each face shall not exceed ten (10) sq. ft.
c. The total area of a three dimensional sign shall be determined by enclosing the largest
cross-section of the sign in an easily recognizable geometric shape and computing its area
which shall not exceed nine (9) sq. ft.
d. Such sign shall be hung at right angles to the building and shall not project closer than
two (2) feet to the curb line.
e. The supporting framework shall be in proportion to the size of such sign.
f. Signs which overhang a public way (including sidewalks) shall be covered by a public
liability insurance policy in an amount specified by the Town and which names the Town
as the insured party.
g. The top of the sign may be suspended in line with one of the following, whichever is the
most successful application of scale, linear continuity, and visibility as determined by the
Zoning Administrator:
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 264
(1) suspended between the bottom sills of the second story windows and the top of
the doors and windows of the ground floor; or,
(2) the lowest point of the roof of a one story building.
h. Projecting signs shall have a minimum clearance of eight (8) feet above grade when
located adjacent to or projecting over a pedestrian way. If projecting over an alley or
driveway, the clearance must be at least thirteen (13) feet.
Section 259. Permitted Signs and Standards for the C-2, CM-1 and CM-2 Districts
1. Signs permitted in the Highway Commercial Zone (C-2) district shall be limited to the following:
a. Unlighted real estate signs, total sign area not to exceed forty (40) square feet.
b. One detached on-site sign not to exceed fifteen (15) square feet in area for each twenty
(20) linear feet of street frontage; however, such sign shall not exceed eighty (80) square
feet in area.
c. Flat signs not to exceed fifteen (15) square feet in area for each twenty (20) linear feet of
street frontage, however such signs shall not exceed a maximum of thirty (30) square feet
or 20 percent of the wall on which it is located.
d. Except as otherwise noted where a shopping center building or structure has multiple
frontage, the number of signs permitted for single frontage may also be permitted for the
additional frontage as determined by the Planning Commission.
2. Signs permitted in the CM-1 and CM-2 districts shall be limited to the following:
a. Unlighted real estate signs, total sign area not exceeding twenty (20) square feet.
b. One detached, on-site sign, not exceeding forty-eight (48) square feet in area and not to
exceed six (6) feet in height.
c. One flat signs not exceeding forty-eight (48) square feet.
Section 260. Permitted Signs and Standards for the L-1 and L-2 Districts
Signs permitted in the Limited Industrial Zone (L-1) and Light Industrial districts (L-2) shall be limited to
the following:
1. Unlighted real estate signs not to exceed forty (40) square feet in area.
2. A flat sign not to exceed fifteen (15) square feet in area for each twenty (20) linear feet of street
frontage; however, such signs shall not exceed a maximum of one hundred (100) square feet or
twenty (20) percent of the wall on which it is located.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 265
3. One on-site, detached sign not to exceed fifteen (15) square feet in area for each twenty (20)
linear feet of street frontage; however, such signs shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet
in area.
Section 261. Master Signage Plan
1. A master signage plan shall be required for any proposed shopping center, industrial park, or
other commercial, business, institutional or industrial development that involves more than one
use on a single property or is part of a unified development plan. No permit shall be issued for an
individual sign requiring a permit unless and until a Master Signage Plan has been approved by
the Planning Commission. Any amendment to an approved Master Signage Plan must be
approved by the Planning Commission.
2. Information Required. A Master Signage Plan shall contain the following information:
a. An accurate plot plan of the proposed development site, at such scale as the Zoning
Administrator may reasonably require;
b. Location of buildings, parking lots, driveways, and landscaped areas;
c. Computation of the maximum total sign area, the maximum area for individual signs, the
height of signs and the number of freestanding signs and banners allowed on the zone
lot(s) included in the plan under this Chapter;
d. Sign plans and, if requested, photo simulation of the signs in the proposed location; and
e. An accurate indication on the plot plan of the proposed location of each present and
future sign of any type, whether requiring a permit or not, except that incidental signs
need not be shown.
3. Proposed standards for consistency among all signs affected by the Master Signage Plan with
regard to:
a. Color scheme;
b. Lettering or graphic style;
c. Lighting;
d. Location of each sign on the buildings;
e. Material; and
f. Sign proportions.
4. No sign permit shall be issued for a sign included in a master signage plan that does not conform
to the standards of the master signage plan. A master signage plan may be amended at any time.
5. The following principles shall control the computation of sign area and sign height.
a. Computation of Area of Individual Signs. The area of a sign face (which is also the sign
area of a wall sign or other sign with only one face) shall be computed by means of the
smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof that will encompass the
extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display, together with any
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 266
material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to
differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, but not
including any supporting framework, bracing, or decorative fence or wall when such
fence or wall otherwise meets zoning ordinance regulations and is clearly incidental to
the display itself.
b. Computation of Area of Multi-faced Signs. The sign area for a sign with more than one
face shall be computed by adding together the area of all sign faces visible from any one
point. When two identical sign faces are placed back to back so that both faces cannot be
viewed from any point at the same time, and when such sign faces are part of the same
sign structure and are not more than 42 inches apart, the sign area shall be computed by
the measurement of one of the faces.
c. Computation of Height. The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the
base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign.
Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of (1) existing grade prior to
construction or (2) the newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any
filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. In
cases in which the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be
computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign
is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public street or the grade of
the land at the principal entrance to the principal structure on the zone lot, whichever is
lower.
Section 262. Signs Excluded From Regulation
The following signs are exempt from regulation under this Chapter.
1. Signs not exceeding four (4) square feet in area that are customarily associated with residential
use and that are not of a commercial nature, such as (a) signs giving property identification names
or numbers or names of occupants, (b) signs on mailboxes or newspaper tubes, and (c) signs
posted on private property relating to private parking or warning the public against trespassing or
danger from animals.
2. Signs erected by or on behalf of or pursuant to the authorization of a governmental body,
including legal notices, identification and informational signs, and traffic, directional, or
regulatory signs.
3. Official signs of a noncommercial nature erected by public utilities.
4. Flags, pennants, or insignia of any governmental or nonprofit organization when not displayed in
connection with a commercial promotion or as an advertising device.
5. Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings or works of art, so long as such features
or works do not contain letters, trademarks, moving parts, or lights.
6. Signs directing and guiding traffic on private property that do not exceed four (4) square feet each
and that bear no advertising matter.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 267
7. Church bulletin boards, church identification signs, and church directional signs that do not
exceed one (1) per abutting street and sixteen (16) square feet in area and that are not internally
illuminated.
8. Signs painted on or otherwise permanently attached to currently licensed motor vehicles that are
not primarily used as freestanding signs.
9. Signs proclaiming religious, political, or other noncommercial messages that do not exceed one
per abutting street and sixteen (16) square feet in area and that are not internally illuminated.
Section 263. Certain Temporary Signs: Permit Exemptions and Additional Regulations
[Amended 1/3/2017 by Ord No. 2016-21]
1. The following temporary signs are permitted without a zoning, special-use, or sign permit.
However, such signs shall conform to the requirements set forth below as well as all other
applicable requirement of this Chapter.
a. Signs containing the message that the real estate on which the sign is located (including
buildings) is for sale, lease, or rent, together with information identifying the owner or
agent. Such signs may not exceed size specifications for each district and shall be
removed immediately after sale, lease, or rental. One such sign per street frontage shall
be permitted. For lots of five acres or more in area and having a street frontage in excess
of 400 (four hundred) feet, a second sign may be erected.
b. Construction site identification signs. Such signs may identify the project, the owner or
developer, architect, engineer, contractor and subcontractors, funding sources, and may
contain related information including but not limited to sale or leasing information. Not
more than one such sign may be erected per site, and it may not exceed thirty-two (32)
square feet in area in a non-residential zone and twenty (20) square feet in residential
zone. Such signs shall not be erected prior to the issuance of a building permit and shall
be removed within ten (10) days after the issuance of the final occupancy permit.
c. Signs attached temporarily to the interior of a building window or glass door. Such signs,
individually or collectively, may not cover more than seventy-five (75) percent of the
surface area of the transparent portion of the window or door to which they are attached.
Such signs shall be removed within 30 days after placement.
d. Displays, including lighting, erected in connection with the observance of holidays. Such
signs shall be removed within ten (10) days following the holidays.
e. Signs erected in connection with elections or political campaigns. Such signs shall be
removed within fifteen (15) days following the election or conclusion of the campaign.
No such sign may exceed 16 square feet in surface area.
f. Temporary signs to advertise events. Signs shall measure no larger than eighteen (18)
inches by twenty-four (24) inches and must be removed within fifteen (15) days after the
event.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 268
Section 264. Sign Illumination and Signs Containing Light
1. Unless otherwise prohibited by this Chapter, signs may be illuminated if such illumination is in
accordance with this section.
2. No sign within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a residential zone may be illuminated between the
hours of midnight and 6 a.m., unless the impact of such lighting beyond the boundaries of the lot
where it is located is entirely inconsequential.
3. Lighting directed toward a sign shall be shielded so that it illuminates only the face of the sign
and does not shine directly into a public right-of-way or residential premises.
4. Except as herein provided, (a) internally illuminated signs are not permissible in the R-1, R-2, and
R-3 zoning district, and (b) where permissible, internally illuminated freestanding signs may not
be illuminated during hours that the business or enterprise advertised by such sign is not open for
business or in operation. This subsection shall not apply to the following types of signs:
a. Signs that constitute an integral part of a vending machine, telephone booth, device that
indicates the time, date, or weather conditions, or similar device whose principal function
is not to convey an advertising message.
b. Signs that do not exceed two square feet in area and that convey the message that a
business enterprise is open or closed or that a place of lodging does or does not have a
vacancy.
5. Subject to Subsection 7, illuminated tubings or strings of lights that outline property lines, sales
areas, roof lines, doors, windows, or similar areas are prohibited.
6. Subject to Subsection 7, no sign may contain or be illuminated by flashing or intermittent lights
or lights of changing degrees of intensity, except signs indicating the time, date or weather
conditions.
7. Electronic Message Signs – A computer programmable sign capable of displaying words,
symbols, figures, or picture images that can be altered or rearranged on site or by remote means
without altering the face or surface of the sign, subject to the following:
a. Permitted as part of a freestanding/monument sign in Commercial District (C-2), or nonprofit,
tax-exempt organization in other districts, with review by the Planning
Commission to determine consistency with general provisions, scale, and character of the
Town of Perryville;
b. All text displayed to be static for a minimum of ten (10) seconds, subject to approval by
State and Federal authority;
c. The continuous scrolling of text, animated images or images which move, or give the
appearance of movement or flashing are prohibited;
d. All electronic message signs shall have automatic dimming capabilities that adjust the
brightness to the ambient light at all times of day or night;
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 269
e. Electronic message signs shall be programmed to “freeze” or go blank if there is a
malfunction, so that flashing or other distracting movement does not result;
f. All indoor electronic message signs visible from a public right-of-way shall not be larger
than two (2) square feet and are subject to all conditions and standards of this Ordinance;
g. Subject to all size and setback requirements for the Zoning District.
Section 265. Location and Height Requirements
1. Freestanding signs shall be setback from streets by at least one-half the distance required for
building setbacks set forth in Article XV.
2. No sign may extend above any parapet or be placed upon any roof surface, except that for
purposes of this section, roof surfaces constructed at an angle of 75 degrees or more from
horizontal shall be regarded as wall space. This subsection shall not apply to displays, including
lighting, erected in connection with the observation of holidays on the roofs of residential
structures.
3. No sign or supporting structure may be located in or over the traveled portion of any public rightof-
way unless the sign is attached to a structural element of a building and an encroachment
permit has been obtained from the Town. Signs which overhang a public way (including
sidewalks) shall be covered by a public liability insurance policy in an amount specified by the
Town and which names the Town of Perryville as the insured party.
4. No part of a freestanding sign may exceed a height, measured from ground level, of 25 feet in the
TC, C-2, L-1, and L-2 districts and 15 feet in all other districts.
Section 266. Miscellaneous Restrictions and Prohibitions
1. No off-premises signs may be located in any district except as provided for in Section 270.2.b.
2. No sign may be located so that it substantially interferes with the view necessary for motorists to
proceed safely through intersections or to enter onto or exit from public streets or private roads.
3. Signs that revolve or are animated or that utilize movement or apparent movement to attract the
attention of the public are prohibited. Without limiting the foregoing, banners, streamers,
animated display boards, pennants, and propellers are prohibited, but signs that only move
occasionally because of wind are not prohibited if their movement (a) is not a primary design
feature of the sign, and (b) is not intended to attract attention to the sign. The restriction of this
subsection shall not apply to signs specified in Subdivision 8 or to signs indicating the time, date,
or weather conditions.
4. No sign may be erected so that by its location, color, size, shape, nature, or message it would tend
to obstruct the view of or be confused with official traffic signs or other signs erected by
governmental agencies.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 270
5. Freestanding signs shall be securely fastened to the ground or to some other substantial
supportive structure so that there is virtually no danger that either the sign or the supportive
structure may be moved by the wind or other forces of nature and cause injury to persons or
property.
6. No sign shall be placed on or about public property or within any public right-of-way except
those installed by the Maryland State Highway Administration and the Town of Perryville for
public safety and welfare or pursuant to any Governmental function, law, ordinance, or other
regulation.
Section 267. Maintenance of Signs
1. All signs and all components thereof, including without limitation supports, braces, and anchors,
shall be kept in a state of good repair. With respect to freestanding signs, components
(supporting structures, backs, etc.) not bearing a message shall be constructed of materials that
blend with the natural environment or shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the natural
environment.
2. If a sign, other than a billboard, advertises a business, service, commodity, accommodation,
attraction, or other enterprise or activity that is no longer operating such sign shall be removed
within 30 days after such abandonment by the sign owner, owner of the property where the sign is
located, or other party having control over such sign.
3. If the message portion of a sign is removed, leaving only the supporting "shell" of a sign or the
supporting braces, anchors, or similar components, the owner of the sign or the owner of the
property where the sign is located or other person having control over such sign shall, within
thirty (30) days of the removal of the message portion of the sign, either replace the entire
message portion of the sign or remove the remaining components of the sign. This subsection
shall not be construed to alter the effect of Section 269, which prohibits the replacement of a
nonconforming sign. Nor shall this subsection be construed to prevent the changing of the
message of a sign.
4. The area within 10 feet in all directions of any part of a freestanding sign shall be kept clear of all
debris and all undergrowth more than five inches in height.
Section 268. Unlawful Cutting of Trees or Shrubs
No person may, for the purpose of increasing or enhancing the visibility of any sign, damage, trim,
destroy, or remove any trees, shrubs, or other vegetation located:
1. Within the right-of-way of any public street or road, unless the work is done pursuant to the
express written authorization of the Town.
2. On property that is not under the ownership or control of the person doing or responsible for such
work, unless the work is done pursuant to the express authorization of the person owning the
property where such trees or shrubs are located;
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 271
3. In any area where such trees or shrubs are required to remain under a permit issued under this
Chapter.
Section 269. Non-conforming Signs
1. No person may engage in any activity that causes an increase in the extent of nonconformity of a
nonconforming sign. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, no nonconforming sign
may be enlarged or altered in such a manner as to aggravate the nonconforming condition. Nor
may illumination be added to any nonconforming sign.
2. A nonconforming sign may not be moved or replaced except to bring the sign into complete
conformity with this Chapter.
3. If a nonconforming sign is destroyed, it may not thereafter be repaired, reconstructed, or replaced
except in conformity with all the provisions of this Chapter, and the remnants of the former sign
structure shall be cleared from the land. For purposes of this section, a nonconforming sign is
"destroyed" if damaged to an extent that the cost of repairing the sign to its former statue or
replacing it with an equivalent sign equals or exceeds the value (tax value if listed for tax
purposes) of the sign so damaged.
4. The message of a nonconforming sign may be changed so long as this does not create any new
nonconformities (for example, by creating an off-premises sign under circumstances where such a
sign would not be allowed).
5. Subject to the other provisions of this section, nonconforming signs may be repaired and
renovated so long as the cost of such work does not exceed, within any 12-month period, fifty
(50) percent of the value (tax value if listed for tax purposes) of such sign.
6. If a nonconforming sign other than a billboard advertises a business, service, commodity,
accommodation, attraction, or other enterprise or activity that is no longer operating or being
offered or conducted, that sign shall be considered abandoned and shall be removed within 30
days after such abandonment by the sign owner, owner of the property where the sign is located,
or other person having control over such sign.
7. If a nonconforming billboard remains blank for a continuous period of 180 days, that billboard
shall be deemed abandoned and shall, within 30 days after such abandonment, be altered to
comply with this article or be removed by the sign owner, owner of the property where the sign is
located, or other person having control over such sign. For purposes of this section, a sign is
"blank" if:
a. It advertises a business, service, commodity, accommodation, attraction, or other
enterprise or activity that is no longer operating or being offered or conducted; or
b. The advertising message it displays becomes illegible in whole or substantial part.
8. Non-conforming off-site signs shall be subject to the requirements of Article VIII, Section 88.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 272
Section 270. Banners, Pennants and Special Event Signs
1. Special Event Signs
a. A carnival, fair, circus, festival or similar event as determined by the Town may locate
banners, flags and pennants provided:
(1) A permit is obtained containing the date of the event.
(2) These signs may be displayed no more than one week prior to the event and must
be removed no more than five (5) days after the event, except non-profit
organizations may display these signs no more than four weeks prior to the event
and must remove them no more than five (5) days after the event.
(3) These signs must be located on-site.
(4) The event occurs no more than once a year.
b. A carnival, fair, circus, festival or similar event, as determined by the Town may display
off-premise signs provided:
(1) Written permission is obtained from the property where the sign is to be located
and is provided to the town.
(2) A permit is obtained stating location, wording and date of event. Sign
information must be limited to event name, date, location and sponsor.
(3) No more than 4 signs per event may be erected.
(4) Signs may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area per sign.
(5) They may be erected no more than 4 weeks prior to the event and must be
removed no more than 5 days after the event.
2. Grand Opening Signs
a. A grand opening or grand re-opening is permitted to use banners, pennants or flags
provided:
(1) They are not displayed more than two (2) weeks.
(2) A permit must be obtained which would include number, and type of all banners
as well as the date of the event.
(3) In the TC District, the “grand opening” banner may only be one provided by the
Town. Pennants and flags are not permitted.
b. A grand opening or grand re-opening is permitted to display two (2) off-premise signs
provided:
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 273
(1) Written permission is obtained from the owner of the property where the sign is
to be located and is provided to the Town.
(2) A permit must be obtained stating locations, date of event and wording on sign.
(3) Signs may only indicate grand-opening or re-opening, name of business,
merchandise available, date of event, location of business and owner's name.
These signs shall not include prices.
(4) Signs are not displayed more than 2 weeks prior to the event and must be
removed no more than 1 week after the event.
(5) Signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area.
3. Special Sales Signs
a. Banners may be used to advertise a sale provided:
(1) Not more than 2 banners may be displayed on any lot at any one time.
(2) It does not exceed twenty-four (24) sq. ft. in size.
(3) They are displayed no more than 2 weeks at a time and 6 times in any one year
period.
(4) A permit shall be required stating size of banners, date to be displayed, business
name and number of banners displayed.
b. Commercial centers in C-2 areas may use banners to advertise a sale provided:
(1) Not more than 4 banners may be displayed on any lot at any one time.
(2) It does not exceed twenty-four (24) sq. ft. in size.
(3) They are displayed no more than 2 weeks at a time and 6 times in any one year
period.
(4) A permit shall be required stating size of banners, date to be displayed, business
name and number of banners displayed.
(5) Banners shall be not located where they will obscure existing signs.
4. Help Wanted Signs
a. Banners may be used to advertise help wanted provided:
(1) Size shall not exceed thirty-two (32) sq. ft. in area in C-2 zones and twenty-four
(24) sq. ft. in area in other commercial zones.
(2) Comply with Subsection 5 below.
(3) State only "Help Wanted".
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 274
(4) Must be located on-site.
5. Additional Regulations for all Banners, Pennants and Flags
a. Banners and pennants may be indirectly lit during hours of operation only.
b. No sign may be located so that it substantially interferes with the view necessary for
motorists to proceed safely through intersections or to enter onto or exit from public
streets or private roads.
c. No sign may be erected so that by its location, color, size, shape, nature, or message it
would tend to obstruct the view of or be confused with official traffic signs or other signs
erected by governmental agencies.
d. All signs should be securely attached to the support structure to prevent sagging or
dropping of the pennants, banners or flags. Banners should be secured as per the
definition.
e. Such signs shall not be used in the calculation of permitted sign area for each use.
Section 271. Permitted Signs and Standards for CEMUD Floating Zone [Amended 2-18-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-1]
5. A Master Sign Plan shall be provided for the CEMUD Floating Zone and submitted for Preliminary
approval as part of the Preliminary Site Plan and for Final approval as part of the site design standards
as part of the first Final Site Plan approval. All sign applications will be reviewed against these
standards, unless otherwise approved in the Master Sign Plan, non-residential signs in the interior of
the site shall comply with Section 258 for Town Center, Section 259 shall apply to the site’s highway
frontage areas, and residential signs shall comply with Section 256.
6. Once approved, the Master Sign Plan shall supersede the sign standards stated in Article XV, Signs,
to the extent of any conflict. The Master Sign Plan shall comply with the standards set in Section 261
and shall:
a. Provide for a coordinated site-wide sign system including both the site-wide signs provided
by the Master Developer and those that may be provided by tenants or other occupants. The
Master Sign Plan shall cover commercial identification and directional signage in order to
reduce visual clutter and harmonize with the architecture, landscape and other design
elements of the development.
b. Address the location, size, type, height, number, color, mounting, illumination and material of
all proposed site and building façade signs by type.
c. Provide a site plan element locating all proposed site signs by type.
d. Provide prototypical sign design standards that apply to future signs by tenants along with a
Master Developer review process for tenant signs.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 275
ARTICLE XVI PARKING
Section 273. Definitions
Unless otherwise specifically provided or unless clearly required by the context, the words and phrases
defined below shall have the meaning indicated when used in this section.
Circulation Area. That portion of the vehicle accommodation area used for access to parking or
loading areas or other facilities on the lot. Essentially, driveways and other maneuvering areas
(other than parking aisles and parking spaces) comprise the circulation area.
Driveway. That portion of the vehicle accommodation area that consists of a travel lane bounded
on either side by an area that is not part of the vehicle accommodation area.
Gross Floor Area (GFA). The total area of a building measured by taking the outside dimensions
of the building at each floor level intended occupancy or storage.
Loading and Unloading Area. That portion of the vehicle accommodation area used to satisfy the
requirements of Section 283.
Vehicle Accommodation Area (Parking Area or Parking Lot). That portion of a lot that is used by
vehicles for access, circulation, parking, and loading and unloading. It comprises the total of
circulation areas, loading and unloading areas, and parking areas (spaces and aisles).
Parking Area Aisles. That portion of the vehicle accommodation area consisting of lanes
providing access to parking spaces.
Section 274. Number of Parking Spaces Required
1. All developments in all zoning districts shall provide a sufficient number of parking spaces to
accommodate the number of vehicles that ordinarily are likely to be attracted to the development
in question.
2. The presumptions established by this article are that: (a) a development must comply with the
parking standards set forth in Subsection 274.5. to satisfy the requirement stated in Subsection 1.,
and (b) any development that does meet these standards is in compliance. However, the Table of
Parking Requirements is only intended to establish a presumption and should be flexibly
administered, as provided in Section 275.
3. All off-street parking spaces required to serve buildings or a use erected or established after the
effective date of this Chapter shall be located on the same zoning lot as the building or use
served, except that where an increase in the number of spaces is required by a change or
enlargement of a non-residential use or where spaces are provided collectively or used jointly by
2 or more non-residential buildings or establishments, the required spaces may be located and
maintained as set forth herein.
4. The Town recognizes that the Table of Parking Requirements set forth in Subsection 274.5
cannot and does not cover every possible situation that may arise. Therefore, in cases not
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 276
specifically covered, the Planning Commission is authorized to determine the parking
requirements using this table as a guide.
5. Table of Minimum Parking Requirements
USE OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENT
Residential
Single Family Detached Unit 2.0 spaces
Apartments and other multifamily
2.5 spaces per unit
Townhouse:
1 Bedroom Units
2 Bedroom Units
3+ Bedroom Units
2.0 spaces
2.5 spaces
3.0 spaces
Non-Residential
Assembly Hall 1.0 space per every 100 sq. ft. GFA
Appliance/Hardware Store 2.0 spaces per every 1,000 sq. ft. GFA, plus 1.0 space per every 300 sq.
ft. GFA over 1,000 sq. ft. GFA.
Art Gallery 1.0 space per 500 sq. ft. GFA
Auditorium 1.0 space per 6 permanent seats
Bar, PUB, Tavern 1.0 space per 2 seats, plus 1.0 space per 3 employees
Beauty Parlor 3.0 spaces per operator chair
Bed and Breakfast 1.0 space per guest room plus 2.0 spaces per owner's unit
Bowling Alley 4.0 spaces per alley
Bank 4.0 spaces per every 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Church/Synagogue 1.0 space per 3 seats
Convenience Store 1.0 spaces per every 250 sq. ft GFA
Day Care Center 1.0 space per 7 children, plus 1.0 space per staff person
Equipment Sales/Service
Shop/Wholesale
2.0 spaces per every 1,000 sq. ft. GFA, plus 1.0 space per every 300 sq.
ft.GFA over 1,000 sq. ft.
Fast Food Restaurant 1.0 space per 4 seats, plus 1.0 spaces per 2 employees on maximum
shift.
With or Without Drive-
Through Facilities
With drive-through facility, add 8 stacking spaces for the drive-through
window
Fiduciary Institutions 1.0 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA
Funeral Homes 1.0 space per 4 permanent seats, or 1.0 space per 30 sq. ft. GFA
Furniture Stores 1.0 space per 500 sq. ft. GFA, plus 1.0 space per employee on
maximum shift
Golf Course 6.0 per hole
Group Homes 1.0 space per staff person, plus 1.0 space per 2 occupants
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 277
USE OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENT
Health Club 10 spaces per every 1,000 sq. ft. GFA, plus 1.0 space per every 2
employees.
Hospital 2.0 spaces per bed or 1.0 spaces 150 sq. ft. GFA, whichever is greater
Hotel/Motel 1.0 space per room, plus 1.0 space per employee on maximum work
shift, plus 1.0 space per each 200 sq. ft. GFA of commercial floor area
contained therein
Laundromat/Dry Cleaners 1.0 per machine, minimum of 5.0 spaces
Library 1.0 space per 300 sq. ft. GFA
Marina 0.5 spaces per slip
Medical Center 1.0 space per 250 sq. ft. GFA
Miniature Golf 1.0 space per hole
Nightclub 1.0 space per 2 seats
Nursing Home 1.0 space per 2 beds
Offices
Under 49,999 sq. ft. GFA 4.5 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
50,000 - 99,999 sq. ft. GFA 4.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
100,000 + sq. ft. GFA 3.5 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Pool or Billiard Hall 4.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Post Office 1.0 space per 600 sq. ft. GFA, plus 1.0 space per employee
Racquetball Courts 2.0 spaces per court
Research Centers 1.0 space per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Restaurant 1.0 space per 3 seats, plus 1 space per employee on the maximum shift
Retail Store 1.0 space per 200 sq. ft. GFA
Schools
Elementary 2.0 spaces per classroom, but not less than 1.0 per teacher and staff
Intermediate 1.5 spaces per classroom, but not less than 1.0 per teacher and staff
Secondary 5.0 spaces per classroom
Service Station 4.0 spaces per bay and work area
Shopping Center
(GLA>200,000 sq. ft.)
4.5 space per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Grocery/Food Store (Super
Market)
3.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Swimming Pool 1.0 space per 4 persons, up to capacity
Veterinary Offices 1.0 space per 400 sq. ft. floor space in office, with a 4 space minimum
VFW, American Legion, Etc. 1.0 space per 2 seats
Table Notes:
GFA = Gross Floor Area
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 278
GLA = Gross Leasable Area
- When determination of the number of parking spaces required results in a requirement
fractional space, any fraction shall be counted as one parking space
- For the purpose of determining the number of off-street parking spaces for certain uses,
the number of seats is the number of seating units installed or indicated, or each 24 lineal
inches of benches, pews, or space for loose chairs.
Section 275. Flexibility in Administration Required
1. The Town of Perryville recognizes that, due to the particularities of any given development, the
inflexible application of the parking standards set forth in Section 274.5. may result in a
development either with inadequate parking space or parking space far in excess of its needs.
Alternative off-street parking standards may be accepted if the applicant can demonstrate that
such standards better reflect local conditions and needs.
2. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Planning Commission may allow deviations
from the parking requirements set forth in Subsection 274.5. when it finds that:
a. A residential development is irrevocably oriented toward the elderly;
b. A business is primarily oriented to walk-in trade.
3. Whenever the Planning Commission allows or requires a deviation from the parking requirements
set forth in Subsection 274.5., it shall enter on the face of the permit the parking requirement that
it imposes and the reasons for allowing or requiring the deviation.
4. If the Planning Commission concludes, based upon information it receives in the consideration of
a specific development proposal, that the presumption established by Section 274.5. for a
particular use classification is erroneous, it shall initiate a request for an amendment to the Table
of Parking Requirements in accordance with the procedures set forth in Article XIII.
Section 276. Parking Space Dimensions
1. Subject to Subsections 2. and 3., each parking space shall contain a rectangular area at least 18
feet long and 9 feet wide. Lines demarcating parking spaces may be drawn at various angles in
relation to curbs or aisles, so long as the parking spaces so created contain within them the
rectangular area required by this section.
2. Wherever parking areas consist of spaces set aside for parallel parking, the dimensions of such
parking spaces shall be not less than 23 feet by 9 feet.
3. Each handicapped parking space shall meet the requirements of the American Disabilities Act.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 279
Section 277. Required Widths of Parking area Aisles and Driveways
1. Parking area aisle widths shall conform to the following table, which varies the width
requirement according to the angle of parking.
Parking Angle
Aisle Width 0o 30o 45o 60o 90o
One-Way Traffic 15 15 16 18 24
Two-Way Traffic 22 22 22 23 24
2. Driveways shall be not less than 10 feet or exceed 15 feet in width for one-way traffic and less
than 18 feet or exceed 30 feet in width for two-way traffic, except that 10-feet-wide driveways
are permissible for two-way traffic when (a) the driveway is not longer than 50 feet, (b) it
provides access to not more than 6 spaces, and (c) sufficient turning space is provided so that
vehicles need not back into a public street.
Section 278. General Design Requirements
1. Unless no other practicable alternative is available vehicle accommodation areas shall be
designed so that, without resorting to extraordinary movements, vehicles may exit such areas
without backing onto a public street. This requirement does not apply to parking areas consisting
of driveways that serve one or two dwelling units, although backing onto arterial streets is
discouraged.
2. Parking areas for all development shall be designed so that sanitation, emergency, and other
public service vehicles can serve such developments without the necessity of backing
unreasonable distances or making other dangerous or hazardous turning movements.
3. Every parking area shall be designed so that vehicles cannot extend beyond the perimeter of such
area onto adjacent properties or public rights-of-way. Such areas shall also be designed so that
vehicles do not extend over sidewalks or tend to bump against or damage any wall, vegetation, or
other obstruction.
4. Circulation areas shall be designed so that vehicles can proceed safely without posing a danger to
pedestrians or other vehicles and without interfering with parking areas.
5. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be arranged so as to reflect away
from any adjoining residential zone or uses and any public or private right-of-way.
6. A "sight triangle" shall be observed within a triangle formed by the intersection of the street lines
and points on the street line 25 feet from the intersection at all street intersection or intersections
of driveways with streets.
7. All parking areas shall be drained so as to dispose of all surface water within the parking area
without carrying the said water accumulation over a public sidewalk. Piping the water to a
suitable outfall may be required.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 280
8. Permanent storm water retention shall be provided for all off-street parking areas as required by
the Town of Perryville.
9. No required off-street parking space in any residential zone shall be located within any required
front yard or side street side yard area except that parking in driveways for up to 2 spaces is
permitted.
10. Additional parking in residential zones: Provided the above parking (Subsection 9) has been met,
additional parking shall be permitted in the required front yards or side street side yard, provided
the following setback requirements are met:
Side Street
Zone Front Yard Setback Side Yard Setback
R-2, R-3, 15' 6'
R-1 15' 10'
TC 10’ 10’
11. The percentage of coverage of permitted parking areas and driveways in any residential zone
shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total required front yard or side street side yard.
12. Off-street parking facilities may be located within the required front yard of any commercial,
office/residential, or industrial zone. But shall not be nearer than fifty (50) feet to any residential
district.
13. Special access, surface, and location requirements for garages, parking lots, automobile service
stations, and vehicle sales lots:
a. No building, structure or premises shall be used, erected, or altered which is intended or
designed to be used as a community garage, an automobile repair shop, a service station,
or a parking lot or structure as the principal use on a property, which has an entrance or
exit for vehicles in the same block front and within 200 feet of the property boundary of
any school, public playground, church, hospital, public library, convalescent, nursing, or
rest home, orphanage, and no such entrance or exit, except for a community garage, shall
be located within 20 feet of any residential zone; nor shall any structure used for an
automobile repair shop or service station or any part of a parking lot or structure be
located within 100 feet of any property boundary line of any of the aforesaid public or
institutional uses. "Parking lot" as used herein does not include off-street parking areas as
otherwise required for the public or institutional uses listed above.
b. No gasoline pump, oil draining pit, or similar appliance for any purpose shall be located
within 15 feet of any right-of-way or within 50 feet of a residential zone, except where
such a pump, pit, or appliance is within a completely enclosed building and distant at
least 15 feet from any vehicular entrance or exit of such building. Except for gasoline
service stations, no gasoline pumps shall be permitted as an accessory use for another
activity unless a site plan is submitted to and approved by the Planning Commission.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 281
Section 279. Vehicle Accommodation Area Surfaces
1. Parking areas that (a) include lanes for drive-in windows or (b) contain parking areas that are
required to have more than 10 parking spaces and that are used regularly at least five days per
week shall be graded and surfaced with asphalt, concrete or other material that will provide
equivalent protection against potholes, erosion, and dust as per applicable Town specifications.
2. Parking areas that are not provided with the type of surface specified in Subsection 1. shall be
graded and surfaced with crushed stone, gravel, or other suitable material to provide a surface that
is stable and will help to reduce dust and erosion. The perimeter of such parking areas shall be
defined by bricks, stones, railroad ties, or other similar devices. In addition, whenever such a
vehicle accommodation area abuts a paved street, the driveway leading from such street to such
area (or, if there is no driveway, the portion of the vehicle accommodation area that opens onto
such streets), shall be paved as provided in Subsection 1. for a distance of 15 feet back from the
edge of the paved street. This subsection shall not apply to single-family or two-family residences
3. Parking spaces in areas surfaced in accordance with Subsection 1. shall be appropriately
demarcated with painted lines or other markings. Parking spaces in areas surfaced in accordance
with Subsection 2. shall be demarcated whenever practicable.
4. Vehicle accommodation areas shall be properly maintained in all respects. In particular, and
without limiting the foregoing, vehicle accommodation area surfaces shall be kept in good
condition (free from potholes, weeds, overgrowth, trash, clutter, etc.) and parking space lines or
markings shall be kept clearly visible and distinct.
Section 280. Joint Use of Required Parking Spaces
1. One parking area may contain required spaces for several different uses, but except as otherwise
provided in this section, the required space assigned to one use may not be credited to any other
use.
2. To the extent that developments that wish to make joint use of the same parking spaces operate at
different times, the same spaces may be credited to both uses. For example, if a parking lot is
used in connection with an office building on Monday through Friday but is generally 90 percent
vacant on weekends, another development that operates only on weekends could be credited with
90 percent of the spaces on that lot. Or, if a church parking lot is generally occupied only to 50
percent of capacity on days other than Sunday, another development could make use of 50
percent of the church lot's spaces on those other days.
3. If the joint use of the same parking spaces by two or more principal uses involves satellite
parking spaces, then the provisions of Section 281are also applicable.
4. In the case of mixed uses (with different parking requirements occupying the same building or
premises) or in the case of a joint use of a building or premises by more than one use having the
same parking requirements, the parking spaces required shall equal the sum of the requirements
of the various uses computed separately, except that parking requirements for permitted accessory
retail and service uses in a hotel, motel, or motor lodge that contains 50 or more dwelling units
may be reduced by the following percentages:
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 282
a. Retail sales, offices, service establishments, 50 percent
b. Restaurants and dining rooms, 75 percent
c. Ballrooms, banquet halls, meeting rooms, auditoriums, 80 percent.
5. Off-street parking areas required for residential use shall not be included in any joint parking
arrangement.
Section 281. Satellite Parking
1. If the number of off-street parking spaces required by this Chapter cannot reasonably be provided
on the same lot where the principal use associated with these parking spaces is located, then
spaces may be provided on adjacent or nearby lots in accordance with the provisions of this
section. These off-site spaces are referred to in this section as satellite parking spaces.
2. All such satellite parking spaces (except spaces intended for employee use) must be located
within 400 feet of a public entrance of a principal building housing the use associated with such
parking, or within 400 feet of the lot on which the use associated with such parking is located if
the use not housed within any principal building. Satellite parking spaces intended for employee
use may be located within any reasonable distance. No more than 40 percent of the total required
spaces are to be located in satellite parking spaces.
3. The developer wishing to take advantage of the provisions of this section must present
satisfactory written evidence that he has the permission of the owner or other person in charge of
the satellite parking spaces to use such spaces. The developer must also sign an acknowledgment
that the continuing validity of his permit depends upon his continuing ability to provide the
requisite number of parking spaces.
4. All satellite parking spaces shall be located in the same zoning district as the structures or uses
served or shall abut at least 50 feet, either directly or across an alley, from the structure or uses
served.
5. Satellite parking spaces shall be used solely for the parking of passenger automobiles. No
commercial repair work or service of any kind shall be conducted, and no charge shall be made
for parking. No sign of any kind, other than designating ownership, entrances, exits, and
conditions of use, shall be maintained on such satellite parking areas.
6. Each entrance and exit to and from such parking area shall be at least 20 feet distant from any
adjacent lot line located in any residential zone.
7. The satellite parking areas shall be subject to all requirements of this Chapter concerning
surfacing, lighting, drainage, landscaping, screening, and setbacks.
Section 282. Special Provisions For Lots With Existing Buildings
1. Any increase in the intensity of use of any structure shall mean the addition of dwelling units,
employees, gross floor area, seating capacity, or any other unit of measurement used as a basis for
determining required parking facilities. When the intensity of use of any structure is increased by
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 283
less than 20 percent, parking facilities shall be provided for the increase, but not for any existing
deficiency in such facilities. When the intensity is increased by more than 20 percent, including
consecutive increases from the date of this Chapter, parking facilities shall be provided for the
entire structure on premises.
2. When the use of any structure or premises is changed to a different use, parking facilities shall be
provided for the different use.
3. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter, whenever (a) there exists a lot with one or
more structures on it constructed before the effective date of this Chapter, and (b) a change in use
that does not involve any enlargement of a structure is proposed for such lot, and (c) the parking
requirements of Section 274 that would be applicable as a result of the proposed change cannot be
satisfied on such lot because there is not sufficient area available on the lot that can practicably be
used for parking, then the developer need only comply with the requirements of Section 274 to
the extent the (a) parking space is practicably available on the lot where the development is
located, and (b) satellite parking space is reasonably available as provided in Section 281.
However, if satellite parking subsequently becomes reasonably available, then it shall be a
continuing condition of the permit authorizing development on such lot that the developer obtain
satellite parking when it does become available.
Section 283. Loading and Unloading Areas
1. Subject to Subsection 5., whenever the normal operation of any development requires that goods,
merchandise, or equipment be routinely delivered to or shipped from that development, a
sufficient off-street loading and unloading area must be provided in accordance with this section
to accommodate the delivery or shipment operations in a safe and convenient manner.
2. The loading and unloading area must be of sufficient size to accommodate the numbers and types
of vehicles that are likely to use this area, given the nature of the development in question. The
following table indicates the number and size of spaces that, presumptively, satisfy the standard
set forth in this subsection. However, the Planning Commission may require more or less loading
and unloading area if reasonably necessary to satisfy the foregoing standard.
Gross Leasable
Area of Building Number of Spaces*
1,000- 19,000 1
20,000- 79,999 2
80,000-127,999 3
128,000-191,000 4
192,000-255,999 5
256,000-319,999 6
320,000-391,999 7
Plus one (1) space for each additional 72,000 square feet or fraction thereof.
*Minimum dimensions of 12 feet x 55 feet and overhead clearance of 14 feet from street grade
required.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 284
3. Loading and unloading areas shall be so located and designed that the vehicles intended to use
them can (a) maneuver safely and conveniently to and from a public right-of-way, and (b)
complete the loading and unloading operations without obstructing or interfering with any public
right-of-way or any parking space or parking lot aisle.
4. No area allocated to loading and unloading facilities may be used to satisfy the area requirements
for off-street parking, nor shall any portion of any off-street parking are be used to satisfy the area
requirements for loading and unloading facilities.
5. Whenever (a) there exists a lot with one or more structures on it constructed before the effective
date of this Chapter, and (b) a change in use that does not involve any enlargement of a structure
is proposed for such lot, and (c) the loading area requirements of this section cannot be satisfied
because there is not sufficient area available on the lot that can practicably be used for loading
and unloading, then the developer need only comply with this section to the extent reasonably
possible.
6. No such space shall be located closer than 50 feet to any other lot in any residential district unless
wholly within a completely enclosed building or unless enclosed on all sides by a wall or
uniformly painted board fence not less than 6 feet in height.
7. The Planning Commission may modify any requirement of this section within the TC and CM
districts where it determines that compliance would conflict with ingress and egress requirements
and standards of the State Highway Administration along a State highway.
Section 284. Parking facilities for the Physically Handicapped
1. Location. Parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall be located as close as possible to
ramps, walkways, entrances, and elevators. Where feasible, these parking spaces shall be located
so that the physically handicapped are not forced to wheel or walk across main traffic lanes or
behind parked cars to reach the ramps, and other facilities. The spaces shall be situated in those
areas of the parking lots located nearest to each primary building entrance.
2. Each handicapped parking space shall comply with current American Disabilities Act standards.
3. Required Number of Spaces. The following number of parking spaces shall be reserved for the
physically handicapped:
Total Parking Spaces in Lot Required Minimum Number
Up to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 285
501 to 1,000 2 % of Total
Over 1,000 20, plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000
4. Identification. Parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall be identified by signs,
generally located 8 feet above grade. The signs shall state that the space is reserved by law for the
physically handicapped. Where these signs are placed flush against buildings or structures, or in
other locations not accessible to vehicular or pedestrian traffic, the height may be reduced to 6
feet.
5. Curbs.
a. Where a curb exists between a parking lot and a sidewalk, a horizontally scored ramp or
curb cut shall be provided for wheelchair access.
b. The curb cut shall not be less than 4 feet wide and shall have a grade of not more than
one foot in 12 feet.
c. Curb cuts shall be provided within 30 feet of each accessible entrance to the structure, at
all pedestrian walk intersections, and elsewhere to provide reasonably direct circulation
within each development.
d. The curb cuts shall not be more than 150 feet apart.
. Sidewalks.
a. Sidewalks shall be scored or textured to indicate the location of doors to blind persons.
b. Exterior sidewalks shall not be obstructed.
c. Exterior sidewalks shall have a side slope not greater than one inch in 4 feet. They shall
be at least 4 feet wide and have a grade of not more than one foot in 20 feet.
d. Wherever sidewalks cross driveways, parking lots, or other sidewalks, they shall blend to
a common level.
7. Storm Drains. Storm drain grates and similar devices shall not be located within the required
access for the physically handicapped.
8. Grade. The grade of parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall not be more than one
foot in 20 feet.
Section 285. Reserved
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 286
ARTICLE XVII SCREENING, SHADING, LANDSCAPING and ENVIRONMENTAL
STANDARDS
Part I Buffers
Section 286. Purpose
1. One of zoning's most important functions is the division of land uses into districts which have
similar character and contain compatible uses. All uses permitted in any district have generally
similar nuisance characteristics. Buffer yards will operate to minimize the negative impact of any
future use on neighboring uses.
2. The buffer yard is a combination of setback and a visual buffer or barrier and is a yard or area
together with the planting required thereon. Both the amount of land and the type and amount of
planting specified for each buffer yard requirement of this Chapter are specified and are designed
to ameliorate nuisances between adjacent zoning districts to ensure a desired character along
public streets and roads. The planting units required of buffer yards have been calculated to
ensure that they do, in fact, function as "buffers."
3. Buffer yards shall be required to separate different zoning districts from each other in order to
eliminate or minimize potential nuisances such as dirt, litter, noise, glare of lights, signs, and
unsightly buildings or parking areas, or to provide spacing to reduce adverse impacts of noise,
odor, or danger from fires or explosions. Mature woodlands are considered the best buffers and
should be used whenever possible.
Section 287. Location of Buffer yards
Buffer yards shall be located on the outer perimeter of a lot or parcel, extending to the lot or parcel
boundary line. Buffer yards shall not be located on any portion of an existing or dedicated public or
private street or right-of-way. Buffer yards shall not be located within a yard required in a single family
attached (townhouse) development or planned unit development.
Section 288. Determination of Required Buffer yard
To determine the type of buffer yard required on a parcel or between two parcels or between a parcel and
a street, the following procedure shall be used:
1. Identify whether any portion or property line of the site constitutes a zoning district boundary. If
it does, determine the zoning on both sides of the property.
2. Determine whether the land on the adjoining property is vacant or developed or whether a plat of
the subdivision has been approved.
3. Classify any street adjacent to the proposed use as a local, collector, or arterial street.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 287
4. Determine the buffer yard required on each boundary (or segment thereof) of the subject parcel
by referring to the Tables of Required Buffer yards.
5. Determine if the proposed development is a use which has buffer yards required to separate that
use from certain uses. Then determine the buffer yard required between such uses by referring to
the Tables of Required Buffer yards.
Section 289. Responsibility for Buffer yards
1. When a proposed use adjoins a vacant parcel for which a buffer yard is required by the presence
of a zoning boundary, that use shall at the time of development provide one-half of the buffer
which is required by the Tables of Required Buffer yards.
2. The second use to develop shall, at the time it develops, provide all additional plant material
and/or land necessary to provide the total buffer yard required between those 2 uses. If the
adjoining use had developed without a buffer yard, the second use will be responsible for
installing the total buffer yard.
3. Existing plant material and/or land located on the preexisting (first developed) land use which
meets the requirements of this Chapter may be counted as contributing to the total buffer yard
required between it and the second (adjacent) land use to develop.
Section 290. Tables of Required Buffer yards
REQUIRED BUFFERYARDS BETWEEN ADJACENT ZONING DISTRICTS
ZONE R-1 R-2 R-3 RM T-C NB
C-2,
CM-1,
CM-2
L-1 & L-
2
R-1 -- A B B C B D E
R-2 A -- B B C B D E
R-3 C B -- B C B D E
T-C na na na na na na na na
NB B B B B B -- C E
CM B B B -- B B C D
C-2,
CM-1,
CM-2
D D D B B C -- D
I-1 & I-
2
E E E D D E D --
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 288
REQUIRED STREET
BUFFERS
FUNCTIONAL CLASSIFICATION
ZONING DISTRICTS ARTERIAL COLLECTOR LOCAL
R-1, R-2, R-3 D C B
NB, CM, C-2, CM-1, CM-2 B B B
L-1, L-2 C C C
Section 291. Buffer yard Requirements
Illustrations graphically indicating the specification of each buffer yard are contained in Appendix B.
Section 292. Buffer yard Use
A buffer yard may be used for passive recreation or storm water management. It may contain pedestrian,
bike, or equestrian trails provided that: (1) no plant material is eliminated, (2) the total width of the buffer
yard is maintained, and (3) all other regulations of the Chapter are met. (4) In no event, however, shall
swimming pools, tennis courts or other such uses be permitted in buffer yards. The Planning Commission
may allow substitution or reduction of the buffer yard if it finds that the required buffer yard will obstruct
the view of a driver or that the buffer yard is incompatible with the existing streetscape.
Section 293. Ownership of Buffer yards
Buffer yards may remain in the ownership of the original developer (and assigns) of a land use, or they
may be subjected to deed restrictions and subsequently be freely conveyed, or they may be transferred to
any consenting grantees, such as adjoining landowners, the Town of Perryville, or a homeowner's
association, provided that any such conveyance adequately guarantees the protection of the buffer yards
for the purposes of this Chapter. Final Ownership shall be specified and approved by the Planning
Commission.
Section 294. Buffer yards Which Exceed Minimum Requirements
Where the buffer yard required between a land use and vacant land turns out to be greater than that buffer
yard which is required between the first use and the subsequently developed use, the following options
apply:
1. The subsequent use may provide one half of the buffer required by this Section. The existing use
may expand its use into the original buffer area, provided that the resulting total buffer yard
between the two uses meets the buffer yard requirements of this Section.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 289
2. The existing use may enter into agreements with abutting landowners to use its existing buffer to
provide some or all of the required buffer yard of both land uses. The total buffer shall equal the
requirements of this Section. Provided that such an agreement can be negotiated, the initial use
may provide the second use some or all of its required buffer yard and/or extra land on which it
might develop. The existing use may reduce its excess buffer by transferring part or all of the
excess buffer to the adjoining landowner to serve as its buffer. Any remaining excess buffer area
may be used by the existing use for expansion of that use or for transfer by it to the adjoining
landowner to expand that adjoining use.
Section 295. Contractual Reduction of Buffer yards
1. When a land use is proposed adjacent to vacant land, and the owner of that vacant land enters into
a contractual relationship with the owner of the land that is to be developed first, a reduced buffer
may be provided by that first use, provided that: the contract contains a statement by the owner of
the vacant land of an intent to develop at no greater than a specified land use intensity class; and
an agreement by that vacant landowner to assume all responsibility for additional buffer, if
needed by the subsequent development of a less intense use than had been agreed upon, is
transferred to the owner of the vacant (second in time to be developed) land.
Part II Shading
Section 296. Town Findings and Declaration of Policy: Shade Trees
1. The Town finds that:
a. Trees are proven producers of oxygen, a necessary element for human survival,
b. Trees appreciably reduce the ever increasing environmentally dangerous carbon dioxide
content of the air and play a vital role in purifying the air we breathe,
c. Trees transpire considerable amounts of water each day and thereby purify the air much
like the air-washer devices used on commercial air conditioning systems,
d. Trees have an important role in neutralizing waste water passing through the ground from
the surface to ground water tables and lower aquifers,
e. Trees, through their root systems, stabilize the ground water tables and play an important
and effective part in soil conservation, erosion control, and flood control,
f. Trees are an invaluable physical, aesthetic, and psychological counterpoint to the urban
setting, making urban life more comfortable by providing shade and cooling the air and
land, reducing noise levels and glare, and breaking the monotony of human developments
on the land, particularly parking areas, and
g. For the reasons indicated herein, trees have an important impact on the desirability of
land and therefore on property values.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 290
2. Based upon the findings set forth in Subsection 1., the Town declares that it is not only desirable
but essential to the health, safety, and welfare of all persons living or working within the Town's
planning jurisdiction to protect certain existing trees and, under the circumstances set forth in this
article, to require the planting of new trees in certain types of developments.
Section 297. Required Trees Along Dedicated Streets
Along both sides of all newly created streets that are constructed in accordance with the Perryville street
standards, the developer shall at a minimum either plant or retain sufficient trees so that between the
paved portion of the street and a line running parallel to and fifty (50) feet from the centerline of the
street, there is for every fifty (50) feet of street frontage at least an average of one deciduous tree that has
or will have when fully mature a trunk at least 12 inches in diameter.
Section 298. Retention and Protection of Large Trees
1. Every development shall retain all existing trees 18 inches in diameter or more unless the
retention of such trees would unreasonably burden the development.
2. No excavation or other subsurface disturbance may be undertaken within the drip line of any tree
18 inches in diameter or more, and no impervious surface (including, but not limited to, paving or
buildings) may be located within 12½ feet (measured from the center of the trunk) of any tree 18
inches in diameter or more unless compliance with this subsection would unreasonably burden
the development. For purposes of this subsection, a drip line is defined as a perimeter formed by
the points farthest away from the trunk of a tree where precipitation falling from the branches of
that tree lands on the ground.
3. The retention or protection of trees 18 inches in diameter or more as provided in Subsections 1.
and 2. unreasonably burdens a developer if, to accomplish such retention or protection, the
desired location of improvements on a lot or the proposed activities on a lot would have to be
substantially altered and such alteration would work an unreasonable hardship upon the
developer.
4. If space that would otherwise be devoted to parking cannot be so used because of the
requirements of Subsections 1. or 2., and, as a result, the parking requirements set forth in Article
XVI cannot be satisfied, the number of required spaces may be reduced by the number of spaces
"lost" because of the provisions of Subsections 1. and 2., up to a maximum of 15 percent of the
required spaces.
Part III Landscape Standards
Section 299. Plan Requirements for Landscaping and Screening
1. Applicability. A master landscaping plan or screening plan meeting the standards of this part is
required for any development, except applications involving a detached single family dwelling
unit requiring only a zoning certificate and building permit.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 291
2. A master landscape or screening plan shall consist of one (1) or more sheets drawn to scale or
combined with a site plan and shall include the following information:
a. The location and footprint of all proposed buildings, structures, and facilities on the site
and proposed landscaping areas.
b. The approximate location of rivers or stream branches or natural, intermittent streams or
drainage channels, ponds, wooded areas, or other special natural features on the
development site.
c. A tabular summary of type of species, height, diameter, and quantity of shrubbery and
trees, including street trees, to be planted within landscaped or screening areas.
d. The height, length, type and location of fencing and related planting areas to be used for
screening purposes.
e. Location of underground and overhead utilities.
f. The continuity of proposed open space with contiguous and other nearby open spaces,
existing or proposed.
3. The plan shall show landscaping proposals for the following areas or facilities where applicable
to the type of development proposed.
a. Street trees
b. Buffer yard plantings
c. Foundation plantings
d. Screening for dumpster or other solid waste collection areas
e. Storm water management retention or detention areas landscaping
f. Above ground utility box screening
g. Parking lot plantings/screening
h. Perimeter plantings
i. Recreation facilities landscaping
j. Loading and unloading space screening
4. The plan shall be consistent with the specific requirements of a site plan or comprehensive
development plan or the specific requirements for the type of development proposed.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 292
Section 300. Landscaping Materials
1. Whenever landscaping is required, it shall consist of, as a minimum, a combination of grass, trees
and shrubs including the following species at the sizes specified, arranged in such a manner as to
complement the proposed structure or project and its adjacent neighborhood. The total linear
amount of property lines or perimeter of the development site and each lot shall be used as a
guide to compute the amount of plantings as required. All such materials may be randomly
placed on the site except as may be required to meet the Buffer yard requirements of this Chapter.
Plantings required in other sections of this Chapter, e.g., buffer, buffer yard, Highway Corridor
Overlay Zone, etc., shall count against the requirements of this part.
2. Landscaping shall emphasize native species trees, shrubs, and flowers to reduce maintenance, to
help ensure longevity, and to reinforce the natural character of the area. Species should be
selected partly on the basis of their visual appeal during different seasons of the year.
3. Any applicant may incorporate and combine the mitigation requirements for meeting the
provisions of the Town’s Forest Conservation Act, the Chesapeake Bay Critical Area Program,
and the State’s Non-Tidal Wetlands Act with these provisions. The Planning Commission may
approve such mitigation plans as a substitute for compliance with these conditions. Any plan may
also use existing trees to count toward the requirements of these guidelines.
4. Whenever screening is required, the following minimum screening materials may be used in any
combination to accomplish the purpose and intent for which the screening is required. The intent
is to screen by 50% the visibility of adjoining property by the following means. Additional types
of landscaping and screening materials or other landscaping amenities may be used, subject to the
approval of the Planning Commission, Zoning Administrator, or Board of Appeals but in no case
shall landscaping or screening be less than that necessary to accomplish the purpose and intent for
which the screening is required.
a. Solid wood, metal, brick, concrete, or otherwise architecturally solid fence.
b. Chain link fence with slat inserts where view is to be obscured.
c. Berms, or berms with fence installed or berms with trees and shrubs planted, or any
combination thereof; sufficient to provide a barrier at least six (6) feet in height
(measured from the bottom of the berm).
d. Whenever a fence is installed as a screen, it shall be located at least three (3) feet from
any abutting property line and landscaping shall be provided on both sides of the fence.
e. Retention of existing natural vegetation depending on width, density, and type, provided
that the Planning Commission or Board of Appeals may require additional, supplemental
plantings to obtain the effect intended by the purpose and intent of this requirement.
f. Plantings which will have a minimum height of six (6) feet at maturity.
5. The applicant shall be required to post a performance bond with the Town to ensure that any
landscape materials that die within eighteen (18) months of planting shall be replaced with the
same species and size, and that any landscape material shall be well maintained, specifically
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 293
irrigated and fertilized, for a total of twenty-four (24) months from time of planting. If landscape
materials are removed, they shall be replaced with material of similar size, shapeliness, function,
hardiness, longevity, and appearance.
Section 301. Shade Trees
1. Shade trees, with a height of more than thirty (30) feet at maturity, shall be a minimum 1 inch in
caliper and a minimum six (6) feet or more in height at the time of planting and shall be planted
in continuous rows along the edges of properties in accordance with the following spacing
standards:
a. Two-family, multi-family residence or manufactured home park in any district - one per
one hundred (100) feet.
b. Commercial and Maritime districts - one per fifty (50) feet.
c. Industrial district - one per fifty (50) feet.
d. All other districts - one per fifty (50) feet.
e. Special exceptions - the requirements for the district in which the use is located or an
alternate as may be determined by the Planning Commission, Zoning Administrator, or
Board of Appeals.
f. Maintain a minimum distance of twenty (20) feet from overhead utilities for species that
exceed thirty (30) at maturity.
2. Street Trees - Street trees meeting the standards of 1 above shall be planted along internal streets,
with at least one tree for every fifty (50) feet of street frontage in residential, commercial,
business, institutional and industrial projects.
Section 302. Understory (Decorative) Trees
Understory trees, with a height of less than thirty (30) feet at maturity, shall be one (1) inch in caliper and
four (4) feet in height at the time of planting and shall be provided as follows:
1. Two-family, or multi-family residence or manufactured home park in any district - none.
2. Commercial and Maritime districts - one per fifty (50) feet.
3. Industrial district - one per seventy-five (75) feet.
4. All other districts - one per one hundred (100) feet.
5. Special exceptions - the requirements for the district in which the use is located or an alternate as
may be determined by the Planning Commission, Zoning Administrator, or Board of Zoning
Appeals.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 294
6. Maintain a minimum distance of twenty (20) feet from overhead utilities for species that exceed
thirty (30) at maturity.
Section 303. Evergreen Trees
Evergreen trees shall be at a height of three and one-half (3 ½) to four (4) feet or greater at planting and
shall be provided as follows:
1. Two-family, or multi-family residence or manufactured home park in any district – none.
2. Commercial and Maritime districts - one per one hundred (100) feet.
3. Industrial district - one per one hundred fifty (150) feet.
4. All other districts - one per one hundred (100) feet.
5. Special exceptions - the requirements for the district in which the use is located or an alternate as
may be determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission, Planning Staff, or Board of Zoning
Appeals.
6. Maintain a minimum distance of 20' from overhead utilities for species that exceed 30' at maturity
Section 304. Shrubs
Evergreen and deciduous shrubs shall be at a height of 18 inches to 24 inches or greater at the time of
planting and shall be provided as measured by the length of the perimeter of the buildings or structures
facing any public street or road as follows:
1. Two-family, or multi-family residences or manufactured home park in any district - one per
fifteen (15) feet.
2. Commercial and Maritime districts - one per fifteen (15) feet.
3. Industrial district - one per forty (40) feet.
4. All other districts - one per one hundred (100) feet.
5. Special exceptions - the requirements for the district in which the use is located or an alternate as
determined by the Planning Commission, Zoning Administrator, or Board of Appeals.
Section 305. Alternatives and Additional Landscape Requirements
As an alternative, an applicant may propose and the Planning Commission or Board of Appeals may
approve:
1. The retention of natural growth on the site to meet the requirements of this section, depending on
width, density, and type of natural growth, provided that the Board or Commission may require
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 295
additional, supplemental plantings to obtain the effect intended by the purpose and intent of these
requirements.
2. Landscaping consisting of a combination of the plantings listed in this article and alternate
plantings of various species and sizes.
3. Landscaping consisting of a combination of architectural materials, including fountains, special
bricks, interlocking paving, decorative features, statues, and other combinations of landscaping
features, materials, or plantings, including street trees.
4. Whenever deemed appropriate, the Planning Commission may require installation of a vegetated
and/or structural buffer along property lines to protect adjoining residential properties from the
potential impacts of a proposed non-residential use and/or to maintain or enhance the general
visual character of the property and surrounding area. Buffers standards shall be selected from
Appendix B.
Section 306. Complementary Plantings
Dwarf and other species may be used only for complementary plantings and no minimum sizes shall be
required.
Part IV Landscaping of Parking Facilities
Section 307. Intent
It is intended that the application of the landscape standards set forth below will reduce the visual and
environmental impacts of large expanses of parking areas. Breaking up of paved parking areas with
plantings will provide improved aesthetics and micro-climatic benefits by reducing heat and glare. In the
case of a property located within the Highway Corridor Overlay Zone, the landscape requirements of that
Part shall apply when more restrictive than the requirements contained herein.
Section 308. Sites Affected
1. New sites. No new parking areas shall hereafter be constructed or used unless landscaping is
provided as required by the provision of this Article.
2. Existing sites. No parking areas shall be expanded, moved, or removed and/or reconstructed
unless the minimum landscaping required by the provision of this Article is provided for the
property to the extent of its alteration or expansion, but not for the entire property.
3. Change of use. No use shall be changed to another use for which the Zoning Chapter requires
additional parking over and above that required for the previous use, unless vehicular use area
perimeter landscaping as required by this Article is provided for such additional parking. The
provisions of this section shall be effective regardless of whether or not new construction is
necessary to meet the parking requirements for the new uses. Where new construction will not be
necessary to meet the parking requirements, such additional required parking shall be deemed to
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 296
be on the perimeter for as much as possible of the existing vehicular use area. Where the previous
use had no required parking, perimeter landscaping shall be provided for the entire vehicular use
area serving the new use. Interior landscaping shall not be required where only the use of the
property is changed and no new construction or reconstruction is proposed.
4. Change of zone. No use of an existing building, structure, or vehicular use area shall be
commenced subsequent to a change in zoning unless property perimeter landscaping as required
herein has been provided.
Section 309. Perimeter Landscaping
1. A planting strip shall be provided at least eight (8) feet wide adjacent to the back of any sidewalks
or ten (10) foot wide adjacent to the property line where no sidewalk exists. Where the parking
lot does not abut a property line or sidewalk, a five (5) foot planting area shall be provided.
2. Except where otherwise specifically required by the Zoning Chapter, a minimum ten (10) foot
wide screening area shall be provided along all abutting property lines of a residential district.
3. The following requirements shall apply to the design and construction of all parking lots for
fifteen (15) vehicles or more:
a. Perimeter Landscaping. an eight (8) foot landscaped area shall be provided adjacent to
all driveways leading to the lot and around the outer edges of all parking lots.
b. Screening Areas. an ten (10) foot screening area shall be provided abutting all residential
districts except where a greater distance is required by the provisions of the zoning
district in which the parking lot is located.
4. Each landscape area adjacent to a street right-of-way shall contain a minimum of one tree per 40
feet of landscape area parallel to the right-of-way. In addition, a vegetative screen, landscaped
berm, fence, wall, or other methods to reduce the visual impact of the parking area shall be
provided. The vegetative screen shall have an average continuous height of three (3) feet. A 3-
foot decrease in elevation from the adjoining property to the street right-of-way shall be construed
as satisfying the vegetative screen requirement.
5. Grass or ground cover shall be planted on all portions of the landscape area not occupied by other
landscape material.
6. Special notes on existing natural vegetation:
a. In all cases where significant natural vegetation exists, as determined by the Zoning
Official, there will be limits of clearing/grading areas established to protect and preserve
these natural area. These natural areas will not be disturbed by the installation of any
structures, utilities, storm and sanitary sewers, water lines, sediment and erosion control
traps, storm water management systems, signage. Existing landscape material which is
proposed to be used to fulfill landscape requirements shall be shown in the required plan.
b. In the case where buffers are created by the application of these standards, no structures,
utilities, storm and sanitary sewers, water lines, sediment and erosion control traps, storm
water management systems, and signage will be permitted.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 297
c. Where pedestrian and bike paths are proposed in the landscape area, such paths shall be
meandering in order to preserve the existing trees.
7. Trees required as a part of the parking lot street right-of-way landscaping may be placed on the
right-of-way adjoining such parking area when approved by the Planning Commission. Such trees
shall be in addition to any street trees required by the subdivision regulations.
8. Landscaping in Easements. The required landscape area for parking areas may be combined with
a utility or other easement only if all landscape requirements can be met. Otherwise, the
landscape area shall be in addition to, and separate from, any easement.
9. In any parking lot perimeter landscaping area all trees shall be set back at least 4 feet from the
edge of paving where vehicles overhang.
Section 310. Interior Landscaping for Parking Lots
1. For any parking lot containing more than 6,000 square feet of area or 15 or more spaces, interior
landscaping shall be provided in addition to the previously required perimeter landscaping.
Interior landscaping shall be contained in peninsulas or islands. An interior parking lot landscape
island or peninsula is defined as a landscaped area containing a minimum area of 153 square feet
having a minimum width of 8.5 feet and a minimum length of 18 feet. There shall be a minimum
of 4 feet to all trees from the edge of paving where vehicles overhang. The minimum landscape
area permitted shall be 10 percent of the parking area. Each island or peninsula shall be enclosed
by appropriate curbing or a similar device at least 6 inches wide and 6 inches in height above the
paving surface. For purposes of Subsection 4. below and subject to the limits established in 5.
below, up to 4 islands can be combined.
2. Where a parking area is altered or expanded to increase the size to 6,000 or more square feet of
area or fifteen (15) or more vehicular parking spaces, interior landscaping for the entire parking
area shall be provided and not merely to the extent of its alteration or expansion.
3. Landscape area. For each 100 square feet, or fraction thereof, of parking lot, 5 square feet of
landscaped area shall be provided. The interior landscaping requirement shall be computed on the
basis of the "net parking facility." For the purposes of this Section, "net parking facility" shall
include parking stalls, access drives, aisles, walkways, dead spaces, and required separations from
structures, but shall not include required street setbacks or access driveways or walkways within
such setbacks.
4. Landscape islands or peninsulas - number required:
a. For less than 100 spaces one island or peninsula is required for every 7 parking spaces.
b. For 100 spaces or more, one island or peninsula is required for every 10 spaces.
c. Each 10 parking spaces shall require an interior planting island.
d. All interior parking aisles shall end in a landscape island.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 298
5. Maximum contiguous areas for interior parking lot landscaping. In order to encourage the
required landscape areas to be properly dispensed, no required landscape area shall be larger than
the following:
a. 350 square feet in parking areas under 30,000 square feet.
b. 1,500 square feet in parking areas over 30,000 square feet.
6. Landscape areas larger than the above are permitted as long as the additional area is in excess of
the required minimum, except that landscape areas larger than the maximum permitted may be
allowed as required landscaping areas in those cases where significant natural vegetation exists.
7. Minimum plant materials. A minimum of one tree for each 250 square feet or fraction thereof of
required landscape or for each 5 spaces of required parking or for each 161 square feet of island
or peninsula, whichever is greater, shall be required. The remaining area of the required
landscaped area shall be landscaped with shrubs or ground cover not to exceed 2 feet in height, or
grass.
8. Landscaping for service structures. All service structures shall be fully screened, except when
located more than 35 feet above the established grade, and shall not be visible from a public way
to the maximum extent possible, as determined by the Zoning Administrator. Service structures in
an industrial zone shall be fully screened when located within 100 feet of any zone other than
industrial. For the purposes of this article, service structures shall include propane tanks,
dumpsters, air conditioning units and condensers, electrical transformers and other equipment or
elements providing service to a building or a site.
a. Location of screening. A continuous planting, hedge, fence, wall, or earth mound shall
enclose any service structure or loading zone on all sides unless such structure must be
frequently moved, in which case screening on all but one side is required. The average
height of the screening material shall be one foot more than the height of the enclosed
structure. Whenever a service structure is located next to a building wall, perimeter
landscaping material, or vehicular use area landscaping material, such walls or screening
material may fulfill the screening requirement for that side of the service structure if that
wall or screening material is of an average height sufficient to meet the height
requirement set out in this section. Whenever service structures are screened by plant
material, such material may count towards the fulfillment of required interior or
perimeter landscaping. No interior landscaping shall be required within an area screened
for service structures.
b. Protection of screening material. Whenever screening material is placed around any trash
disposal unit or waste collection unit that is emptied or removed mechanically on a
regular basis, a fixed barrier to contain the placement of the container shall be provided
within the screening material on those sides where there is such material. The barrier
shall be at least 18 inches from the material and shall be of sufficient strength to prevent
possible damage to the screening when the container is moved or emptied. The minimum
front opening of the screening material shall be 12 feet to allow service vehicles access to
the container.
9. Interior landscaping for parking areas shall be installed and continuously maintained by the
owner.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 299
10. Plan submission and approval. Whenever any property is affected by these parking area landscape
requirements, the property owner or developer shall prepare a landscape plan for approval
according to the requirements contained in the Section 299 of this Chapter.
11. Unnecessary paving or irregular paving plans are strongly discouraged and, if incorporated in a
site plan, shall be subject to approval by the Zoning Official.
12. Alternative parking area landscaping design may be considered by the permitting officials in
cases where unique topography and site constraints dictate such alternative. The innovative use of
planting design and materials is encouraged and will be evaluated on the intent demonstrated to
fulfill the stated objectives of this Chapter.
13. Landscape material type and quality shall be as follows:
a. Parking lots and areas that are required to be paved must be shaded by deciduous trees
(either retained or planted by the developer) that have or will have when fully mature a
trunk at least 12 inches in diameter. When trees are planted by the developer to satisfy the
requirements of this subsection, the developer shall choose trees that meet the standards
set forth in Appendix B.
b. Each tree of the type described in Subsection a. shall be presumed to shade a circular area
having a radius of 15 feet with the trunk of the tree as the center, and there must be
sufficient trees so that, using this standard, 20 percent of the vehicle accommodation area
will be shaded.
c. No paving may be placed within 12 ½ feet (measured from the center of the trunk) of any
tree retained to comply with Subsection a., and new trees planted to comply with
Subsection a. shall be located so that they are surrounded by at least 200 square feet of
unpaved area.
d. Parking areas shall be laid out and detailed to prevent vehicles from striking trees.
Vehicles will be presumed to have a body overhang of three feet, six inches.
Part V Environmental Standards for Sensitive Areas
Section 311. Environmental Standards
The following provisions shall apply to all development activities requiring site plan or subdivision plat
approval located outside of the Critical Area. Where a development activity is located within the Critical
Area, the provisions of the Critical Area Overlay district shall apply.
1. Perennial Stream no-disturbance buffer
a. A one-hundred (100) foot natural buffer from all perennial streams shall be required for
all development. Permanent or temporary storm water and/or sediment control devices
shall not be permitted in this Buffer.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 300
b. This buffer requirement may be reduced to no less than seventy-five (75) feet by the
Planning Commission for the following:
(1) If evidence is provided that the design, construction and use of the site will
provide the same or better protection of water quality as the 100' buffer, and if
evidence is provided that said development will meet all other applicable
requirements, as required.
(2) Road crossings, if disturbance is minimized.
(3) Other public or community facilities provided disturbance is minimized in so far
as possible.
2. Intermittent Stream no-disturbance buffer
a. A fifty (50) foot buffer from all intermittent streams shall be required for all
development. Permanent or temporary storm water management and sediment control
devices shall not be permitted in this buffer.
b. This buffer requirement may be waived by the Planning Commission for the following:
(1) Road crossings, if disturbance is minimized.
(2) Other public or community facilities provided disturbance is minimized in so far
as possible.
3. Sensitive Soil no-disturbance buffer. The one-hundred (100) foot perennial stream buffer shall be
expanded to include contiguous 100 year floodplain and nontidal wetlands. In addition, the onehundred
(100) foot perennial stream buffer shall be expanded to include hydric soils, highly
erodible soils and soils on slopes greater than fifteen percent (15%) that are contiguous with the
perennial stream, any 100 year flood plain adjacent to the stream, or any nontidal wetlands
adjacent to the stream to a maximum distance of three hundred (300) feet.
4. Non-tidal Wetland buffer. A twenty-five (25) foot setback from all non-tidal wetlands shall be
required for all development around the extent of the delineated nontidal wetland except as
permitted by the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers and the State of Maryland, Department of Natural
Resources, Non-tidal Wetland Division.
5. Steep Slopes.
The following steep slope provisions shall apply to all development activities located outside of
the Critical Area and to all development activities located in an Intensely Developed Area (IDA)
with the Perryville Critical Area. Where development activity is located within a Limited
Development Area (LDA) or Resource Conservation Area (RCA) the provisions of the Critical
Area Overlay district shall apply.
a. Grading, removal of vegetative cover and trees, and paving are not permitted on any land
in excess of twenty-five percent slope for an area of forty thousand (40,000) square feet
unless the Planning Commission determines based on a detailed justification provided by
the developer that:
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 301
(1) It is necessary for construction of public or private roads, driveways, utilities,
trails, pathways, or storm water management facilities which are essential for
reasonable development of the property;
(2) The design minimizes disturbance;
(3) There is no other reasonable alternative; and
(4) The cost of an alternative improvement shall not be a factor in deciding whether
the criteria in subject (1) above can be met.
(5) Reasonable development, for the purpose of this section, does not guarantee
maximum possible development under the Perryville Zoning Ordinance. In any
zoning district, achieving the maximum possible density is not sufficient
justification alone to allow disturbance.
(6) If permitted, the grading, removal of vegetative cover and trees, or construction
shall only be to the extent required to accommodate the necessary improvements.
In these cases, the Planning Commission may require the least damaging designs,
as well as planting of the areas where grading or removal of vegetative cover has
taken place.
b. Not more than forty percent (40%) of any land in excess of fifteen percent slope and less
than twenty-five percent slope for an area of forty thousand (40,000) square feet shall be
cleared of natural ground cover or vegetation in preparation for development unless the
Planning Commission is able to make the findings specified in (1) through (4) above.
c. Whenever development is proposed on land in excess of fifteen percent slope, the
Planning Commission may require that the proposed development be certified by a
registered professional engineer. If a geo-technical problem is suspected, a more detailed
report may be required, as deemed necessary by the Planning Commission.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 302
ARTICLE XVIII AMENDMENTS
Section 312. Amendments In General
1. The Town Commissioners may from time to time amend, supplement, modify, or repeal the
regulations, or district boundaries herein established on its own motion or on petition of the
owner(s) or contract owner(s) of the property proposed for change.
2. Any application for a zoning amendment shall contain specific information setting forth the basis
for the granting of the request. Any application must disclose the names and addresses of all
persons having legal or equitable interest in the property which is the subject of the amendment,
including shareholders owning more than five (5) percent of the stock in a corporation that has
any interest in land involved in the application, excepting those corporations which are listed and
regularly traded on a recognized stock exchange.
Section 313. Initiation of Amendments
1. Any owner or contract owner wishing to amend, supplement, modify, or repeal any portion of this
Chapter shall file a Zoning Amendment Petition with the Town Administrator in such form and
accompanied by such information as may be required by the Planning Commission.
2. Upon determination by the Town Administrator that the application is complete in accordance
with the herein requirements, the application shall be promptly submitted for comment and
review to appropriate Town, county, and state departments and agencies. Upon such
administrative review (to be completed within sixty (60) days from submission by the Zoning
Administrator) the application shall be submitted to the Planning Commission.
Section 314. Planning Commission Consideration of Proposed Amendments [Amended 1/3/2017
by Ord No. 2016-21]
1. The Planning Commission shall consider the application as follows:
a. The applicant shall be given ample time to present his case to the Planning Commission.
In so doing the applicant may call on expert witnesses to support his request.
b. The Zoning Administrator and/or Town Administrator may present a staff report
representing a review of the application by the Town staff. The staff report shall include,
without limitation, the following matters: population change, availability of public
facilities, present and future transportation patterns, compatibility with existing and
proposed development for the area, the relationship of such proposed amendment to the
Town of Perryville Comprehensive Plan, and a recommendation for approval or denial of
the proposed amendment.
c. The Planning Commission shall ask such questions of either the applicant, any witnesses,
or the staff as may be necessary in deciding its recommendation for approval or denial of
the application.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 303
2. Within sixty (60) days from the Planning Commission's meeting on the application, the Planning
Commission shall transmit the application to the Town Commissioners together with its
recommendation for approval or disapproval. The Planning Commission shall concurrently
transmit this information to the applicant.
3. After the Planning Commission makes its formal recommendation on the application, the Town
Commissioners shall hold a public hearing on the application.
Section 315. Hearing Required; Notice [Amended 1/3/2017 by Ord No. 2016-21]
Public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the provision of the Land Use Article of the
Annotated Code of Maryland.
Section 316. Mayor and Town Commissioners Action on Amendments
1. Before approving or disapproving any application for amendment, the Town shall hold at least
one (1) public hearing in relation to the application, at which parties in interest and citizens shall
have an opportunity to be heard.
2. The Town Commissioners shall hold a public hearing, as set forth in Section 4-203 of the Land
Use Article, within sixty (60) days after receipt of the Planning Commission's recommendation.
3. Prior to holding the public hearing, the property in question shall be posted and all property
owners within 200 feet of subject property shall be notified by the applicant by registered or
certified mail at the last known address as reflected on the tax records.
4. In reaching a decision on zoning amendments, the Town Commissioners shall make findings of
fact in each specific case including, but not limited to, the following matters: population change,
adequacy of public facilities, present and future transportation patterns, compatibility with
existing and proposed development for the area, the recommendations of the Planning
Commission, relation to the Comprehensive Plan, fiscal impact upon Town government, and the
suitability of the property in question to the uses permitted under the existing and proposed
zoning classifications; and may grant the amendment based upon a finding that there was a
substantial change in the character of the neighborhood where the property is located or that there
was a mistake in the existing zoning classification. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
delineate the boundaries of the neighborhood and to identify the change in the character of the
neighborhood.
5. An application for reclassification shall not be accepted for filing by the Town Administrator if
the application is for the reclassification of the whole or any part of land which has been denied
by the Town Commissioners until twelve (12) months from the date of denial.
6. The record in all zoning cases shall include the application, all documents or communications
submitted regarding the application, the recorded testimony received at the hearing, any reports or
communications to or from any public officials or agency concerning the application, and the
final decision of the Town Commissioners. The record shall be open to public inspection and
shall be maintained in the Town Office. The burden of proof for any zoning change shall be upon
the applicant.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance 304
Section 317. Amendments for Floating Zones
1. The provisions of this Article regarding the procedures and requirements of public hearings and
findings of fact to be made regarding applications shall also apply to requests for floating zone
designation except that it shall not be necessary to prove change in the character of the
neighborhood or mistake in the original zoning of the property in order to gain approval. In
floating zones the test for approval or denial shall be compatibility with the neighborhood and
consistency with the comprehensive plan.
2. Procedures to maintain a floating zone once granted.
a. Within two (2) year of the granting of a floating zone, application for building permits
must be filed with requisite fees paid; otherwise, such zoning shall revert automatically to
its prior district classification without notice and public hearing. The Mayor and Town
Commissioners may grant a one-time extension, not to exceed one (1) year.
b. Within one year of the issuance of a building permit, construction shall be commenced on
the land so zoned; otherwise, such zoning shall revert automatically to its prior district
classification without notice and public hearing.
c. Within three years of the granting of a floating zone, 75 percent of the public
improvements devoted to such use or uses as may be permitted in the zoning district shall
be completed; otherwise, the zoning shall revert automatically to its prior district
classification. The property owners have the ability to petition the Town Commissioners
for an extension.
Chapter 84 Zoning Ordinance i
Zoning Ordinance
Chapter 84 of the Code of Perryville
Note: Supplementary use section provided where applicable.
Legend: P = Permitted, PC = Permitted with Conditions, SE =
Special Exception, SC = Special Exception with Conditions
USES DESCRIPTION R-1 R-2 R-3 TC RM CEMUD CM-1 CM-2 NB C-2 L-1 L-2
RESIDENTIAL
1.100 Single-Family Residences
1.110 Single-family detached P P P P P P
1.111 Site-built and modular residential structures P P P P P PC
1.112 Manufactured Home, Double-wide (see Article IX, Part III) SC SC SC
1.113 Manufactured Home, Single-wide (see Article IX, Part III) SC SC
1.200 Two-Family Residence, Duplex P P SC P
1.300 Multi-Family Residences P
1.310 Multi-family townhouses PC SC SC PC
1.320 Multi-family apartments SC PC SC PC PC
1.330 Commercial apartments SC SC PC PC P
1.400 Homes emphasizing special services, treatment, or supervision
1.410 Assisted Living, Group homes, Halfway House private
1.411 not more than 10 people - Section 168 SC SC SC SC
1.412 with between 11 and 16 people SC
1.420 Child and elderly center
1.421 Day care home (having fewer than 7 clients) PC PC PC PC PC PC
1.422 Day care center, day nursery (having between 7 and 16 clients) SC PC
1.423 Day care center, day nursery (having between 16 and 30 clients) SC PC
1.430 Housing for the elderly or handicapped - Section 195 PC SC
1.440 Homeless Shelter SC
1.500 Miscellaneous rooms for rent situations
Section 161. Table of Permitted Uses [Amended: 11-4-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-04; 9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-2; 5-6-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-02; 1-3-
2017 by Ord. No. 2016-21]
Revised 9-14-2012--changed table from Word to Excel
Amended:5-6-2014 Ord No. 2014-02; 1-3-2017 Ord No. 2016-21. Section 161 Table of Permissible Uses - Page 1 of 14
Zoning Ordinance
Chapter 84 of the Code of Perryville
USES DESCRIPTION R-1 R-2 R-3 TC RM CEMUD CM-1 CM-2 NB C-2 L-1 L-2
1.510 Bed and breakfast and country inns - Section 174 SC SC SC SC
1.520 Hotels, motels, convention centers, and similar businesses or
institutions providing overnight accommodations - Section 194
SC SC SC PC
1.600 Home-Based Business - Section 192
1.610 Type 1 Home-Based Business P P P P P PC P
1.611 Type 2 Home-Based Business SC SC SC P SC P
2.000 COMMERCIAL, OFFICE AND SERVICE
2.100 No storage or display of goods outside fully enclosed building
2.101Food stores P PC P
2.102 Professional Offices PC P PC P P P
2.103 Bakeries - Section 216 PC P PC P
2.104 Dry-cleaning and pressing pickup stations or shops P PC P
2.110 Retail sale P
2.111 High-volume traffic generation P
2.111.1 Automobile parts, supplies, and tire stores; drug stores, and
food and beverage, super market
P P
2.111.2 Convenience stores, P SC P
2.111.3 Department stores P P
2.111.4 Shopping center - Section 212 P P
2.112 Low-volume traffic generation (appliance stores, book store,
furniture store gift shops, hardware stores, jewelry shops, wearing apparel,
photographic art supply stores, florists, grocery)
PC SC P
2.112.1 Antique Shops - Section 166 PC SC P PC P
2.112.2 Pet Shops - Section 202 SC P PC P
2.113 Highway Corridor Unified Development - Section 222 SE
2.120 Business services, including computer repair, copying, and postal
services
P SC P PC PC PC
Revised 9-14-2012--changed table from Word to Excel
Amended:5-6-2014 Ord No. 2014-02; 1-3-2017 Ord No. 2016-21. Section 161 Table of Permissible Uses - Page 2 of 14
Zoning Ordinance
Chapter 84 of the Code of Perryville
USES DESCRIPTION R-1 R-2 R-3 TC RM CEMUD CM-1 CM-2 NB C-2 L-1 L-2
2.130 Retail Establishments in a Group of Multiple-family Dwellings -
Section 209
SC P PC PC
2.140 Retail Establishments in an Office Building - Section 210 PC P PC
2.200 Storage and display of goods outside fully enclosed building PC PC
2.210 High-volume traffic generation (building material and supply, boat
sales, farm implements storage and sales, feed and grain storage and sales,
heavy equipment sales and service)
2.200 Low-volume traffic generation PC
2.230 Wholesale sales P PC PC
2.300 All operations conducted entirely within fully enclosed building PC
2.310 Operations designed to attract and serve customers or clients on the
premises
2.311 The offices of attorneys, architects, engineers, other similar
professions, insurance and stock brokers, travel agents, government office
buildings, etc
PC PC PC PC P P PC PC
2.312 Banks and financial institutions, barber and beauty shops, dry
cleaning/laundry, laundromats, personal services
PC P PC P
2.313 Drive-in banks - Section 181 SC PC PC PC PC PC
2.314 Shops for the sale, service or repair of home appliances, office
machines, electrical equipment and television and radio equipment
PC P PC P
2.315 Tattoo Services - Section 236 PC PC
2.320 Operations designed to attract little or no customer or client traffic
other than employees of the entity operating the principal use.
P
2.330 Office or clinics of physicians or dentists with not more than 10,000
square feet of gross floor area - Section 193
PC PC PC
2.340 Operations conducted within and/or outside fully enclosed building
2.341 Operations designed to attract and serve customers or clients on the
premises (plumbing, mechanical contractors)
PC PC PC
Revised 9-14-2012--changed table from Word to Excel
Amended:5-6-2014 Ord No. 2014-02; 1-3-2017 Ord No. 2016-21. Section 161 Table of Permissible Uses - Page 3 of 14
Zoning Ordinance
Chapter 84 of the Code of Perryville
USES DESCRIPTION R-1 R-2 R-3 TC RM CEMUD CM-1 CM-2 NB C-2 L-1 L-2
2.241.1 Car washes and automobile laundries - Section 176 SC
2.342 Operations designed to attract little or no customer or client traffic
other than the employees of the entity operating the principal use
(furniture repair shops, sign painting)
PC PC PC
2.350 Wholesale sales
2.351 Wholesale sales, with no outside storage P P PC
2.352 Wholesale sales, with outside storage P P PC
2.400 Animal Services
2.410 Animal Boarding Places, Veterinary Hospitals, Veterinary
office/clinic - Section 164
PC SC PC PC
2.500 Automotive Services
2.510 Motor vehicle sales or rental PC
2.511 Automobile, trailer and truck sales, service and repair, and emission
testing, not including body work - Section 173
SC SC SC
2.520 Motor vehicle fuel sales - Automobile Filling Station - Section 169 PC PC PC PC
2.530 Neighborhood Motor Vehicle Service Station or Garage - Section 200 PC SC SC SC
2.540 Automobile Painting and Body Work - Section 171 SC SC SC
2.550 Car washes and Automobile Laundries - Section 176 P SC
2.600 Restaurants and Other Establishments P
2.610 Restaurant, standard - Section 206 PC PC P P P PC P
2.620 Restaurant, fast food, drive-in, drive thru PC PC
2.630 Service of Alcoholic Beverages e.g., PUBs, Bars, dance halls,
nightclubs, cocktail lounges - Section 208
SC SC PC SC SC SC PC
2.700 Health Club, spa = Section 197 P P P
2.800 Funeral Parlors, Undertaking Establishments, and Mortuaries
2.810 Funeral Parlors, Undertaking Establishments, and Mortuaries SE SE SE SE PC
2.820 Cemetery SC
Revised 9-14-2012--changed table from Word to Excel
Amended:5-6-2014 Ord No. 2014-02; 1-3-2017 Ord No. 2016-21. Section 161 Table of Permissible Uses - Page 4 of 14
Zoning Ordinance
Chapter 84 of the Code of Perryville
USES DESCRIPTION R-1 R-2 R-3 TC RM CEMUD CM-1 CM-2 NB C-2 L-1 L-2
2.821 Cemeteries, crematorium P PC
2.900 Open Air Markets P
2.910 Open-air markets (farm and craft markets, flea markets, produce
markets non-municipal)
P P
2.920 Greenhouses and horticultural sales with outdoor display - Sec 189 SC PC PC PC
2.930 Roadside stand for products raised on the premises P
4.000 EDUCATIONAL, CULTURAL, RELIGIOUS,
PHILANTHROPIC, SOCIAL, FRATERNAL USES
4.100 Schools
4.110 Elementary and secondary (including pre-school, kindergarten,
associated grounds and athletic and other facilities)
4.111 Public SC SC SC SC P P
4.112 Private - Section 185 SC SC SC SC P P
4.120 Trade or vocational schools SE SE SE SC P P PC PC
4.130 Colleges, universities, community colleges (including associated
facilities such as dormitories, office buildings, athletic fields, etc.)
SE SE SE P
4.200 Churches, synagogues, and temples (including associated residential
structures for religious personnel and associated buildings but not including
elementary or secondary school buildings)
SE SE SE SE SE P SE SE
4.300 Social, Fraternal Clubs and Lodges, Philanthropic Institutions SE P SE SE
4.400 Nursery Schools; Day Care Centers with More than 30 Children PC P SC P
4.500 Libraries, museums, art galleries, art centers, and similar uses (including
associated educational and instructional activities)
SE SE SE SE P SC SE
4.600 Art or cultural center - Section 167 PC PC P PC
5.000 RECREATIONS, AMUSEMENT, ENTERTAINMENT
5.100 Activity conducted entirely within building or substantial structure
Revised 9-14-2012--changed table from Word to Excel
Amended:5-6-2014 Ord No. 2014-02; 1-3-2017 Ord No. 2016-21. Section 161 Table of Permissible Uses - Page 5 of 14
Zoning Ordinance
Chapter 84 of the Code of Perryville
USES DESCRIPTION R-1 R-2 R-3 TC RM CEMUD CM-1 CM-2 NB C-2 L-1 L-2
5.110 Bowling alleys, skating rinks, indoor tennis and squash courts, billiard
and pool halls, rifle and pistol ranges, indoor athletic and exercise facilities
and similar uses
P P
5.120 Movie theaters P P
5.121 Open-air drive-in theaters - Section 216 P P
5.122 Gaming Establishments - Section 188.1
5.200 Activity conducted primarily outside enclosed buildings or structures PC
5.210 Privately owned outdoor recreational facilities such as golf and country
clubs, swimming or tennis clubs, etc., not constructed pursuant to a permit
authorizing the construction of some residential development - Section 190
SC SC SC SC
5.220 Publicly owned and operated outdoor recreational facilities such as
athletic fields, golf courses, tennis courts, swimming pools, parks, etc., not
constructed pursuant to a permit authorizing the construction of another use
such as a school
SC
5.230 Golf Driving Range - Section 191 PC SC
5.300 Swimming Pool, Community SC SC SC SC SC SC
5.400 Swimming Pool, Commercial P SC
5.500 Campgrounds and Recreational Vehicle Parks - Section 175 SC
6.000 INSTITUTIONAL RESIDENCE OR CARE OR CONFINEMENT
FACILITIES
6.100 Hospitals, clinics, other medical (including mental health) treatment
facilities in excess of 10,000 square feet of floor area - Section 193
SC SC PC
6.200 Nursing care home, institutions, intermediate care institutions,
handicapped or infirm institutions, child care institutions
SC
6.300 Animal Hospital, veterinary clinic PC SC PC PC
6.400 Institutions (other than halfway houses) SE
6.410 Halfway houses, other than criminal offenders SE
Revised 9-14-2012--changed table from Word to Excel
Amended:5-6-2014 Ord No. 2014-02; 1-3-2017 Ord No. 2016-21. Section 161 Table of Permissible Uses - Page 6 of 14
Zoning Ordinance
Chapter 84 of the Code of Perryville
USES DESCRIPTION R-1 R-2 R-3 TC RM CEMUD CM-1 CM-2 NB C-2 L-1 L-2
6.420 Halfway houses, including criminal offenders SE
7.000 EMERGENCY SERVICES
7.100 Police Stations P P P P P P P P P P P
7.200 Fire Stations P P P P P P P P P P P
7.300 Rescue squad, ambulance service P P P P P P P P P P P
7.400 Civil defense operation P P P P P P P P P P P
8.000 MISCELLANEOUS PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC FACILITIES
8.100 Post office, local PC PC PC PC PC PC PC
8.200 Recycling Centers P P P P P PC PC
8.300 Rail Station P P P P P
8.400 Bus terminals SC
8.500 Heliports and helistops SC SC
9.000 MARINA, INCLUDING BOAT SALES AND REPAIR AND
BOAT RENTAL
9.100 Marina, Yacht Club - Section 196 SC SC SC
9.200 Docks, piers, bulkheads and other over water structures, except private
over-water piers and boathouses accessory to a dwelling
SE P P
9.210 High and Dry Storage, Dry-Stack Storage SC SC SE
9.300 Manufacturing
of Marine-related Products SE SE
9.400 Private piers and over-water boat houses accessory to a dwelling
9.410 Private piers, less than six (6) feet in width P P P P P P P
9.420 Private piers, greater than six (6) feet in width and over-water boat
houses
SE SE SE SE SE SE SE
9.500 Marina related service and repair P P
9.600 Boat sales and storage, but not including high and dry or dry-stack
storage
P P P
9.700 Fuel Sales P P P
Revised 9-14-2012--changed table from Word to Excel
Amended:5-6-2014 Ord No. 2014-02; 1-3-2017 Ord No. 2016-21. Section 161 Table of Permissible Uses - Page 7 of 14
Zoning Ordinance
Chapter 84 of the Code of Perryville
USES DESCRIPTION R-1 R-2 R-3 TC RM CEMUD CM-1 CM-2 NB C-2 L-1 L-2
10.000 UTILITY FACILITIES, TOWERS AND RELATED
1S0T.R10U0C PTuUblRicE UStilities P P P P P P P P P P P
10.110 Neighborhood Service P P P P P P P P P P P
10.120 Water or sewerage treatment facilities P P P P P P P P
10.130 Public utility buildings and structures - Section 203 PC PC PC PC PC PC PC PC PC PC PC
10.200 Towers and Related Structures P P
10.210 Television antennas 50 feet tall or less P P P P P P P P P P P
10.220 Towers and antennas more than 50 ft tall and associated sub-stations SC SC SC SC SC SC SC SC SC SC SC
10.230 Satellite dishes or receive-only earth station - Section 211 PC PC
10.231 Diameter eighteen (18) inches or less PC PC PC PC PC PC PC PC PC PC PC
10.231 Diameter greater than eighteen (18) inches SC SC SC SC SC PC PC SC SC PC PC
11.000 MISCELLANEOUS USES
11.100 Temporary structures used in connection with the construction of a
permanent building and real estate sales office (time limit and with permit) -
construction trailers, temporary storage trailers and temporary sale office
SC SC SC SC SC PC SC SC SC SC SC SC
11.200 Festivals, events of public interest of special events PC PC PC PC PC PC PC PC PC
11.300 Christmas tree sales PC PC P
11.400 Nurseries - Section 189 SC SC SC P PC PC
11.500 Dwellings for resident watchmen and caretakers employed on the
premises
SE P P PC PC
11.600 Accessory Use, Utility Buildings PC PC PC PC PC PC PC
11.700 Excavation, Borrow Pits, Extraction, Removal of Sand, Gravel or
Stone, Stripping of Topsoil - Section 186
SC
12.00 STORAGE AND PARKING
12.100 Automobile parking garages or parking lots not located on a lot on
which there is another principal use to which parking is related
P P P P
Revised 9-14-2012--changed table from Word to Excel
Amended:5-6-2014 Ord No. 2014-02; 1-3-2017 Ord No. 2016-21. Section 161 Table of Permissible Uses - Page 8 of 14
Zoning Ordinance
Chapter 84 of the Code of Perryville
USES DESCRIPTION R-1 R-2 R-3 TC RM CEMUD CM-1 CM-2 NB C-2 L-1 L-2
12.200 Storage of goods not related to sale or use of those goods on the same
lot where they are stored
P
12.210 All storage within completely enclosed structure P P P
12.220 Storage inside or outside completely enclosed structures P P
12.300 Mini-warehouses - Section 199 SC SC
12.400 Parking of vehicles or storage of equipment outside enclosed structures
where: (a) vehicles or equipment are owned and used by person making use of
the lot, and (b) parking or storage is more than a minor and incidental part of
the overall use made of the lot. Parking or storage of waste removal vehicles
and equipment is not included
P P
12.500 Automobile and Light Truck Storage Lots PC PC
12.600 Cargo Trailers and Closed-Body Trucks Used As Storage Structures,
Temporary
SC PC PC
13.00 INDUSTRIAL
13.100 General light manufacturing or fabricating including processing,
cleaning testing and distribution of materials, food stuffs and products, related
uses, and uses with similar impacts including, but not necessarily limited to,
the following:
PC PC
13.101 Auditorium or lecture hall and recreation facilities primarily for
employees in the district
PC PC
13.102 Beverage blending or bottling, bakery products, candy manufacture,
dairy products and ice cream, fruit and vegetable processing and canning,
packing and processing of fish, meat and poultry products, but not distilling of
beverages or slaughtering of poultry or animals, or processing or bulk storage
of grain or feeds for animals or poultry.
PC PC
13.103 Compounding of cosmetics, toiletries, drugs and pharmaceutical
products
PC PC
13.104 Contractor's shop and storage PC PC
13.105 Laboratories, research, experimental or testing, but not testing
combustion engines or explosives
SC
Revised 9-14-2012--changed table from Word to Excel
Amended:5-6-2014 Ord No. 2014-02; 1-3-2017 Ord No. 2016-21. Section 161 Table of Permissible Uses - Page 9 of 14
Zoning Ordinance
Chapter 84 of the Code of Perryville
USES DESCRIPTION R-1 R-2 R-3 TC RM CEMUD CM-1 CM-2 NB C-2 L-1 L-2
13.106 Manufacture or assembly of boats, bolts, nuts, screws and rivets,
ornamental iron products, firearms, electrical appliances, tools, dies,
machinery and hardwood products, sheet-metal products and vitreous
enameled metal products.
PC PC
13.107 Manufacture or assembly of medical and dental equipment, drafting,
optical and musical instruments, watches, clocks, toys, games and electrical or
electronic apparatus.
PC PC
13.108 Manufacture of rugs, mattresses, pillows, quilts, millinery, hosiery,
clothing and fabrics, printing and finishing of textiles and fibers into fabric
goods.
PC PC
13.109 Manufacture of boxes, furniture, cabinets, baskets and other wood
products of similar nature.
PC PC
13.110 Motion-picture studios PC PC
13.111 Oil storage depot PC PC
13.112 Photographic processing or blueprinting PC PC
13.113 Printing and publishing PC PC
13.114 Railroad spur tracks. PC PC
13.115 Wholesale merchandising or storage warehouses, with floor area
devoted to warehousing and handling of merchandise
PC PC
13.200 General light industrial, warehousing and storage uses, including
certain open or enclosed storage of products, materials and vehicles and any
similar uses which are not likely to create any more offensive noise, vibration,
dust, heat, smoke, odor, glare or other objectionable influences than the
minimum amount normally resulting from other uses listed, such listed uses
being generally wholesale establishments, service industries and light
industries that manufacture, process, store and distribute goods and materials
and are, in general, dependent on raw materials refined elsewhere, and
manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment,
as specified,
of the following products or similar products:
PC PC
13.201 Aircraft and aircraft parts PC
13.202 Aluminum extrusion, rolling, fabrication and forming PC
Revised 9-14-2012--changed table from Word to Excel
Amended:5-6-2014 Ord No. 2014-02; 1-3-2017 Ord No. 2016-21. Section 161 Table of Permissible Uses - Page 10 of 14
Zoning Ordinance
Chapter 84 of the Code of Perryville
USES DESCRIPTION R-1 R-2 R-3 TC RM CEMUD CM-1 CM-2 NB C-2 L-1 L-2
13.203 Animal pounds PC
13.204 Assembly of trailers and truck bodies PC
13.205 Bedding (mattress, pillow and quilt) PC
13.206 Beverage blending or bottling, but not distilling, bakery products,
candy manufacture, dairy products and ice cream, fruit and vegetable
processing and canning, packing and processing of fish, meat and poultry
products, but not distilling of beverages or slaughtering of poultry or animals,
or processing or bulk storage of grain or feeds for animals or poultry.
13.207 Blacksmith shops, including gas- and steam-fitting shops PC
13.208 Boat manufacture and repair, boat sales, service, storage or rentals P P PC PC
13.209 Button manufacture PC
13.210 Carbon paper and inked-ribbon manufacture PC
13.211 Carpets, rugs and mats, including cleaning PC
13.212 Cigar and cigarette manufacture PC
13.213 Coal and coke storage and sales PC
13.214 Commercial animal, poultry and bird raising PC
13.215 Reserved PC
13.216 Cosmetics, toiletries and perfumes (compounding only) PC
13.217 Dairy operations and dairy products, ice cream and cheese PC
13.218 Electrolytic process plating PC
13.219 Equipment rental PC
13.220 Experimental research laboratories, but not including combustion
engine testing
PC
13.221 Exterminating establishments PC
13.222 Fertilizer storage in bags or bulk storage of liquid or dry fertilizer in
tanks or in a completely enclosed building, but not manufacture or processing
PC
Revised 9-14-2012--changed table from Word to Excel
Amended:5-6-2014 Ord No. 2014-02; 1-3-2017 Ord No. 2016-21. Section 161 Table of Permissible Uses - Page 11 of 14
Zoning Ordinance
Chapter 84 of the Code of Perryville
USES DESCRIPTION R-1 R-2 R-3 TC RM CEMUD CM-1 CM-2 NB C-2 L-1 L-2
13.223 Fireplace logs PC
13.224 Food products manufacture, processing and packaging of such
products as candy, chewing gum, cocoa products, coffee, tea and spices,
macaroni and noodles
PC
13.225 Foundry products manufacture (electrical only) PC
13.226 Fruit and vegetable processing, including canning, preserving,
drying
and freezing
PC
13.227 Freight truck and transfer terminals PC
13.228 Furniture (wood, reed, rattan, metal and plastic) PC
13.229 Grain blending and packaging, but not milling PC
13.230 Heating, ventilating, cooking and refrigeration supplies and appliances PC
13.231 Ice manufacture, including dry ice PC
13.232 Industrial vocational training schools, including internal-
combustion
engines
PC
13.233 Ink manufacturing (mixing only) PC
13.234 Insecticides, fungicides, disinfectants and related industrial and
household chemical elements (blending only)
PC
13.235 Kennels, boarding or otherwise PC
13.236 Knitting, weaving, printing, finishing of textiles and fibers into fabric
goods or clothing, hats or hosiery
PC
13.237 Livery stables and riding academies PC
13.238 Machinery manufacture; machine shops PC
13.239 Manufacture of wood products, including baskets, boxes, crates,
barrels and vendeers
PC
13.240 Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances or electronic
apparatus, medical, optical or drafting equipment,
toys, games and musical
instruments
PC
Revised 9-14-2012--changed table from Word to Excel
Amended:5-6-2014 Ord No. 2014-02; 1-3-2017 Ord No. 2016-21. Section 161 Table of Permissible Uses - Page 12 of 14
Zoning Ordinance
Chapter 84 of the Code of Perryville
USES DESCRIPTION R-1 R-2 R-3 TC RM CEMUD CM-1 CM-2 NB C-2 L-1 L-2
13.241 Manufacture, sale or storage of plumbing PC
13.242 Manufacture, sale, storage or repair of agricultural or farm implements PC
13.243 Meat products, packing and processing (not slaughtering) PC
13.244 Metal products manufacture, such products as bolts, nails, staples,
needles, pins, metal containers, ornamental iron fabrication, silverware and
plated wire
PC
13.245 Oleomargarine (compounding and packing only) PC
13.246 Open or enclosed building materials (cement, lime in bags or
containers, sand, gravel, stone, lumber, structural or reinforcing steel, steel
fabricating, pipe and the like) storage and sales, but not manufacture of steel
or junk storage
PC
13.247 Pharmaceutical products; drugs PC
13.248 Planing and millwork; lumberyards PC
13.249 Poultry packing and slaughtering (wholesale) PC
13.250 Printing, publishing and engraving, photographic processing or
blueprinting
PC
13.251 Processing and canning of condensed and evaporated milk PC
13.252 Processing, packing or storing, except fish curing or smoking, of fish,
shrimp, crabs, clams, oysters and other seafood
PC
13.253 Pulp goods, pressed or molded, including paper mache products PC
13.254 Radiator repair, cleaning and flushing PC
13.255 Radio or television broadcasting stations, studios, offices and towers PC
13.256 Railroad switching yards, primarily for railroad service in the district,
team tracks and spur tracks
PC
13.257 Repair and assembly of automobiles, trucks, buses, truck trailers,
motorcycles and bicycles and transmission repair service
PC
13.258 Research centers SC PC
Revised 9-14-2012--changed table from Word to Excel
Amended:5-6-2014 Ord No. 2014-02; 1-3-2017 Ord No. 2016-21. Section 161 Table of Permissible Uses - Page 13 of 14
Zoning Ordinance
Chapter 84 of the Code of Perryville
USES DESCRIPTION R-1 R-2 R-3 TC RM CEMUD CM-1 CM-2 NB C-2 L-1 L-2
13.259 Rubber- and synthetic-treated fabrics, excluding all rubber and
synthetic processing
PC
13.260 Sheet-metal products, duct work and containers PC
13.261 Shipping containers (corrugated board, fiber or wirebound)
PC
13.262 Sign fabrication and painting shops PC
13.263 Soap, washing or cleaning, powder or soda (compounding only) PC
13.264 Tire retreading, recapping and vulcanizing shop PC
13.265 Tools, dies and hardware products; firearms PC
13.266 Vitreous enameled products PC
13.267 Warehouses, wholesale houses and distributors, wholesale market PC
13.268 Wholesale bakery products (manufacturing permitted) PC
13.269 Welding or soldering shops PC
13.270 Welding or soldering shops PC
Revised 9-14-2012--changed table from Word to Excel
Amended:5-6-2014 Ord No. 2014-02; 1-3-2017 Ord No. 2016-21. Section 161 Table of Permissible Uses - Page 14 of 14
Notes:
X = item required at indicated development stage
Appendix A - Page 1 of 5
APPENDIX A
BASIC INFORMATION REQUIRED WITH ZONING AND BUILDING
PERMIT APPLICATIONS
NOTE: All plats and plans must be clear and legible. Incomplete plats will be returned to the applicant for completion and
re-submission.
DEVELOPMENT STAGE
Major Site Plan
Item#
DESCRIPTION
Sketch/
Concept
Plan
Minor Site
Plan
General
Develop.
Plan
Prelim.
Final
I. PROJECT-PLAT INFORMATION
1. Name, address of owner, applicant, developer and lienholder,
date of application.
X X X X X
2. Name and address of engineer, land surveyor architect,
planner, and/or landscape architect, as applicable, involved in
document preparation.
X X X X X
3. Date of survey. X X X
4. Seal, signature and license number of engineer, land surveyor,
architect, and/or landscape architect, as applicable involved
in document preparation. Each sheet must have a
surveyor's seal.
X X X
5. Title block denoting name and type of application, tax map
sheet, block and lots, parcel, and street location.
X X X X X
6. A vicinity map at a specified scale (no smaller than 1"=200')
showing location of the tract with reference to surrounding
properties, streets, landmarks, streams, etc. Show all of the
property owned according to the Tax Map(s) if only part of
the property is to be developed.
X X X X X
7. Existing and proposed zoning of tract and adjacent property. X X X X X
8. Adjacent property owners, names, Liber and Folio. X X X X X
9. Title, north arrow and scale (1"=100'). X X X
10. Appropriate signature block for planning director, planning
commission chairman, and the health department.
X X X
11. Appropriate certification blocks. X X
12. Certification and dedication by the owner or owners to the
effect that the subdivision as shown on the final plat is made
with his or her consent and that it is desired to record same.
X X
13. Monumentation, location and description. X X
Notes:
X = item required at indicated development stage
Appendix A - Page 2 of 5
14. Standardized sheets 18"x24" (final - black ink on mylar). X X X
15. Metes and bounds survey showing dimensions, bearings,
curve, data, length of tangents, radii, arc, chords, and central
angles for all centerlines and rights-of-way, and centerline
curves on streets, datum and benchmark, primary central
points approved by the Town Engineer. (Boundary of proposed
subdivision can be a deed plot).
X X X
16. Acreage of tract to the nearest thousandth of an acre. X X X X X
17. Date of original and all revisions. X X X X X
18. Size and location of any existing or proposed structures with
all setbacks dimensioned (for concept plan, GDP general
location but not setbacks). Include storm drains, culverts,
retaining walls, fences, stormwater management facilities,
sediment and erosion structures.
X X X X X
19. Number of dwelling units. X X X X X
20. Location, dimensions, bearings, names of any existing or
proposed roads or streets.The location of pedestrian ways,
driveways.Right of way widths. (for GDP, concept plans,
general locations).
X X X X X
21. All proposed lot lines (width and depth) and area of lots in
square feet, number of lots, lot numbers.
X X X
22. Location and type of utilities. X X
23. Copy and/or delineation of any existing or proposed deed
restrictions or covenants.
X X
24. References to protective covennnts governing the maintenance
of undedicated public spaces or reservations.
X X
25. Location and size of proposed Natural Park areas, play
grounds and other public areas.
X X X X
26. Any existing or proposed easement (drainage and utility) or
land reserved for or dedicated to public use*. Location,
dimensions of proposed reservations, right of ways, open
space, buffers, forested areas along with means by which
these areas will be permanently maintained.
X X X X X
27. Statement of owner dedicating streets, right-of-way, and any
sites for public use.
X X
28. Development stages or phasing plans (for GDP and concept
plans, general phasing). Sections numbered by phase.
X X
29. Total number of off-street parking spaces including ratio and
number of units per space.
X X X X
30. List of required regulatory approvals/permits. X X X X X
31. List of variances required or requested. X X X X X
32. Requested or obtained design waivers or exceptions. X X X X X
Notes:
X = item required at indicated development stage
Appendix A - Page 3 of 5
33. Payment of application fees. X X X X X
34. Total area of the site that will be temporarily and/or permanently
disturbed.
X X
II. SETTING-ENVIRONMENTAL INFORMATION
35. All existing streets, water courses, flood plains wetlands, or
other environmentally sensitive areas on or adjacent to the
site.
X X X X
36. Existing rights-of-way and/or easements on or immediately
adjacent to the tract.
X X X X X
37. Topographical features of subject property from USGS map
or more accurate source at 2'-5' intervals, 50' beyond the
boundary, with source stated on maps.
X X X
38. Field delineated or survey topo. X X
39. General areas of >15% slope shaded and identified as steep
slopes.
X X X
40. Slope analysis of >15% slopes. These areas shall be shaded
and identified as steep slopes.
X X
41. Forest Stand Delineation (See Zoning Ordinance). X X
42. Existing system of drainage of subject site and adjacent sites
and of any larger tract or basin of which it is a part.
X X X
43. A 100 Year Flood Plain based on FEMA maps. X X X X X
44. Tidal and non-tidal wetland delineation based on NWI maps
and field review.
X X X X
45. Non-tidal wetlands identification based on field delineation/
determination.
X
46. Location of sensitive areas and their Buffers (Zoning Ordinance).
X X X X X
47. Location and width of Bufferyards. X X X X X
48. Soil types based on Cecil County Soil Survey. X X
49. Traffic Impact Study, as required. X
50. Statement of effect on school district and school bus service,
as required.
X
The following additional information items are required in the areas designated Critical Areas
51. Location of the Critical Area District boundary and Critical
Area designation.
X X X X X
52. Number of acres in the Critical Area. X X X X
53. Mean high waterline and landward edge of tidal wetlands. X X X X
Notes:
X = item required at indicated development stage
Appendix A - Page 4 of 5
54. Location of existing forested areas to be disturbed by construction.
Planting plan approved by the Maryland Forest
Service (final).
X X X X
55. The known locations of HPA's, the habitat of any threatened
or endangered species, and the habitat of any Species in Need
of Conservation. Habitat Protection Plan reviewed by the
Maryland Fish, Heritage and Wildlife Administration.
X X X X X
56. The location of the Critical Area Buffer and the expanded
Buffer, as required.
X X X X X
57. Hydric and highly erodible soils based on the Cecil County
Soil Survey.
X X X X
58. Natural Park management plan, if applicable. X
59. Shore erosion protection plan, if applicable. X
60. Environmental assessment. X X X
61. Statement of consistency with the Critical Area Program. X X X X
III. PLATS, IMPROVEMENT PLANS, AND CONSTRUCTION INFORMATION
62. Subdivision Plat meeting requirements of Perryville Subdivision
Regulations.
X X
63. Grading and drainage plans including roads, drainage ditches,
sediment basins, and berms.
X X X
64. Existing and proposed contour intervals as follows: X X X
Less than 5% slope = 1 foot
5 to 15% slopes = 2 feet or less
>15% = as required for construction
65. Proposed street grades, typical cross sections and profiles,
right-of-way widths, pedestrian ways, total area of roads.
X X X
66. Existing and proposed utility infrastructure plans and profiles
including sanitary sewer, water, storm drainage and stormwater
management, as appropriate in the case of minor
subdivisions.
X X X
67. Grades and sizes of sanitary sewers and waterlines. X X X
68. Direction and distance to water and sewer if not available on
or adjacent to the site with invert and elevation of sewer.
X X
69. Certification from electric and telephone utilities of adequate
facilities to serve proposed development.
X X
70. Location of fire hydrants. X X
71. Construction details as required by ordinance. X X
72. Stormwater Management Plan. X X X
Notes:
X = item required at indicated development stage
Appendix A - Page 5 of 5
73. Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. X X X
74. Lighting plan and details, as required. X
75. Landscape plan and details, including required Bufferyards. X X X
76. Forest Conservation Plan X X
77. Proposed street names. X X
78. New block and lot numbers. X X
79. Solid waste management plan. X X
80. Preliminary architectural plan and elevations. X X
81. Required County, State, and/or Federal or approvals, e.g.,
State Highway Administration, County Public Works, Army
CORPS of Engineers, DNR Wetlands Permit/License,
MDOE Quality Certification, MDOE sanitary construction
permit, local Health Department approvals.
X X
82. Department of Public Works signature on final Site Plan
83. Public works agreement and surety instruments. X
Appendix B – Page 1
APPENDIX B BUFFERYARD REQUIREMENTS
B-1: Bufferyard Specifications
The following illustrations graphically indicate the specifications of each bufferyard. Bufferyard
requirements are stated in terms of the width of the bufferyard and the number of plant units required per
one hundred (100) linear feet of bufferyard. The recommended bufferyard should be one of the options
illustrated. The "plant unit multiplier" is a factor by which the basic number of plant materials required for
a given bufferyard is determined given a change in the width of that yard. The type and quantity of plant
materials required by each bufferyard, and each bufferyard option, are specified in this section.
Afforestation and reforestation plantings required under the Forest Conservation requirements contained in
the Ordinance may occur in bufferyards provided such plantings meet the minimum requirements for
afforestation or reforestation.
The options within any bufferyard are designed to be equivalent in terms of their effectiveness in
eliminating the impact of adjoining uses. Cost equivalence between options was attempted where possible.
Generally, the plant materials which are identified as acceptable are determined by the type(s) of soil
present on the site. Each illustration depicts the total bufferyard located between two uses.
Whenever a wall, fence, or berm is required within a bufferyard, these are shown as "structure required" in
the following illustrations, wherein their respective specifications are also shown. All required structures
shall be the responsibility of the higher intensity use.
B-2: Plant Material
The following plant material substitutions shall satisfy the requirements of this section.
(1) In bufferyards C and D evergreen canopy or evergreen understory trees may be substituted for
deciduous canopy forest trees without limitation.
(2) In bufferyards B evergreen canopy or evergreen understory trees may be substituted as follows:
(a) In the case of deciduous canopy forest trees, up to a maximum of fifty (50) percent of the
total number of the deciduous canopy trees otherwise required.
(b) In the case of deciduous understory, without limitation.
(3) In all bufferyards, evergreen or conifer shrubs may be substituted for deciduous shrubs without
limitation.
(4) In all bufferyards required of public service uses, the public service use may substitute evergreen
canopy or evergreen understory plant materials for canopy forest trees and understory plant
materials, without limitation.
If the development on the adjoining use is existing, planned, or deed-restricted for solar access, understory
trees may be substituted for canopy trees where canopy trees would destroy solar access. Any existing plant
material which otherwise satisfies the requirements of this section may be counted toward satisfying all
such requirements.
Appendix B – Page 2
Although the exact placement of required plants and structures shall be the decision of each user except
that the following requirements shall be satisfied:
(1) Evergreen (or conifer) class III and IV plant materials shall be planted in clusters rather than singly
in order to maximize their chances of survival.
(2) Berms (B1 and B2,) required of bufferyard D options are intended to buffer more significant
nuisances from adjacent uses and, additionally, to break up and absorb noise, which is achieved by
the varied heights of plant materials between the masonry wall and the noise source.
All bufferyard areas shall be seeded with lawn unless ground cover is already established.
Appendix B – Page 3
Appendix B – Page 4
Appendix B – Page 5
Appendix B – Page 6
Appendix B – Page 7
Appendix B – Page 8
Perryville Code – Chapter A86 Fees
A86 01
Chapter A86
FEES
§ A86-1. Zoning Permit Fees.
§ A86-2. Zoning Board of Appeals Fees.
§ A86-3. Records to be kept.
§ A86-4. Disposal of funds.
§ A86-5. Perryville Community Park Fees.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Commissioners of the Town of Perryville 6-4-80
as Resolution No. 80-1. [Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I; 4-2-13 by Res. No. 13-6; 6-4-13 by Res. No. 13-19; 1-3-
2017 by Ord. No. 2016-23]
§ A86-1. Zoning Fees.
Erection of any fence—ornamental or protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $ 10.00
Accessory buildings under 150 square feet requiring little or no
foundation work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10.00
Other accessory buildings and additions (porches, rooms, garages) . . . . . . . . . . 10.00
Addition of driveway to existing home . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10.00
Signs: (New or Replacement):
Flat: each face . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20.00
Detached: each face . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30.00
Any addition or improvement to commercial or industrial buildings, $0.01 per
square foot of each enclosed space, to a maximum of $500.00, minimum of . . . . 20.00
Moving of any building, structure or part thereof . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20.00
New house under 1,099 square feet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20.00
New house from 1,100 to 1,490 square feet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25.00
Perryville Code – Chapter A86 Fees
A86 02
New house greater than 1,500 square feet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30.00
Commercial buildings of 1,000 square feet or less . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20.00
Commercial buildings of greater than 1,000 square feet, $0.01 per
square foot of enclosed space, to a maximum of $500.00, minimum of . . . . . 40.00
Industrial buildings 2,000 square feet or less . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40.00
Industrial buildings greater than 2,000 square feet, $0.01 per square foot of
enclosed space, to a maximum of $500.00, minimum of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40.00
Swimming pool. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20.00
Public and semipublic buildings: 1/10 of 1% of total building cost,
maximum of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 500.00
Retaining Wall over 4 feet in height . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15.00
Demolition (disconnection of utilities). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20.00
Zoning Certificate Re-Issuance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20.00
Critical Area (if plans require Critical Area Commission review). . . . . . . . . . . . 10.00
Shoreline Stabilization/Construction (bulkhead, pier, floating dock,
retaining wall, revetment) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20.00
No charge for minor repair(s) (does not include structural changes) or normal
maintenance.
Note: A shopping center or a group of buildings, being built as a commercial center,
shall be considered as one (1) structure.
Note: Apartment buildings: Each apartment counts as one (1) home of one thousand
five hundred (1,500) square feet or more.
Note: New home permits must indicate they have electric smoke detector located in
sleeping unit.
§ A86-2. Zoning Board of Appeals fees.
Variances (as delineated in the Perryville Zoning Ordinance) . . . . . . . . . . . . . $ 150.00
Special exceptions or conditional uses (as delineated in the Perryville
Zoning Ordinance) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $250.00
Perryville Code – Chapter A86 Fees
A86 03
Zoning change request . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $250.00
Appeals from Zoning Administrator’s decision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $250.00
§ A86-3. Records to be kept.
Records shall be kept noting all time and funds spent in administrating the Zoning
Ordinance.
§ A86-4. Disposal of funds.
All fees paid for permits and processes shall be deposited in the General Fund
Account of the Town, with proper documentation of all deposits.
§ A86-5. Perryville Community Park Fees.
The following fees are payable for a permit to use multi-purpose fields at the Perryville
Community Park:
1. For-profit organizations:
a. $15 per two hour block, Monday through Friday.
b. $20 per four hour block, Saturday and Sunday.
2. Non-profit organizations:
a. $5 per two hour block, Monday through Friday.
b. $7.50 per four hour block, Saturday and Sunday.
For good cause shown the Mayor and Commissioners may waive all or part of any fee for
a particular application.
Permit fee will be refunded upon receiving cancellation request in writing at least two
weeks prior to permitted date(s) of use.

Perryville Code - Chapter 62 Rental Dwelling
Chapter 62
RENTAL DWELLING
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Town Commissioners of the Town of Perryville
7-7-2009 as Ord. No. 2008-5 and shall become effective November 1, 2009. Repealed
and Reenacted with amendments 12-4-12 as Ord. No. 2012-7 and shall become
effective 12-24-12.
Chapter 62
RENTAL DWELLING
1. This Chapter shall apply to all dwellings and structures located within the Town
of Perryville which contain one or more units rented for residential purposes and
which are rented or leased to any resident/tenant for more than thirty (30)
consecutive days either by oral or written agreement. As used in this Chapter,
"rental housing" means a dwelling or structure in which one or more of these
rental units are located, and "rental unit" means a dwelling unit or other
residential unit located within rental housing.
2. This Chapter shall be enforced by the Town Code Enforcement Officer, the
Town Administrator, or any other person directed by the Mayor and
Commissioners of the Town of Perryville.
3. The Town Code Enforcement Officer, Town Administrator or other Town
official/employee may call upon appropriate County, State or other authorities,
agencies, codes or regulations in identifying and correcting conditions in rental
housing or in rental units which constitute violations of this Chapter or other duly
enacted ordinances, regulations or laws, as applicable.
4. The legal owner of record of rental housing shall obtain a rental housing license
from the Town of Perryville before operating a building or dwelling as rental
housing.
5. The rental housing license shall contain the name, mailing address and telephone
number of the property owner and emergency contact information for the owner
or property manager or agent authorized to act for the owner on all matters
relating to the rental housing. The rental housing license shall also specify the
exact location of the rental housing for which it is issued and the number of rental
units within such rental housing. If the property is owned by a corporation,
limited liability company, or other legal entity, the entity must provide proof that
6201 12-4 - 2012
Perryville Code - Chapter 62 Rental Dwelling
it is qualified to do business in the State of Maryland. Each corporation, , limited
liability company, or other legal entity, including any non-resident owner, shall
certify to the Town the name, address and telephone number of an agent who
resides in Maryland and is qualified to accept notices and service of process on
behalf of the owner and must keep such information current. All owners or
property managers who are authorized to act for the owner shall provide the
Town with emergency contact information and shall keep such information
current.
6. If a licensee changes address, changes emergency contact information, or
changes the resident agent or transfers ownership, the licensee shall notify the
Town within ten (10) calendar days of any such change. The Town may suspend
or revoke any license for failure to notify the Town in a timely manner as
required by this Section 6.
7. A rental housing license may not be issued or renewed by the Town unless the
owner of the dwelling, or structure to be used for rental housing has applied to
the Town on an application form provided by the Town and has paid the
applicable license fee as adopted by the Mayor and Commissioners by resolution.
8. As part of the rental housing license application, and as a precondition to the
Town's approval of the application, the owner shall:
a. Consent to inspections by the Town to determine if the dwelling, rental
housing or rental unit for which the license is to be issued is in compliance
with all housing and rental codes and requirements if an inspection is
determined to be necessary per Section 14 of this Chapter.
b. Comply, operate and maintain the rental housing in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter and other applicable law.
9. A rental housing license shall be issued for a period of one (1) year commencing
on January 1 of the year in which the license is issued unless sooner revoked. The
rental housing license fee shall be fifteen dollars ($15. 00). This fee is not to be
prorated.
10. Every person who rents or leases a rental unit shall provide each tenant with a
Landlord-Tenant Responsibility Notice, the form of which shall be provided to
the licensee when the rental housing license is issued, on or before the move-in
date. This notice shall contain the license number and the property owners and/or
property manager's contact information.
11 . A rental housing license may not be renewed unless an application for renewal
has been made before the expiration of the current license. Any person who fails
to renew a rental housing license on or before its expiration date and continues to
let, rent or allow the occupancy of the rental housing or rental unit for which the
6202 12-4 - 2012
Perryville Code - Chapter 62 Rental Dwelling
license was issued, shall be guilty of a municipal infraction. Each day that the
violation continues is a separate offense. The municipal infraction fine for such
offense shall be two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) ..
12. All license fees and municipal infraction fines must be paid in full prior to the
issuance of the license or renewal.
13. Any person who fails to obtain a rental housing license as required by this
Chapter, and continues to rent or lease any unit, after first having been given
fifteen (15) calendar days notice of that person's failure to obtain the required
license, shall be guilty of a municipal infraction. The municipal infraction fine
for failure to obtain a rental housing license as required by this Chapter shall be
two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) for each offense. Each day that rental
housing or a rental unit continues to be let or rented for residential purposes
without having the required license shall be a separate offense.
14. If the Town receives a complaint or has reasonable cause to believe that a
licensed rental housing or rental unit does not comply with all applicable laws
and requirements, including the requirements of this Ordinance, the Town may
inspect the rental housing or rental unit.
a. If, upon inspection the Town determines that there is one or more
violation(s) which pose a serious and immediate threat to the life, safety,
property or health of the occupants of the rental housing or rental unit, the
rental housing license may be suspended immediately. Notice of such
immediate suspension due to violation(s) involving imminent danger shall
be made by certified mail to the owner or agent listed on the application
and/or by any means calculated to provide immediate actual notice.
b. If, upon inspection the Town determines that there is one or more
violation(s) which do not pose a serious and immediate threat to the life,
safety, property or health of the occupants of the rental housing or rental
unit, and for which the license was not immediately suspended, written
notice shall be sent by certified mail to the owner or agent, as listed on the
license application, directing that all violations be corrected within thirty
(30) days from the date of the notice. If all such violation(s) are not
corrected to the satisfaction of the Town within thirty (30) days of the
notice of violation the Town may suspend or revoke the rental housing
license for such rental housing or rental unit. The Town may grant up to
two (2) extensions to correct all violations where the Town has determined
that the owner is making a good faith effort to complete the required
repairs or improvements in a timely manner but is unable to comply due to
the magnitude of the work, or can prove delays in receipt of materials or
equipment, delays in a hired contractor's completing the required work, or
delays due to weather or other matters beyond the owner's control.
6203 12-4 - 2012
Perryville Code - Chapter 62 Rental Dwelling
15. No tenant shall be evicted solely on the basis of retaliation for the making of any
complaint to the Town for any violation.
16. If a rental housing license is denied, revoked or suspended, other than under the
provision of Section 14(A) of this Chapter (serious and immediate threat to
health and safety), the Town shall require the owner or agent of the rental
housing or rental unit to give any tenant or other individuals occupying the
affected rental unit ninety (90) days written notice to vacate. The ninety (90) day
notice shall begin the first day of the month after service of the notice to the
tenant. A copy of such notice to vacate shall also be delivered to the Town.
1 7. A dwelling so ordered to be vacated, due to license denial, revocation or
suspension, shall not again be occupied until a written statement has been secured
from the Town Code Enforcement officer, the Town Administrator or their
designee showing that the dwelling has been made to comply with this Code or
any other applicable law.
18. Any person who continues to rent or lease any unit, after first having been given
fifteen (15) calendar days notice that the rental license has been suspended or
revoked, shall be guilty of a municipal infraction and is subject to a fine in the
amount of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) for each offense. Each day
that a unit continues to be leased or rented for residential purposes without
having the required license shall be a separate offense.
19. No rental housing or rental unit shall be created or occupied unless it conforms
with the provisions of the Town of Perryville Zoning Ordinance. No new rental
housing or rental units shall be established or added, nor shall the occupancy
limit of any rental housing or rental unit be increased except in conformity with
the Zoning Ordinance.
20. Any owner of rental housing or a rental unit aggrieved by the action of the Code
Enforcement Officer, Town Administrator or other Town official or employee in
suspending, revoking or denying any license may, within fifteen (15) days after
service of the written notice of such action, appeal such action to the Town of
Perryville Landlord-Tenant Board (hereinafter Landlord-Tenant Board) as
established in this Chapter. Within thirty (30) days after a notice of appeal is
filed the Landlord-Tenant Board shall conduct a hearing, at which the owner
aggrieved shall have the opportunity to be heard along with all necessary
witnesses. Within thirty (30) days of such hearing the Landlord-Tenant Board
shall either reverse, modify or affirm the action appealed. The decision of the
Landlord-Tenant Board shall be in writing. Any party aggrieved by the decision
of the Landlord-Tenant Board may, within thirty (30) days from the date of such
decision, file an appeal to the Circuit Court for Cecil County. The procedures for
any appeal shall be governed by Title 7, Chapter 200 (Judicial Review of
Administrative Agency Decisions) of the Maryland Rules, as amended.
6204 12-4 - 2012
Perryville Code - Chapter 62 Rental Dwelling
21. The following uses shall be exempt from the requirements of this Chapter :
government buildings and uses; hospitals, ·nursing homes, hospices and other
health care facilities and residences; churches, synagogues, parsonages, rectories
or other religious facilities; day cares; hotels, motels, and bed and breakfast
facilities, provided they do not rent or lease any dwelling, dwelling unit or
rooming unit to any resident/tenant for more than thirty (30) consecutive days;
and, schools and dormitories.
22. The provisions of this Chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted
for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. Wherever the
requirements of this Chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other
lawfully adopted ordinance, state law, rule, regulation, or code, the more
restrictive or that imposing the higher standard shall govern.
23. There is hereby established a Town of Perryville Landlord-Tenant Board. The
Landlord-Tenant Board shall consist of three (3) members who reside within the
Town of Perryville. One member shall be a landlord. One member shall be a
tenant whose livelihood does not derive in whole or in significant part from the
ownership and/or management of rental property. The third member shall be a
resident of the Town who is neither a landlord or tenant. There shall also be one
.(1) alternate member for each group.
The terms of the members and any alternate member shall be for three (3) years.
Each member of the Board shall continue to serve until a successor has been
appointed and confirmed. The term of any member of the Board shall
immediately terminate in the event the member changes status as a landlord,
tenant, a member of the public at large that is neither a landlord or tenant, or
ceases to reside within the Town.
All members and alternates shall be appointed by the Mayor and Commissioners.
Recommendations for members and alternates shall be requested from all
organizations within the Town representing either landlords or tenants. If no
nominations are received within a time limit specified by the Mayor,
appointments may be made without nominations.
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations necessary for the fair and
expeditious enforcement of this Ordinance, including but not limited to provisions
for the calling and conducting of meetings, hearings and appeals held pursuant to
the terms of this Ordinance and for the issuing of findings, opinions and orders.
24. Should any section or provision of this Chapter be declared by any court to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
Chapter as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared
unconstitutional or invalid.
6205 12-4 - 2012