Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Municipal Infractions
[Adopted 1-12-2004 by Ord. No. 240]
§ 1-1. Declaration of municipal infractions.
The Mayor and Town Council shall specify those Town ordinance provisions
which shall constitute municipal infractions if violated.
§ 1-2. Issuance of citations.
§ 1-3. Payment of fine.
The fine is payable by the recipient of the citation to the Mayor and Town
Council of Sykesville or an authorized agent of the Town within 20 calendar
days of receipt of the citation.
The procedure for the issuance and service of citations for municipal
infractions shall be the procedure set forth in Article 23A, § 3(b) of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, or corresponding future provision of the
Annotated Code of Maryland.
A.
Those representatives authorized by the Mayor and Town Council to
enforce Town ordinances ("Enforcement Officers") may issue a citation
to any person alleged to be committing a municipal infraction. The
Enforcement Officer shall file copies of any such citation in the office of
the Mayor and Council.
B.
A citation issued under this section shall contain the following
information:
The Enforcement Officer's certification attesting to the truth of the
matter set forth in the citation;
(1)
(2) Name and address of the person charged;
The nature of the infraction, including the ordinance which has
been violated.
(3)
(4) The location and time that the infraction occurred;
The amount of the infraction fine assessed and any additional
amounts which shall be due upon failure to make timely payment;
(5)
The manner, location and time in which the fine may be paid to the
municipality;
(6)
The right of the accused to elect to stand trial for the municipal
infraction; and
(7)
The effect of failing to pay the assessed fine or demand a trial
within the prescribed time.
(8)
C.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
§ 1-4. No formal hearing; offender's options.
The Town shall not conduct any formal hearing for those persons in receipt
of a citation for a municipal infraction. Any offender so cited may pay
the fine as indicated in the citation or elect to stand trial in the District
Court of Maryland for Carroll County for the offense. This provision shall
not prevent an offender from requesting, either personally or through an
attorney, additional information concerning the municipal infraction.
§ 1-5. Election to stand trial.
A person who receives a citation for a municipal infraction may elect to
stand trial for the offense by giving notice to the Mayor and Town Council
at least five days prior to the date by which payment shall be required
under the citation. Upon receipt of such notice, the Mayor and Council shall
forward to the District Court of Maryland for Carroll County a copy of the
citation indicating the recipient's intention to stand trial.
§ 1-6. Failure to pay fine.
If a person charged in a citation fails to pay the fine within 20 calendar days
of receipt of the citation, and fails to timely deliver to the Town the written
notice of intent to stand trial, the person is liable for the assessed fine.
Failure to timely pay the assessed fine may result in an increase of the fine
to an amount not to exceed the lesser of double the original fine or $1,000,
and adjudication of the case through the District Court of Maryland for
Carroll County, including the filing of a demand for judgment on affidavit.
§ 1-7. Enforcement officers.
The Town Manager, the Town Police Chief and any sworn police officer of
the Town shall be considered Enforcement Officers within the meaning of
this article.
§ 1-8. Parking violations.
Parking violations are considered municipal infractions that are subject to a
separate fee schedule adopted by the Town Council.
§ 1-9. Violations and penalties.
General municipal infraction penalties. Unless otherwise specifically
enumerated in the ordinance which has been violated, a municipal
infraction of Class A as defined in § 1-10 below shall be levied upon a
violation of any ordinance.
A.
Continuing violations. Unless otherwise provided, a person may be
cited for a separate and/or repeat offense for each day a violation of any
Town ordinance continues.
B.
§ 1-4 SYKESVILLE CODE § 1-10
1:4
§ 1-10. Schedule of Fines for Municipal Infractions.
When a certain act or omission thereof is deemed to constitute a municipal
infraction, the following schedule of fines shall be applicable to said
violation(s):
Type of Offense Class Fine
Municipal Infraction A $50.00
Municipal Infraction B $100.00
Municipal Infraction C $250.00
Municipal Infraction D $500.00
Municipal Infraction E $1,000.00
§ 1-11. Amendment of fine schedule.
The Mayor and Council may amend the Schedule of Fines for Municipal
Infractions, including the maximum fine for a municipal infraction, by
resolution.
§ 1-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-11
1:5

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 9-27-2004 by Ord. No. 247]
§ 1-12. Adoption of Code.
The ordinances of the Town of a general and permanent nature, adopted by
the Mayor and Council of the Town, as revised, codified and consolidated
into chapters and sections by General Code Publishers Corp. and consisting
of Chapters 1 through 180, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and
enacted as the "Code of the Town of Sykesville," hereinafter known and
referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-13. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-14. Effective date.
This ordinance was introduced at the Town meeting held on the 13th day of
September 2004, and approved for passage by the Council on the 27th day
of September 2004, and became effective 21 days from the date of passage.
§ 1-15. Copy of Code on file. [Amended 6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 268]
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf or post binder form has been filed in
the office of the Town Manager (or such other staff member who may
be designated by the Town Manager) and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this ordinance, and if
this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Town
Manager of the Town by impressing thereon the Seal of the Town, and such
certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Town Manager (or such
other staff member who may be designated by the Town Manager), to be
made available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times
while the Code is in effect.
§ 1-16. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the Mayor and
Council to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Town of Sykesville"
shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf or post binder book containing said
Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-17
1:7
§ 1-17. Publication and filing. [Amended 6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 268]
The Town Manager (or such other staff member who may be designated
by the Town Manager) pursuant to law, shall cause to be published, in the
manner required, a notice of the passage of this ordinance in a newspaper
of general circulation in the Town. Sufficient copies of the Code shall be
maintained in the office of the Town Manager (or such other staff member
who may be designated by the Town Manager) for inspection by the public
at all times during regular office hours. Publication of such notice coupled
with availability of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall
be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-18. Code book to be kept up-to-date. [Amended 6-11-2007 by
Ord. No. 268]
It shall be the duty of the Town Manager (or such other staff member
who may be designated by the Town Manager) to keep up-to-date the
certified copy of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the
Town Manager's office (or such other staff member's office who may be
designated by the Town Manager) for the use of the public. All changes in
said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of
this codification, which shall be adopted specifically as part of the Code,
shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such
changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code books,
at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-19. Sale of Code book. [Amended 6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 268]
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from the
Town Manager (or such other staff member who may be designated by the
Town Manager) upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the
Mayor and Council, which may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures
for the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-20. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Town to be
misrepresented thereby. Any violation of this section shall be punishable as
a misdemeanor, the penalty for which shall be a fine not to exceed $1,000
or imprisonment for a term not to exceed six months.
§ 1-21. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part
thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not
be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section or
parts thereof.
§ 1-17 SYKESVILLE CODE § 1-22
1:8
§ 1-22. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-23. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code which are inconsistent with any ordinance contained
in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this adopting
ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-24. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and repeal of ordinances provided for in § 1-12
of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to January 12, 2004.
Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or
any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
B.
Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of
this ordinance in violation of any legislative provisions or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
C.
Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
D.
Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
E.
Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
F.
Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Town's indebtedness.
G.
Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract or obligation.
H.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
§ 1-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-24
1:9
§ 1-25. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
§ 1-26. Deposit of copies with state agencies.
Pursuant to § 9A of Article 23A of the Maryland Code, a copy of the Code
of the Town of Sykesville containing the Charter shall be deposited with the
Maryland Department of Legislative Services.
The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
J.
Ordinances establishing the amount and manner of payment of salaries
or compensation of officers and employees, establishing workdays and
working hours of certain employees and providing for holidays and
vacations for employees and keeping of employment records.
K.
L. All ordinances pertaining to Zoning Map changes.
M. Ordinance No. 87.
In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain grammatical changes and other minor changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the
Mayor and Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code
as if the ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended
to read as such.
A.
In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions to the Code
enumerated in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof
are made herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of
this ordinance. (Chapter and section number references are to the
ordinances as they have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)1
B.
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-25B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 9-27-2004 by Ord. No.
247." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
Town offices.
§ 1-24 SYKESVILLE CODE § 1-26
1:10
ARTICLE III
Charter Amendments
During
the
process
of
codification,
certain
revisions
to
the
Charter
were
approved
by
the
Mayor
and
Council.
The
resolutions
amending
the
Charter
were
adopted
in
accordance
with
statutory
requirements,
separate
from
the
Code
Adoption
Ordinance.
A
complete
enumeration
of
these
resolutions
follows:
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-26
1:11
Res. No. Adoption Date Effect on Charter
2004-1 8-9-2004 Adopted numbering
system, style and
corrections to grammar,
spelling and punctuation
2004-2 8-9-2004 Repealed Sections
18-76, 18-77, 18-82 and
18-85, to be readopted
as Code Ch. 122,
Articles I and II, and Ch.
174; and repealed
Sections 18-78, 18-79,
18-80, 18-81, 18-83,
18-84, 18-86 and 18-87
2004-3 8-9-2004 Amended § C-6
2004-4 8-9-2004 Amended § C-23
2004-5 8-9-2004 Amended § C-69
§ 1-26 SYKESVILLE CODE § 1-26
1:12
Chapter 12
ETHICS
§ 12-1. Applicability; definitions.
§ 12-2. Ethics Commission.
§ 12-3. Conflicts of interest.
The provisions of this chapter apply to all Town elected officials,
employees, and appointees to boards and commissions of the Town.
A.
The "Ethics Commission" shall mean the Town's Ethics Commission as
established by this chapter.
B.
The Ethics Commission shall consist of three members, to be appointed
by the Mayor.
A.
The Ethics Commission shall:
(1) Devise, receive, and maintain all forms required by this chapter;
Develop procedures and policies for advisory opinion requests and
provide published advisory opinions to persons subject to this
chapter regarding the applicability of the provisions of this chapter
to them;
(2)
Develop procedures and policies for the processing of complaints
to make appropriate determinations regarding complaints filed by
any person alleging violations of this chapter; and
(3)
Conduct a public information program regarding the purposes and
application of this chapter.
(4)
B.
C. The Town Attorney shall advise the Ethics Commission.
The Ethics Commission shall certify to the State Ethics Commission
on or before October 1 of each year that the Town is in compliance
with the requirements of State Government Article, Title 15, Subtitle 8,
Annotated Code of Maryland, for elected local officials.
D.
The Ethics Commission shall determine if changes to this chapter are
required to be in compliance with the requirements of State
Government Article, Title 15, Subtitle 8, Annotated Code of Maryland,
and shall forward any recommended changes and amendments to the
Town Council for enactment.
E.
The Ethics Commission may adopt other policies and procedures to
assist in the implementation of the Ethics Commission's programs
established in this chapter.
F.
§ 1-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-3
1:13
In this section, "qualified relative" means a spouse, parent, child, or
sibling.
A.
All Town-elected officials, officials appointed to Town boards and
commissions subject to this chapter, and employees are subject to this
section.
B.
Participation prohibitions. Except as permitted by Ethics Commission
regulation or opinion, an official or employee may not participate in:
Except in the exercise of an administrative or ministerial duty that
does not affect the disposition or decision of the matter, any matter
in which, to the knowledge of the official or employee, the official
or employee, or a qualified relative of the official or employee has
an interest.
(1)
Except in the exercise of an administrative or ministerial duty
that does not affect the disposition or decision with respect to the
matter, any matter in which any of the following is a party:
A business entity in which the official or employee has a direct
financial interest of which the official or employee may
reasonably be expected to know;
(a)
A business entity for which the official, employee, or a qualified
relative of the official or employee is an officer, director,
trustee, partner, or employee;
(b)
A business entity with which the official or employee or, to the
knowledge of the official or employee, a qualified relative is
negotiating employment or has any arrangement concerning
prospective employment;
(c)
If the contract reasonably could be expected to result in a
conflict between the private interest of the official or employee
and the official duties of the official or employee, a business
entity that is a party to an existing contract with the official
or employee, or which, to the knowledge of the official or
employee, is a party to a contract with a qualified relative;
(d)
An entity, doing business with the Town, in which a direct
financial interest is owned by another entity in which the
official or employee has a direct financial interest, if the official
or employee may be reasonably expected to know of both
direct financial interests; or
(e)
A business entity that:
The official or employee knows is a creditor or obligee of
the official or employee or a qualified relative of the official
or employee with respect to a thing of economic value; and
[1]
(f)
(2)
C.
§ 12-3 SYKESVILLE CODE § 12-3
1:14
As a creditor or obligee, is in a position to directly and
substantially affect the interest of the official or employee
or a qualified relative of the official or employee.
[2]
A person who is disqualified from participating under Subsection
C(1) and (2) of this section shall disclose the nature and
circumstances of the conflict and may participate or act if:
The disqualification leaves a body with less than a quorum
capable of acting;
(a)
The disqualified official or employee is required by law to act;
or
(b)
The disqualified official or employee is the only person
authorized to act.
(c)
(3)
The prohibitions of Subsection C(1) and (2) of this section do not
apply if participation is allowed by regulation or opinion of the
Ethics Commission.
(4)
Employment and financial interest restrictions.
Except as permitted by regulation of the Ethics Commission when
the interest is disclosed or when the employment does not create a
conflict of interest or appearance of conflict, an official or employee
may not:
Be employed by or have a financial interest in any entity:
Subject to the authority of the official or employee or the
Town agency, board, or commission with which the official
or employee is affiliated; or
[1]
That is negotiating or has entered a contract with the
agency, board, or commission with which the official or
employee is affiliated.
[2]
(a)
Hold any other employment relationship that would impair
the impartiality or independence of judgment of the official or
employee.
(b)
(1)
This prohibition does not apply to:
An official or employee who is appointed to a regulatory or
licensing authority pursuant to a statutory requirement that
persons subject to the jurisdiction of the authority be
represented in appointments to the authority;
(a)
Subject to other provisions of law, a member of a board or
commission in regard to a financial interest or employment
held at the time of appointment, provided the financial interest
or employment is publicly disclosed to the appointing authority
and the Ethics Commission;
(b)
(2)
D.
§ 12-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-3
1:15
An official or employee whose duties are ministerial, if the
private employment or financial interest does not create a
conflict of interest or the appearance of a conflict of interest,
as permitted by and in accordance with regulations adopted by
the Ethics Commission; or
(c)
Employment or financial interests allowed by regulation of the
Ethics Commission if the employment does not create a conflict
of interest or the appearance of a conflict of interest or the
financial interest is disclosed.
(d)
Post-employment limitations and restrictions.
A former official or employee may not assist or represent any party
other than the Town for compensation in a case, contract, or other
specific matter involving the Town if that matter is one in which the
former official or employee significantly participated as an official
or employee.
(1)
Until the conclusion of the next regular session that begins after
the elected official leaves office, a former member of the Town
Council may not assist or represent another party for compensation
in a matter that is the subject of legislative action.
(2)
E.
Contingent compensation. Except in a judicial or quasi-judicial
proceeding, an official or employee may not assist or represent a party
for contingent compensation in any matter before or involving the
Town. [Amended 1-28-2012 by Ord. No. 286]
F.
Use of prestige of office.
An official or employee may not intentionally use the prestige of
office or public position for the private gain of that official or
employee or the private gain of another.
(1)
This subsection does not prohibit the performance of usual and
customary constituent services by an elected local official without
additional compensation.
(2)
G.
Solicitation and acceptance of gifts.
(1) An official or employee may not solicit any gift.
An official or employee may not directly solicit or facilitate the
solicitation of a gift, on behalf of another person, from an individual
regulated lobbyist.
(2)
An official or employee may not knowingly accept a gift, directly or
indirectly, from a person that the official or employee knows or has
the reason to know:
(3)
H.
§ 12-3 SYKESVILLE CODE § 12-3
1:16
Is doing business with or seeking to do business with the Town
office, agency, board, or commission with which the official or
employee is affiliated;
(a)
Has financial interests that may be substantially and materially
affected, in a manner distinguishable from the public generally,
by the performance or nonperformance of the official duties of
the official or employee;
(b)
Is engaged in an activity regulated or controlled by the
official's or employee's governmental unit; or2
(c)
Subsection H(5) of this section does not apply to a gift:
That would tend to impair the impartiality and the
independence of judgment of the official or employee receiving
the gift;
(a)
Of significant value that would give the appearance of
impairing the impartiality and independence of judgment of
the official or employee; or
(b)
Of significant value that the recipient official or employee
believes or has reason to believe is designed to impair the
impartiality and independence of judgment of the official or
employee.
(c)
(4)
Notwithstanding Subsection H(3) of this section, an official or
employee may accept the following:
Meals and beverages consumed in the presence of the donor
or sponsoring entity;
(a)
Ceremonial gifts or awards that have insignificant monetary
value;
(b)
Unsolicited gifts of nominal value that do not exceed $20 in
cost or trivial items of informational value;
(c)
Reasonable expenses for food, travel, lodging, and scheduled
entertainment of the official or the employee at a meeting
which is given in return for the participation of the official or
employee in a panel or speaking engagement at the meeting;
(d)
Gifts of tickets or free admission extended to an elected local
official to attend a charitable, cultural, or political event, if the
purpose of this gift or admission is a courtesy or ceremony
extended to the elected official's office;
(e)
A specific gift or class of gift that the Ethics Commission
exempts from the operation of this subsection upon a finding,
(f)
(5)
2. Editor's Note: Former Subsection H(3)(d), pertaining to lobbyists, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 1-28-2012 by Ord. No. 286.
§ 12-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-3
1:17
§ 12-4. Financial disclosure for local elected officials and
candidates to be local elected officials.
in writing, that acceptance of the gift or class of gifts would not
be detrimental to the impartial conduct of the business of the
Town and that the gift is purely personal and private in nature;
Gifts from a person related to the official or employee by blood
or marriage, or any other individual who is a member of the
household of the official or employee; or
(g)
Honoraria for speaking to or participating in a meeting,
provided that the offering of the honorarium is not related in
any way to the official's or employee's official position.
(h)
Disclosure of confidential information. Other than in the discharge
of official duties, an official or employee may not disclose or use
confidential information, that the official or employee acquired by
reason of the official's or employee's public position and that is not
available to the public, for the economic benefit of the official or
employee or that of another person.
I.
Participation in procurement.
An individual or a person that employs an individual who assists a
Town agency in the drafting of specifications, an invitation for bids,
or a request for proposals for a procurement may not subject a
bid or proposal for that procurement or assist or represent another
person, directly or indirectly, who is submitting a bid or proposal
for the procurement.
(1)
The Ethics Commission may establish exemptions from the
requirements of this section for providing descriptive literature,
sole source procurements, and written comments solicited by the
procuring agency.
(2)
J.
This section applies to all local elected officials and candidates to be
local elected officials.
Except as provided in Subsection B of this section, a local elected
official or a candidate to be a local elected official shall file the
financial disclosure statement required wider this section:
(a) On a form provided by the Ethics Commission;
(b) Under oath or affirmation; and
(c) With the Ethics Commission.
(1)
(2) Deadlines for filing statements.
A.
§ 12-3 SYKESVILLE CODE § 12-4
1:18
An incumbent local elected official shall file a financial
disclosure statement annually no later than April 30 of each
year for the preceding calendar year.
(a)
An individual who is appointed to fill a vacancy in an office for
which a financial disclosure statement is required and who has
not already filed a financial disclosure statement shall file a
statement for the preceding calendar year within 30 days after
appointment.
(b)
An individual who, other than by reason of death, leaves an
office for which a statement is required shall file a statement
within 60 days after leaving the office.
The statement shall cover:
The calendar year immediately preceding the year in
which the individual left office, unless a statement
covering that year has already been filed by the
individual; and
[a]
The portion of the current calendar year during which
the individual held the office.
[b]
[1]
(c)
Candidates to be local elected officials.
Except for an official who has filed a financial disclosure statement
under another provision of this section for the reporting period,
a candidate to be an elected local official shall file a financial
disclosure statement each year beginning with the year in which
the certificate of candidacy is filed through the year of the election.
(1)
A candidate to be an elected local official shall file a statement
required under this section:
In the year the certificate of candidacy is filed, no later than
the filing of the certificate of candidacy;
(a)
In the year of the election, on or before the earlier of April 30
or the last day for the withdrawal of candidacy; and
(b)
In all other years for which a statement is required, on or
before April 30.
(c)
(2)
A candidate to be an elected official:
May file the statement required under § 12-4B(2)(a) of this
chapter with the Town Clerk or Board of Election Supervisors
with the certificate of candidacy or with the Ethics Commission
prior to filing the certificate of candidacy; and
(a)
Shall file the statement required under § 12-4B(2)(b) and (c)
with the Ethics Commission.
(b)
(3)
B.
§ 12-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-4
1:19
If a candidate fails to file a statement required by this section after
written notice is provided by the Town Clerk or Board of Election
Supervisors at least 20 days before the last day for the withdrawal
of candidacy, the candidate is deemed to have withdrawn the
candidacy.
(4)
The Town Clerk or Board of Election Supervisors may not accept
any certificate of candidacy unless a statement has been filed in
proper form.
(5)
Within 30 days of the receipt of a statement required under this
section, the Town Clerk or Board of Election Supervisors shall
forward the statement to the Ethics Commission or the office
designated by the Ethics Commission.
(6)
Public record.
The Ethics Commission or office designated by the Ethics
Commission shall maintain all financial disclosure statements filed
under this section.
(1)
Financial disclosure statements shall be made available during
normal office hours for examination and copying by the public
subject to reasonable fees and administrative procedures
established by the Ethics Commission.
(2)
If an individual examines or copies a financial disclosure statement,
the Ethics Commission or the office designated by the Ethics
Commission shall record:
The name and home address of the individual reviewing or
copying the statement; and
(a)
The name of the person whose financial disclosure statement
was examined or copied.
(b)
(3)
Upon request by the official or employee whose financial disclosure
statement was examined or copied, the Ethics Commission or the
office designated by the Ethics Commission shall provide the
official with a copy of the name and home address of the person
who reviewed the official's financial disclosure statement.
(4)
C.
Retention requirements. The Ethics Commission or the office
designated by the Ethics Commission shall retain financial disclosure
statements for four years from the date of receipt.
D.
Contents of statement.
Interests in real property.
A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of
all interests in real property wherever located.
(a)
(b) For each interest in real property, the schedule shall include:
(1)
E.
§ 12-4 SYKESVILLE CODE § 12-4
1:20
The nature of the property and the location by street
address, mailing address, or legal description of the
property;
[1]
The nature and extent of the interest held, including any
conditions and encumbrances on the interest;
[2]
The date when, the manner in which, and the identity of
the person from whom the interest was acquired;
[3]
The nature and amount of the consideration given in
exchange for the interest or, if acquired other than by
purchase, the fair market value of the interest at the time
acquired;
[4]
If any interest was transferred, in whole or in part, at
any time during the reporting period, a description of
the interest transferred, the nature and amount of the
consideration received for the interest, and the identity of
the person to whom the interest was transferred; and
[5]
The identity of any other person with an interest in the
property.
[6]
Interests in corporations and partnerships.
A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule
of all interests in any corporation, partnership, limited liability
partnership, or limited liability corporation, regardless of
whether the corporation or partnership does business with the
Town.
(a)
For each interest reported under this subsection, the schedule
shall include:
The name and address of the principal office of the
corporation, partnership, limited liability partnership, or
limited liability corporation;
[1]
The nature and amount of the interest held, including any
conditions and encumbrances on the interest;
[2]
With respect to any interest transferred, in whole or in
part, at any time during the reporting period, a description
of the interest transferred, the nature and amount of the
consideration received for the interest, and, if known, the
identity of the person to whom the interest was
transferred; and
[3]
With respect to any interest acquired during the reporting
period:
[4]
(b)
(2)
§ 12-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-4
1:21
The date when, the manner in which, and the identity
of the person from whom the interest was acquired;
and
[a]
The nature and the amount of the consideration given
in exchange for the interest or, if acquired other than
by purchase, the fair market value of the interest at
the time acquired.
[b]
An individual may satisfy the requirement to report the amount
of the interest held under Subsection E(2)(b)[2] by reporting,
instead of a dollar amount:
For an equity interest in a corporation, the number of
shares held and, unless the corporation's stock is publicly
traded, the percentage of equity interest held; or
[1]
For an equity interest in a partnership, the percentage of
equity interest held.
[2]
(c)
Interests in business entities doing business with Town.
A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of
all interests in any business entity that does business with the
Town, other than interests reported under Subsection E(2) of
this section.
(a)
For each interest reported under this subsection, the schedule
shall include:
The name and address of the principal office of the
business entity;
[1]
The nature and amount of the interest held, including any
conditions to and encumbrances in the interest;
[2]
With respect to any interest transferred, in whole or in
part, at any time during the reporting period, a description
of the interest transferred, the nature and amount of the
consideration received in exchange for the interest, and, if
known, the identity of the person to whom the interest was
transferred; and
[3]
With respect to any interest acquired during the reporting
period:
The date when, the manner in which, and the identity
of the person from whom the interest was acquired;
and
[a]
The nature and the amount of the consideration given
in exchange for the interest or, if acquired other than
[b]
[4]
(b)
(3)
§ 12-4 SYKESVILLE CODE § 12-4
1:22
by purchase, the fair market value of the interest at
the time acquired.
Gifts.
A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of
each gift in excess of $20 in value or a series of gifts totaling
$100 or more received during the reporting period from or
on behalf of, directly or indirectly, any one person who does
business with or is regulated by the Town;
For each gift reported, the schedule shall include:
[a] A description of the nature and value of the gift; and
The identity of the person from whom, or on behalf of
whom, directly or indirectly, the gift was received.
[b]
[1]
(a)
(4)
Employment with or interests in entities doing business with the
Town.
A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule
of all offices, directorships, and salaried employment by the
individual or member of the immediate family of the individual
held at any time during the reporting period with entities doing
business with the Town.
(a)
For each position reported under this subsection the schedule
shall include:
The name and address of the principal office of the
business entity;
[1]
The title and nature of the office, directorship, or salaried
employment and the date it commenced; and
[2]
The name of each Town agency with which the entity is
involved.
[3]
(b)
(5)
Indebtedness to entities doing business with the Town.
A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of
all liabilities, excluding retail credit accounts, to persons doing
business with the Town owed at any time during the reporting
period;
[1] By the individual; or
By a member of the immediate family of the individual if
the individual was involved in the transaction giving rise
to the liability.
[2]
(a)
For each liability reported under this subsection, the schedule
shall include:
(b)
(6)
§ 12-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-4
1:23
The identity of the person to whom the liability was owed
and the date the liability was incurred;
[1]
The amount of the liability owned as of the end of the
reporting period;
[2]
The terms of payment of the liability and the extent to
which the principal amount of the liability was increased
or reduced during the year; and
[3]
[4] The security given, if any, for the liability.
A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of the
immediate family members of the individual employed by the Town
in any capacity at any time during the reporting period.
(7)
Sources of earned income.
A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule
of the name and address of each place of employment and of
each business entity of which the individual or a member of the
individual's immediate family was a sole or partial owner and
from which the individual or member of the individual's family
received earned income, at any time during the reporting
period.
(a)
A minor child's employment or business ownership need not
be disclosed if the agency that employs the individual does not
regulate, exercise authority over, or contract with the place of
employment or business entity of the minor child.
(b)
(8)
A statement filed under this section may also include a schedule of
additional interests or information that the individual making the
statement wishes to disclose.
(9)
For the purposes of § 12-4E(1), (2), and (3) of this chapter, the following
interests are considered to be interest of the individual making the
statement:
An interest held by a member of the individual's immediate family,
if the interest was, at any time during the reporting period, directly
or indirectly controlled by the individual.
(1)
An interest held by a business entity in which the individual held a
thirty-percent or greater interest at any time during the reporting
period.
(2)
An interest held by a trust or an estate in which, at any time during
the reporting period:
The individual held a reversionary interest or was a
beneficiary; or
(a)
(b) If a revocable trust, the individual was a settlor.
(3)
F.
§ 12-4 SYKESVILLE CODE § 12-4
1:24
§ 12-5. Financial disclosure for employees and appointed officials.
§ 12-6. Exemptions and modifications.
The Ethics Commission:
Shall review the financial disclosure statements submitted under
this section for compliance with the provisions of this section and
shall notify an individual submitting the statement of any omissions
or deficiencies.
(1)
May take appropriate enforcement action to ensure compliance
with this section.
(2)
G.
This section only applies to the following appointed officials and
employees:
(1) The Treasurer.
(2) The Zoning Administrator.
(3) The Chief of Police.
(4) The Town Manager.
(5) Members of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(6) Members of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(7) Members of the Historic District Commission.
Town employees and appointed officials holding such positions
of responsibility as the Ethics Commission may determine and
designate.
(8)
A.
A statement filed under this section shall be filed with the Ethics
Commission under oath or affirmation.
B.
On or before April 30 of each year during which an official or employee
holds office, an official or employee shall file a statement disclosing
gifts received during the preceding calendar year from any person that
contracts with or is regulated by the Town, including the name of the
donor of the gift and the approximate retail value at the time or receipt.
C.
An official or employee shall disclose employment and interests that
raise conflicts of interest or potential conflicts of interest in connection
with a specific proposed action by the employee or official sufficiently
in advance of the action to provide adequate disclosure to the public.
D.
The Commission shall maintain all disclosure statements filed under
this section as public records available for public inspection and
copying as provided in § 12-4C and D of this chapter or provide for this
in any other way. [Added 1-28-2012 by Ord. No. 286]
E.
§ 12-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-6
1:25
§ 12-7. Enforcement.
The Ethics Commission may grant exemption and modifications to the
provisions of §§ 12-3 and 12-5 of this chapter to employees and to
appointed members of Town Boards and commissions, when the Ethics
Commission finds that an exemption or modification would not be
contrary to the purposes of this chapter, and the application of this
chapter would:
(1) Constitute an unreasonable invasion of privacy; and
Significantly reduce the availability of qualified persons for public
service.
(2)
A.
The Ethics Commission may:
Assess a late fee of $2 per day up to a maximum of $250 for a
failure to timely file a financial disclosure statement required under
§§ 12-4 and 12-5 of this chapter; and
(1)
Issue a cease-and-desist order against any person found to be in
violation of this chapter.
(2)
A.
Upon a finding of a violation of any provision of this chapter, the Ethics
Commission may:
Issue an order of compliance directing the respondent to cease and
desist from the violation;
(1)
(2) Issue a reprimand; or
Recommend to the appropriate authority other appropriate
discipline of the respondent, including censure or removal if that
discipline is authorized by law.
(3)
B.
Upon request by the Ethics Commission, the Town Attorney may file
a petition for injunctive or other relief in the Circuit Court of Carroll
County, or in any other court having proper venue for the purpose of
requiring compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
The court may:
(a) Issue an order to cease and desist from the violation;
Except as provided in Subsection C(1)(b) of this section, void
an official action taken by an official or employee with a
conflict of interest prohibited by this chapter when the action
arises from or concerns the subject matter of the conflict and if
the legal action is brought within 90 days of the occurrence of
the official action, if the court deems voiding the action to be
in the best interest of the public; or
(b)
(1)
C.
§ 12-6 SYKESVILLE CODE § 12-7
1:26
Chapter 19
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Mayor and Council — See Charter, Arts. II and
III.
Impose a fine of up to $5,000 for any violation of the provisions
of this chapter, with each day upon which the violation occurs
constituting a separate offense.
(c)
A court may not void any official action appropriating public funds,
levying taxes, or providing for the issuance of bonds, notes, or
other evidences of public obligations.
(2)
In addition to any other enforcement provisions in this chapter, a
person who the Commission or a court finds has violated this chapter:
(1) Is subject to termination or other disciplinary action; and
May be suspended from receiving payment of salary or other
compensation pending full compliance with the terms of an order
of the Commission or a court.
(2)
D.
A Town official or employee found to have violated this chapter is
subject to disciplinary or other appropriate personnel action, including
removal from office, disciplinary action, suspension of salary, or other
sanction.
E.
A finding of a violation of this chapter by the Commission is public
information.
F.
§ 12-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-7
1:27

ARTICLE I
Compensation
[Adopted 5-12-1987 by Ord. No. 148; amended in its entirety
5-12-1997 by Ord. No. 209]
§ 19-1. Mayor. [Amended 9-27-2004 by Ord. No. 247; 2-28-2005 by
Ord. No. 257; 2-13-2017 by Ord. No. 298]
§ 19-2. Council members. [Amended 2-28-2005 by Ord. No. 257;
2-13-2017 by Ord. No. 298]
§ 19-3. Applicability. [Amended 9-27-2004 by Ord. No. 247]
The compensation provided herein shall apply to officials whether elected to
a full four-year term or to the unexpired portion of a term of office resulting
from a vacancy.
The Mayor shall receive the sum of $500 per month, except that, for
any of the four quarters of the fiscal year, starting July 1, during which
the Mayor:
Fails to attend three meetings of the Mayor and Town Council,
the Mayor shall receive no compensation for the first month
immediately following such quarter; or
(1)
Fails to attend six meetings of the Mayor and Town Council, the
Mayor shall receive no compensation for the first two months
immediately following the end of such quarter.
(2)
A.
B. The increase in compensation is effective starting July 1, 2017.
Each member of the Council shall receive the sum of $250 per month,
except that, for any of the four quarters of the fiscal year, starting July
1, during which a Council member:
Fails to attend three meetings of the Mayor and Town Council, the
Council member shall receive no compensation for the first month
immediately following such quarter; or
(1)
Fails to attend six meetings of the Mayor and Town Council, the
Council member shall receive no compensation for the first two
months immediately following such quarter.
(2)
A.
B. The increase in compensation is effective starting July 1, 2017.
§ 19-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-3
1:29
Chapter 24
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 145. Zoning — See Ch. 180.
§ 24-1. Composition; residency.
There is a Town Planning and Zoning Commission of Sykesville, consisting
of seven members, who shall reside within the corporate limits of the Town
of Sykesville and remain registered voters of the Town for the duration of
their terms.
§ 24-2. Organization, rules, staffing and financing.
The organization, rules, staff, and finance of said Planning and Zoning
Commission shall be established and administered in accordance with
Article 66B, Annotated Code of Maryland, and any acts amendatory thereof.
§ 24-3. Appointment, removal, terms, and compensation of
members.
The appointment, removal, term, and compensation of the members shall
be in accordance with Article 66B, § 3.01 et seq., of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, and any acts amendatory thereof.
§ 24-4. Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be
all those set forth and authorized in Article 66B of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, as said state law now exists and as it may hereafter be amended
from time to time.
§ 24-5. Appeals.
Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any final decision
of the Planning and Zoning Commission regarding planning and subdivision
controls, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board or bureau of the
Town of Sykesville may appeal the same to the Board of Appeals of the Town
of Sykesville.
Chapter 30
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 19-3 SYKESVILLE CODE § 24-5
24:30
ARTICLE I
Acting Outside Territorial Limits
[Adopted 3-11-1982 by Ord. No. 123]
§ 30-1. Authority to send officers and equipment beyond Town
borders.
Personnel of the Police Department, both sworn and nonsworn, together
with all necessary equipment, may lawfully go or be sent beyond the
territorial limits of Sykesville to any point within or without the State of
Maryland under the following circumstances:
§ 30-2. Authority not limiting.
The authority contained in § 30-1 is not intended to limit the authority
currently existing for police personnel to act outside of the territorial limits
of Sykesville.
Upon the instruction of the Chief of Police or his designees acting at
the request of the State of Maryland, another state or the District of
Columbia, a county or a municipal corporation.
A.
B. Pursuant to any mutual agreement as to which Sykesville is a party.
Pursuant to any statute of the State of Maryland, ordinance of
Sykesville or the common law.
C.
§ 30-1 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 30-2
30:31

ARTICLE II
Auxiliary Police
[Adopted 5-11-1992 by Ord. No. 194]
§ 30-3. Establishment of auxiliary force.
The Chief of Police is hereby empowered to establish and maintain an
auxiliary police force to be known as the "Sykesville Auxiliary Police" to
assist the Sykesville Police Department in the matters set forth herein.
§ 30-4. Duties.
The Sykesville Auxiliary Police shall perform the following duties under the
direction of the Sykesville Police Department:
§ 30-5. Powers.
Sykesville Auxiliary Police shall have the powers necessary to carry out
the functions as directed by the Sykesville Police Department as set forth
herein. Members of the Sykesville Auxiliary Police shall not be deemed
police officers or Town policemen as defined by the Town or by the Town
Charter and shall not have general arrest and law enforcement powers,
shall not carry or use firearms while on duty and shall not have general
investigative responsibility.
§ 30-6. Appointment; compensation; oath of office.
Candidates for the Sykesville Auxiliary Police shall be recommended by the
Chief of Police, approved and appointed by the Mayor and Council and must
meet such criteria as may be established by the Chief of Police. Members
of the Sykesville Auxiliary Police shall receive no compensation. Prior to
exercising any duty as a member of the Sykesville Auxiliary Police, each
auxiliary police officer shall take the oath of office similar to the oath taken
by regular police officers.
§ 30-7. Surrender of equipment upon dismissal.3
Each member of the Sykesville Auxiliary Police shall, upon dismissal,
surrender all equipment, uniforms and other property belonging to the
Sykesville Police Department or Sykesville Auxiliary Police.
Render assistance as requested in major disasters and emergencies as
determined by the Chief of the Sykesville Police Department; and
A.
Render assistance as requested with regard to directing and controlling
vehicular and pedestrian traffic and parking at such functions within
the jurisdiction of the Sykesville Police Department; and
B.
C. Such other duties as may be directed by the Chief of Police.
3. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 30-3 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 30-8
30:33
§ 30-8. Suspension and dismissal.
The Mayor and Council may, in its sole and absolute discretion, with or
without cause, discharge and dismiss at any time, any member of the
Sykesville Auxiliary Police. The Chief of Police may, with or without cause,
temporarily suspend any member of the Sykesville Auxiliary Police pending
action by the Mayor and Council.
§ 30-9. Promulgation of rules and regulations.4
The Chief of Police shall be empowered to promulgate such rules,
regulations and orders governing the Auxiliary Police as he may deem
necessary, subject to the approval by resolution of the Council of such rules,
regulations and orders.
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 30-8 SYKESVILLE CODE § 30-9
30:34
Chapter 35
VOTING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Registration, nomination and elections — See
Charter, Art. V.
Ethics — See Ch. 12.
§ 35-1. Procedures for write-in votes.
The Town shall permit the counting of write-in votes during general
elections of the Town in accordance with the following:
§ 35-2. Winner of election.
The qualified individual with the highest number of votes shall be declared
the winner of the election, including all write-in votes in compliance with
the guidelines set forth above.
A. Each write-in vote shall include a first and last name.
B. Each write-in vote shall be printed.
Each write-in vote shall be legible as determined by a majority of the
Board of Elections Supervisors.
C.
In the event there are two or more persons with the same first and
last name that are qualified to receive write-in votes, a middle name or
middle initial shall be included in the write-in vote.
D.
In order to qualify to receive write-in votes, such write-in candidate
must qualify to hold office pursuant to §§ C-4 and C-16 of the Town
Charter, as applicable.
E.
A write-in candidate who receives the highest number of votes in a
general election must accept the position in person and in writing to
the Town Manager (or any assistant secretaries who may be appointed
by the Mayor and the Council) within 48 hours of certification of the
election results to the Town Manager (or any assistant secretaries
who may be appointed by the Mayor and the Council). [Amended
6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 268]
F.
A write-in candidate who receives the highest number of votes in a
general election must file a financial disclosure statement with the
State of Maryland Ethics Commission within 48 hours of certification of
the election results to the Town Manager (or any assistant secretaries
who may be appointed by the Mayor and the Council). [Amended
6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 268]
G.
§ 30-9 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 35-3
30:35
§ 35-3. Vacant open seats. [Amended 6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 268]
In the event there is an open seat with no nominated candidates and no
write-in votes, the Board of Elections Supervisors shall certify the open seat
as "vacant" to the Town Manager (or any assistant secretaries who may be
appointed by the Mayor and the Council). In such event, the vacancy shall
be filled in accordance with § C-11 of the Town Charter.
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 43
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages in parks — See Ch. 111,
§ 111-5.
§ 35-3 SYKESVILLE CODE § 35-3
43:36
ARTICLE I
Open Containers
[Adopted 11-10-1975 by Ord. No. 103; amended in its entirety at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 43-1. Open containers prohibited in certain places.
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or possess in any open
container any alcoholic beverage while:
§ 43-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Includes any building, ground, park, recreational
facility, street, highway, alley, sidewalk, station, terminal or other structure,
road or parking area located on land owned, leased or operated by the
federal government, the state, the county or the municipality.
§ 43-3. Exceptions.
The Mayor and Council members of the Town of Sykesville reserve the right,
at their discretion and in the best interests of the citizens of the Town of
Sykesville, to grant on special occasions and other events an exception to
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 43-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine not
to exceed $100, or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both, in the
discretion of the Court.
On public property, unless authorized by a governmental entity that has
jurisdiction over the property.
A.
On any mall, adjacent parking areas or other outside area of any
combination of privately owned retail establishments, i.e., shopping
centers, where the general public is invited for business purposes.
B.
On an adjacent parking area of some other outside area of any other
retail establishment.
C.
In any parked vehicle located on any of the places enumerated in this
section.
D.
§ 43-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 43-4
43:37
Chapter 48
AMUSEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal infractions — See Ch. 1, Art. I. Curfew — See Ch. 75.
§ 43-4 SYKESVILLE CODE § 43-4
43:38
ARTICLE I
Coin-Operated Gaming Machines
[Adopted 11-9-1982 by Ord. No. 128]
§ 48-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COIN-OPERATED GAMING MACHINE — A machine operated by the
insertion of a coin, slug or disc token. Such machine or machines dispense
or are used or are capable of being used or operated for amusement or
pleasure, or when such machines are operated for the purpose of dispensing
or affording skill or pleasure or any other purpose other than the dispensing
or vending of merchandise or music or service exclusively as those terms
are defined in the ordinance. The following are expressly included within
said terms: marble machines, marble table machines, marble shoot, pinball
machines, skill ball, miniature racetrack machines, miniature football
machines, miniature golf machines, miniature bowling machines and all
other coin-operated gaming machines which dispense or afford skill or
pleasure. This definition does not include coin-operated pool tables.
COIN-OPERATED SERVICE MACHINES — All machines or devices which
dispense services or merchandise only and are not for skill or pleasure.
OPERATOR — Proprietor, lessee, or employee who is in direct control of the
premises where coin-operated machines are located and who had filed with
the Town Manager.[Amended 6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 268]
OWNER — Any persons, individual, firm, company, association or
corporation owning or having the care, control, management, or possession
of any such coin-operated gaming machines in the Town of Sykesville,
Maryland.
PREMISES — A building, or any part of a building where coin-operated
gaming machines are located.
§ 48-2. Licensing.
No person shall maintain, display for public patronage or otherwise
keep for operation by the public any coin-operated gaming machine
without first obtaining a license issued under the terms and conditions
of this article.
A.
No license is required for any individual to own, maintain, or offer for
use to the public any coin-operated pleasure or amusement machines
designed exclusively for use by children under the age of 10 years,
such as coin-operated riding machines and other related coin-operated
machines.
B.
No machine shall be licensed if it is to be located on a second floor or
below ground level, and all machines shall be visible from the street or
outside the premises as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
C.
§ 48-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 48-2
43:39
§ 48-3. Nature of license.
Licenses issued under this article:
§ 48-4. Fees. [Amended 9-27-2004 by Ord. No. 247]
No license shall be issued for any temporary structures outside of a
building, or for any mobile trailer specifically designed for display or
use for the public.
D.
At all times during the hours of operation of the licensed premises,
there shall be present one of the operators who has filed the required
application information with the Town Manager and is at least 18 years
of age in order to provide adequate control and supervision of the
licensed premises and the use of coin-operated amusement devices
present therein. [Amended 6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 268]
E.
Upon a change of an operator conducting business for the licensee,
the licensee shall appear before the Town Manager or give the Town
Manager written notice, by registered or certified mail, of a change
of operator. The licensee shall provide the information concerning the
new operator on the form provided by the Town Manager. After the new
operator has met all the requirements of this article, approval or denial
by the Zoning Administrator will follow within 10 regular working days.
[Amended 6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 268]
F.
A. Become effective upon approval of application and payment of fee.
Are annual licenses which expire one year from the date of issuance,
unless suspended or canceled earlier.
B.
Vest no property right in the licensee except to maintain, display for
public patronage, and permit the use for skill or pleasure of coinoperated
gaming machines in accordance with the terms and conditions
of this article.
C.
Every owner who owns, controls, possesses, exhibits, displays, or who
permits to be exhibited or displayed in this Town any coin-operated
gaming machine shall pay for, and there is hereby levied on each coinoperated
gaming machine, an annual license fee of $100 and $50 each
additional machine.
A.
No part of any license fee shall be refundable for any portion of the
licensed year.
B.
A fee for processing an application shall be $15, paid at the time of
application, which is not refundable. Upon approval, the processing fee
shall be credited toward the license fee.
C.
The fee for a special license (§ 48-20) shall be $25 per machine for each
day in use.
D.
E. The fee for a replacement license shall be $10.
§ 48-2 SYKESVILLE CODE § 48-5
43:40
§ 48-5. Exemption from fee. [Amended 9-27-2004 by Ord. No. 247]
Gas meters, pay telephones, food vending machines, confection-vending
machines, merchandise-vending machines, beverage-vending machines,
cigarette-vending machines, stamp-vending machines and service coinoperated
machines, as that term is defined, are expressly exempt from the
fee levied herein.
§ 48-6. Display of license.
The license shall be permanently and conspicuously posted at the location of
the coin-operated gaming machines in the premises wherein said machines
are to be operated or maintained to be operated during the period for which
said license was issued.
§ 48-7. Application. [Amended 6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 268]
An applicant for a license under the provisions of this article shall
file with the Town Manager (or any other staff member who may be
designated by the Town Manager) a written application on a form
provided for that purpose which shall be signed by the applicant, who
shall be the owner of the business sought to be licensed. A separate
application must be filed for each location sought to be licensed. The
following information shall be supplied by the applicant:
Name, including the trade name by which the applicant does
business, address, and the telephone number of the applicant and
if incorporated, the registered name, and the street address of the
premises.
(1)
Name, address, and telephone number of the operators of the
premises to be licensed.
(2)
Number of coin-operated amusement devices in the premises to be
licensed and serial numbers of each machine.
(3)
Whether a previous license of applicant, or if applicant is a
corporation, corporate officer of applicant, has been revoked or
denied within two years preceding filing of the application.
(4)
(5) A statement that all the facts contained in application are true.
Any other information deemed relevant or necessary by the Zoning
Administrator.
(6)
A.
Names of all individuals, persons who at any time will be the operator
of the premises must be included on the application forms provided by
the Town Manager (or any other staff member who may be designated
by the Town Manager).
B.
§ 48-5 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 48-8
43:41
§ 48-8. Refusal to issue or renew license.
The Zoning Administrator shall refuse to approve issuance or renewal of a
license for one or more of the following reasons:
§ 48-9. Indebtedness to Town as reason for nonissuance or
nonrenewal of license.
The Zoning Administrator shall not issue or renew a license under this
article and shall suspend or cancel a license if it be determined that the
applicant or license is indebted to the Town for any fee, costs, penalties, or
delinquent taxes.
§ 48-10. Replacement of license. [Amended 6-11-2007 by Ord. No.
268]
A replacement license may be issued for one lost, destroyed, or mutilated,
upon application on a form provided by the Town Manager (or any other
staff member who may be designated by the Town Manager). A replacement
license shall bear the same number as the one it replaces and shall have the
word "replacement" appear on the front of the license.
§ 48-11. Transferability.
A license issued under the provisions of this article shall not be assignable
or transferable.
§ 48-12. Conduct on premises.
No licensee, by himself, directly or indirectly, or by any operator, agent or
employee shall:
A. A false statement as to a material matter in an application for a license.
Revocation of a license, pursuant to this article, of the applicant or
corporate officer of the applicant within two years preceding the filing
of the application.
B.
The applicant for such licenses has, within the past 10 years, been
convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude.
C.
Permit any indecent, immoral or profane language, or indecent,
immoral, or disorderly conduct.
A.
Permit the licensed premises to become a resort for disorderly persons
of any type.
B.
Permit gambling or the use, possession, presence of gambling
paraphernalia in the premises. The winning of anything of value as a
result of the operation of a machine shall constitute gambling. However,
the winning of a prize that does not exceed $100 in value in a scheduled
tournament shall not constitute gambling.
C.
§ 48-8 SYKESVILLE CODE § 48-12
43:42
§ 48-13. Bicycle storage racks.
A licensee herein shall provide sufficient bicycle storage racks so as to
adequately provide for the storage of bicycles utilized by patrons of the
permitted premises if such racks be needed as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.
§ 48-14. Cancellation of license.
If any individual, company, corporation, or association who owns, operates,
exhibits, or displays any coin-operated gaming machines in the Town of
Sykesville shall violate any provision of this article, the Zoning
Administrator shall have the power and the authority to cancel all licenses
issued hereunder to any of the foregoing by giving written notice, stating
the reason justifying such cancellation, and the same shall be canceled
10 days from the date of such notice. No license shall be issued within a
period of one year to anyone whose license has been canceled, except at the
discretion of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
§ 48-15. Appeal from decision of Zoning Administrator.
If the Zoning Administrator refuses to approve the issuance of a license or
the renewal of a license to the applicant, or cancels a license or the renewal
of a license to an applicant, or cancels a license issued under this article,
this action is final unless the applicant or licensee, within 30 days after
the receipt of written notice of the action, files a written appeal with the
Zoning Administrator and with the Board of Zoning Appeals. The Board will
consider all the evidence in support of or against the action appealed, and
render a decision, either sustaining or reversing the action.
§ 48-16. Machines prohibited near certain locations.
No skill or pleasure coin-operated machines in an arcade shall be permitted
to be placed within 300 feet of any church, hospital, nursing home, public
library, or school in the Town of Sykesville.
D. Permit intoxicated persons to loiter on the premises.
E. Permit any violation of Chapter 75, Curfew.
Permit the possession or use of any alcoholic beverage on the premises,
nor shall the licensed premises be accessible in any way to anywhere
alcoholic liquor is kept, sold, distributed, or given away. This provision
shall not apply while a liquor license is in effect at the licensed
premises.
F.
Permit the possession or use of any unlawful drug or narcotic, including
marijuana, on the premises.
G.
H. Permit unusual noise or music to emerge from the licensed premises.
I. Permit littering around exterior of the said premises.
§ 48-12 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 48-17
43:43
§ 48-17. Arcades.
Any owner who desires a license for the operation of more than three coinoperated
gaming machines in one specific location shall be subject to all
requirements of Chapter 180, Zoning, and shall if determined by the Zoning
Administrator provide bicycle racks.
§ 48-18. Inspections.
The premises in which such coin-operated gaming machines are located
may be entered upon by the Zoning Administrator at any time during
normal business hours for the purpose of inspecting said premises for
violations of the terms of this article. All law enforcement personnel with
jurisdiction shall have the right to enter into said premises at any time
during normal business hours for the purpose of enforcement of the terms
of this article.
§ 48-19. Illegal operations not legalized.
Nothing herein shall be construed to have the effect to license, permit,
authorize, or legalize any machine, device, table, or coin-operated gaming
machine, the keeping, exhibition, operation, display or maintenance of
which is now illegal or in violation of any ordinance of the Town of
Sykesville, any article of Penal Code of this state, or of the Constitution of
the state.
§ 48-20. Granting of special licenses.
§ 48-21. Substitute machine; fee.
Any licensee may substitute one machine for a similar machine, by applying
to the Zoning Administrator for permission to make the exchange and
supplying all the information required for a substitute license. The new
machine shall be described in the license as a substitute machine. A filing
fee of $10 is levied for a license on a substitute machine.
A special license may be granted to a premises already having licensed
machines to install additional machines for special event, such as
follow:
(1) That the premises are being used for holding of a tournament.
(2) The annual festival.
(3) Special event, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
A.
The Zoning Administrator shall determine the maximum number of
machines allowed on the premises.
B.
§ 48-17 SYKESVILLE CODE § 48-22
43:44
§ 48-22. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-27-2004 by Ord. No.
247]
A violation of any of the provisions of this article shall constitute a Class
C municipal infraction as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal
Infractions. Each day in which a violation occurs or continues shall
constitute a separate offense and a Class C municipal infraction.
§ 48-22 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 48-22
43:45
Chapter 51
ANIMALS
§ 48-22 SYKESVILLE CODE § 48-22
43:46
ARTICLE I
County Regulations
[Adopted 11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 248]
§ 51-1. Applicability of county regulations.
Chapter 81, Animals, of the Code of Public Local Laws and Ordinances of
Carroll County, Maryland ("Chapter 81"), as amended from time to time,
shall be the applicable law in the Town for all matters governed by Chapter
81. Any other provision of any chapter of the Code of the Town that is
contradictory or inconsistent with Chapter 81 is hereby repealed and
deleted.
§ 51-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 51-1
43:47

ARTICLE II
Animals at Public Events
[Adopted 1-9-2018 by Ord. No. 301]
§ 51-2. Applicability.
This section shall apply to any public event on Town property, in which
a special event application is required. The presence of animals at these
events poses health and safety concerns for both the spectators and
animals. Sponsors of other events may also request the Town Manager or
his/her authorized designee in writing to apply the provisions of this section
to such events.
§ 51-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ANIMAL — Every vertebrate and invertebrate nonhuman species of animal,
wild or domestic, male or female, including, but not limited to, dogs, cats,
livestock and other mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians and fish.
SERVICE ANIMAL — A dog (or other animal) that is trained to do work
or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability, including
a physical, sensory, psychiatric, intellectual or other mental disability. To
qualify as a service animal, the work or tasks performed by the service
animal must be directly related to the individual's disability. Emotional
support animals, comfort animals, and therapy dogs are not service animals
under Title II and Title III of the Americans with Disabilities Act5 and do not
qualify under this definition for purposes of this article.
SPECIAL EVENT — Is applicable to all public events, including parades, on
Town property for which a special event application is required.
§ 51-4. Unlawful to have animals at special event.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, having possession, charge,
custody or control of any "animal," as defined in § 51-3, to take that
animal, whether on a leash or otherwise, into the boundaries of any
special event or to otherwise allow the animal to enter the boundaries
of any special event. The boundaries and the interior of a special
event shall consist of any area part of the special event, including
parade routes, and shall include any public park, street, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley, parking lot, grassy area, right-of-way or other publicly
owned area.
A.
Appropriate signage stating "No Pets or Animals Allowed," shall be
prominently placed in the special event area and at all venue entry
points. All advertisements for the special event shall indicate that no
pets or animals are allowed at the special event.
B.
5. Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
§ 51-2 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 51-5
43:49
§ 51-5. Failure to remove animals.
It shall be unlawful for any person with an animal within the boundaries of
a special event to fail to obey the command of a law enforcement officer or
animal control officer to remove such animal from the special event.
§ 51-6. Exceptions.
§ 51-7. Waivers.
An organizer of a special event to which this article applies may request
a waiver from § 51-4. The sponsor shall submit plans specifying how the
public will be protected from the animals and the sponsor's plans and
provisions for removing animal waste. Requests shall be reviewed as part of
the special event permitting process and may be approved or denied as part
of that process.
§ 51-8. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute a municipal
infraction. Each occurrence shall constitute a separate offense. The
penalties for such municipal infraction shall be as follows:
Section 51-4 shall not apply to those animals that are part of an
authorized special event, including special event exhibits or parades.
The special event operator and sponsor shall be responsible for
immediately cleaning up and removing any animal waste from animals
that are part of an authorized special event exhibit or parade. All animal
waste shall be disposed of properly.
A.
Section 51-4 shall not apply to:
Service animals relied upon by persons with disabilities, as defined
in § 51-3C;
(1)
Animals owned and controlled by public law enforcement agencies;
or
(2)
Animals used by a vehicle for hire in accordance with applicable
Town ordinances.
(3)
B.
First offense: A warning by a written citation shall be issued to any
person found violating this chapter for the first time.
A.
Second offense: A second violation shall constitute a Class B municipal
infraction as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal Infractions.
B.
Third offense: A third violation shall constitute a Class C municipal
infraction as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal Infractions.
C.
Fourth and subsequent offenses: A fourth and all subsequent violations
shall constitute a Class D municipal infraction as provided in Chapter
1, Article I, Municipal Infractions.
D.
§ 51-5 SYKESVILLE CODE § 51-8
43:50
Chapter 60
BRUSH, GRASS, WEEDS AND TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 98.
§ 51-8 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 51-8
43:51

ARTICLE I
Activities and Enforcement
[Adopted 10-27-2003 by Ord. No. 237]
§ 60-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following chapters shall have the meanings
indicated:
OCCUPANT — Any person in possession or occupancy of any property
including tenants under any form of lease.
OWNER — A person with any ownership interest in property other than
a remainder interest. "Owner" includes the owner of a condominium unit
with respect to common elements and includes any type of homeowners'
association with respect to space under its control.
PERSON — Any adult individual, or any corporation, partnership, joint
venture or other entity.
§ 60-2. Declaration of nuisance.
§ 60-3. Prohibited activities.
No person who is the owner or occupant of any property within the
corporate limits shall permit any weeds, grass or plants to grow to or
remain on such property in excess of 12 inches in height.
§ 60-4. Trimming and cutting.
Every such owner and occupant, shall cause such weeds, grass and plants
to be trimmed or cut at least twice a year, once on or before June 1 and once
The presence of weeds, grass or plants in the Town of Sykesville in
excess of 12 inches in height is hereby found and declared to be a
nuisance and detrimental to the health, safety, comfort and general
welfare of the citizens of the Town.
A.
Weeds, grass and plants declared to be a nuisance pursuant to
Subsection A of this section shall exclude:
(1) Trees;
Adequately maintained landscape arrangements of flowers, wild
flowers, ornamental grasses, shrubs and bushes;
(2)
Unimproved natural areas including wetlands, forests, forest
buffers, open space, conservation areas, greenway reservations,
watersheds and meadows, as established by easements or plats;
and
(3)
(4) Agriculture plants.
B.
§ 60-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 60-4
43:53
on or before August 15, and at such other time as may be necessary in order
to comply at all times with the provisions of § 60-3.
§ 60-5. Civil enforcement, costs of collection, liens.
§ 60-6. Joint and several obligations.
Where property is not occupied solely by the owner, the obligations under
this chapter are imposed jointly and severally against the owner and
occupant. Failure of either to comply with this chapter shall not relieve
the other of compliance regardless of any agreement between them to the
contrary. If there is more than one owner or more than one occupant, each
owner and each occupant is jointly and severally subject to the terms of this
chapter.
§ 60-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-27-2004 by Ord. No.
247]
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a municipal
infraction. Each day the violation continues or occurs shall constitute a
separate offense. The penalties for such municipal infraction shall be as
follows:
When any condition exists on any such property which violates § 60-3,
it shall be lawful for the Town Manager, or such other person as may be
designated by the Mayor and Council, to give written notice to comply
with said section within seven days of the date of such notice. Such
notice may be delivered personally to the owner and/or the occupant
or sent by registered or certified mail, and if mailed to any owner
the owner's address as shown on the tax rolls shall be deemed to be
correct. Any postal receipt for the mailing of such notice shall create
a prima facie presumption that the notice was received in due course.
[Amended 6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 268]
A.
If such notice be given and neither the owner nor the occupant
complies, the Town may immediately thereafter cause such weeds,
grass and plants to be cut, trimmed or otherwise removed and all
resulting yard waste shall be removed from the property.
B.
If the Town proceeds to act under Subsections A and B of this section,
the general administrative expense of inspection, issuing notice and
performing work under Subsection B will incur a charge of $50 per
property, which is hereby declared and established to be the minimum
cost of such work. Said sum, together with all additional costs actually
incurred in excess thereof including all costs of collection thereof as
certified by the Town Manager (or such other staff member who may
be designated by the Town Manager), shall constitute a lien against the
property and may be collected in the same manner as the Town taxes
are collected. In addition, the Town Attorney is authorized to institute
civil suit against the owner and/or occupant for the recovery of such
costs. [Amended 6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 268]
C.
§ 60-4 SYKESVILLE CODE § 60-7
43:54
First offense: A warning by a written citation shall be issued to any
person found violating this chapter for the first time.
A.
Second offense: A second violation shall constitute a Class B municipal
infraction as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal Infractions.
B.
Third offense: A third violation shall constitute a Class C municipal
infraction as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal Infractions.
C.
Fourth and subsequent offenses: A fourth and all subsequent violations
shall constitute a Class D municipal infraction as provided in Chapter
1, Article I, Municipal Infractions.
D.
§ 60-7 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 60-7
43:55

ARTICLE II
Maintenance of Vegetation
[Adopted 2-22-2016 by Ord. No. 2946]
§ 60-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms have the following definitions:
OCCUPANT, OWNER, and PERSON — The meanings set forth in § 60-1 of
the Town Code.
OWNER'S MAINTENANCE AREA — All that property, regardless of
ownership, which is located between the roadside property and the curb
or street, including any sidewalks, irrespective of property lines or right-ofway
boundaries.
PUBLIC WAY — The meaning set forth in § C-70 of the Town Charter.
ROADSIDE PROPERTY — All property not owned by the Town which abuts
a public way, road, sidewalk, or right-of-way.
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE — The meaning set forth in § 11-167 of the
Transportation Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
VEGETATION — Any tree, bush, hedge, grass, plant, weed, flower, vine, or
other flora.
§ 60-9. Maintenance required.
Notwithstanding the provisions and exclusions set forth in § 60-2, the
owner(s) and occupant(s) of roadside property shall cause all
vegetation located on the roadside property or owner's maintenance
area to be trimmed, cropped, cut, or otherwise maintained in such
manner and with such frequency as necessary to prevent such
vegetation from:
Obstructing, delaying or otherwise hindering the free passage of
any pedestrian or vehicular traffic along or through any street or
other public way, including, but not limited to, sidewalks;
(1)
Obstructing the view of persons traveling on the Town's streets and
other public ways, including, but not limited to, sidewalks; or
(2)
In any way screening or interfering with traffic control devices,
lamps or lampposts.
(3)
A.
All vegetation which overhangs a public way and is less than 13.5 feet
above a street or other public way which carries vehicular traffic or less
than 10 feet above a sidewalk or other public way which does not carry
vehicular traffic shall be in violation of Subsection A of this section.
B.
6. Editor's Note: This ordinance was adopted as Ch. 61, but was redesignated to maintain the
organization of the Code.
§ 60-8 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 60-9
43:57
§ 60-10. Planting on public lands.
No vegetation shall be planted on any land in or over which the Town has an
easement or right-of-way, nor shall any vegetation be planted on any land
owned by the Town, without the prior written approval of the Town Manager
(or such staff member who may be designated by the Town Manager) or
such other person as may be designated by the Mayor and Council, which
approval may be withheld or granted subject to such conditions deemed
appropriate in the sole discretion of the Town Manager or other designee as
aforesaid.
§ 60-11. Trees on privately owned land.
§ 60-12. Civil enforcement.
Each occupant or owner shall have a duty to maintain that portion of
the roadside property which he or she occupies or over which he or she
has exclusive control, including any owner's maintenance area which
borders such portion of the roadside property.
C.
To the extent that the roadside property is not exclusively occupied
or controlled by a single person, the obligation of all owners and
occupants sharing occupancy or control to comply with the
requirements of this article shall be joint and several.
D.
The owner(s) and occupant(s) of any property located within the Town
shall maintain all trees located on such property so that such trees
do not pose a public hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or
disease, or otherwise constitute a potential threat to persons, property,
and/or other trees within the Town.
A.
Any tree found to be in violation of § 60-9 of the Town Code shall be
presumed to pose a public hazard to life and property in violation of the
preceding Subsection A.
B.
When any condition exists in violation of § 60-9, § 60-10, or § 60-11, it
shall be lawful for the Town Manager, or such other person as may
be designated by the Mayor and Council, to give written notice to the
owner(s) and occupant(s) of the roadside property, who are responsible
for maintaining the violating vegetation and/or trees, to perform such
trimming and maintenance that is necessary to comply with § 60-9,
§ 60-10, or § 60-11 within such time as determined by, and in the sole
discretion of, the Town Manager or other designee as aforesaid, which
time shall not be less than five calendar days of the date of such
notice unless there is a public hazard or threat that must be, in the
sole discretion of the Town Manager or other designee as aforesaid,
addressed immediately.
The notice shall be sent to the owner(s) by registered or certified
mail to the address of the roadside property or, if different, to the
roadside property owner's address as shown on the tax rolls.
(1)
A.
§ 60-9 SYKESVILLE CODE § 60-12
43:58
§ 60-13. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a municipal
infraction. Each day the violation continues or occurs shall constitute a
separate offense. The penalties for such municipal infraction shall be as
follows:
A postal receipt for the mailing of such notice shall establish a
presumption that the notice was delivered to the addressee in the
ordinary course.
(2)
If the roadside property owner's address shown on the tax rolls is
different from the address of the roadside property, then the notice
also shall be addressed to "occupant" and sent by first-class mail,
postage prepaid, to the address of the roadside property.
(3)
If such notice is given and the violation is not cured within the time
established by the Town Manager or other designee, the Town may
immediately thereafter perform, or cause to be performed, such
trimming and maintenance that is necessary to comply with § 60-9,
§ 60-10, or § 60-11, and all resulting waste shall be removed, all at
the sole cost and expense of the roadside property owner(s) and
occupant(s), who shall be jointly and severally liable therefor.
B.
In the event the Town takes action to cure a violation in accordance
with Subsection B, an administrative expense of $100 shall be assessed
against the owner(s), and such administrative expense is hereby
declared and established to be the minimum cost of the Town's work.
Said administrative expense, together with all actual costs and
expenses in excess thereof incurred by the Town in remediating the
violation, and all costs of collection thereof, including reasonable
attorneys' fees, as certified by the Town Manager (or such staff member
who may be designated by the Town Manager), shall constitute a lien
against the roadside property and may be collected in the same manner
as the Town taxes.
C.
The Town is authorized to institute civil suit against the owner(s) and
occupant(s), either or both of them, to recover the costs and expenses
incurred by the Town as set forth in Subsection C.
D.
First offense: A warning by written citation shall be issued to any
person found in violation of this chapter for the first time.
A.
Second offense: A second violation shall constitute a Class B municipal
infraction as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal Infractions.
B.
Third offense: A third violation shall constitute a Class C municipal
infraction as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal Infractions.
C.
Fourth offense: A fourth and all subsequent violations shall constitute
Class D municipal infractions as provided in Chapter 1, Article I,
Municipal Infractions.
D.
§ 60-12 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 60-13
43:59
Chapter 62
BUILDING CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 145. Zoning — See Ch. 180.
§ 62-1. Applicability of county regulations.
Chapter 97, Construction Codes, of the Code of Public Local Laws and
Ordinances of Carroll County, Maryland ("Chapter 97"), as amended from
time to time, shall be the applicable law in the Town for all matters
governed by Chapter 97. The Board of Commissioners of Carroll County
and its official staff, representatives and employees shall be responsible for
review, inspection, and enforcement of Chapter 97 within the Town in the
same manner and to the same extent as carried on and conducted in Carroll
County outside of the corporate limits of the Town. Any other provision of
any chapter of the Code of the Town that is contradictory or inconsistent
with Chapter 97 is hereby repealed and deleted.
Chapter 66
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE RULES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public utility permits — See Ch. 140, Art. III.
§ 66-1. Definitions.7
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADDITIONAL SERVICES — Any of the following:
Such video services as the transmission of all leased access signals
not included in basic subscriber service, as well as the transmission of
cablecast video advertising messages and pay television signals;
A.
Such audio services as the retransmission of cablecast AM or FM
signals, the transmission of cablecast radio advertising messages, as
permitted by the FCC;
B.
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 60-13 SYKESVILLE CODE § 66-1
62:60
BASIC SERVICE — All subscriber services provided by the company in one
or more service tiers, including the delivery of broadcast signals, access
channels and origination channels, covered by a regular monthly charge
paid by all subscribers to a particular service tier, excluding optional
services for which a separate per-channel or per-program charge is made.
Home security service, data retrieval or other such auxiliary services shall
not be considered part of basic service.
BROADCAST SIGNAL — A television or radio signal that is transmitted over
the air and is received by a cable television system off the air, by satellite,
by microwave, or by direct connection to a broadcasting station.
CABLE GROSS REVENUES or GROSS REVENUES — Any and all cash,
credits, property or other consideration of any kind or nature, and all of
the amounts earned or accrued, arising from, attributable to, or in any
way derived directly or indirectly by franchisee, or an entity in any way
affiliated with franchisee, in whatever form and from all sources which are
in connection with or attributable to the operation of the cable television
system within franchisors' corporate boundaries or franchisee's provision
of cable services within franchisors' corporate boundaries.[Amended
3-12-1984 by Ord. No. 135; 5-8-2000 by Ord. No. 218]
Such digital services as the transmission of digital signals including,
but not limited to, two-way signals, computer signals, signals associated
with fire and burglar alarm services, signals associated with home
shopping, remote medical diagnosis, utility equipment monitoring, and
similar services; and
C.
Services not involving the transmission of signals, including rental
of equipment, training services, and all other services which may be
provided by the franchisee to programmers or subscribers.
D.
Cable gross revenues shall include, without limitation, all subscriber
and customer fees and revenues earned or accrued net of bad debts,
including fees and revenues for basic cable services; additional tiers;
premium cable services; late charges; pay per view; program guides;
installation, disconnection, reconnection, change in service or service
call fees; fees for the provision, sale, rental, or lease of converters,
remote controls, additional outlets and other customer premises
equipment; late fees and administrative fees; barter; revenues from
the sale or carriage of other cable-related services; fees paid by
subscribers; revenues from the use of leased access channels;
advertising revenues from the system; and revenues and compensation
from home shopping programming. Cable gross revenues shall not
include the value of free services not required by the franchise
agreement; nor any taxes on services furnished by franchisors, or other
governmental unit and which are collected by franchisee on behalf of
said governmental unit. A franchise fee is not such a tax.
A.
Advertising revenues and other revenues whose sources cannot be
identified with a specific subscriber shall be allocated to franchisors
B.
§ 66-1 BUILDING CODE § 66-1
62:61
CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM (not exempted by appropriate federal, state
and local codes) or COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEM (CATV)
— A system of antennas, cables, wires, lines, towers, waveguides, or other
conductors, converters, equipment or facilities, designed and constructed
for the purpose of producing, receiving, transmitting, amplifying and
distributing audio, video and other forms of electronic or electrical signals,
located in the Town. Said definition shall not include any such facility that
serves or will serve only subscribers in one or more multiple unit dwellings
under common ownership, control or management, which does not use the
Town's rights-of-way.
CABLECAST SIGNAL — A signal that is transmitted by a cable television
system, including microwave links, and is not involved in a broadcast
transmission path.
CHANNEL — A bank of frequencies, six megahertz wide, in the
electromagnetic spectrum capable of carrying either one audio-visual
television signal and a few nonvideo signals or a large number of nonvideo
signals.8
COMMERCIAL SUBSCRIBER — A subscriber who receives a service in a
place of business, where the service may be utilized in connection with a
business, trade or profession or institution.
COMPANY — Any provider of a cable television system.
CONVERTER — An electronic device which converts signals to a frequency
not susceptible to interference within the TV receiver of a subscriber, and
by an appropriate channel selector which also permits a subscriber to view
all signals delivered at designated dial locations.
COUNCIL — The Mayor and Council of the Town of Sykesville, Maryland.
EDUCATIONAL ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel where educational
authorities are the designated programmers.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FRANCHISE — Any provider of a cable communications system which
receives a franchise pursuant to this chapter.
FRANCHISE or FRANCHISE AGREEMENT — The separate agreement by
which a franchise is granted to a franchisee, pursuant to this chapter.
LEASED ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel available for lease, at fair
and nondiscriminatory rates, or a first-come-first-served basis, including
based upon the percentage of subscribers residing in the franchise area
compared to that served from the head end serving each franchisor.
All amounts earned or accrued from Internet service and/or other
interactive cable services shall be included in cable gross revenues.
C.
8. Editor's Note: The definition of "Clerk-Treasurer," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 268. See now "Town Manager."
§ 66-1 SYKESVILLE CODE § 66-1
62:62
those portions of the other access channels not in use by their designated
programmers.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel where the
Council or other local governments or agencies are the designated
programmers.
LOCAL ORGANIZATION CHANNEL — Any channel where the franchisee is
the programmer.
MONITORING — Observing a communications signal, or the absence of a
signal, where the observer is neither the subscriber or the programmer,
whether the signal is observed by visual or electronic means, for any
purpose whatsoever, provided that "monitoring" shall not include systemwide,
nonindividually addressed sweeps of the system for purposes of
verifying system integrity, controlling return path transmissions, or billing
for pay services. Monitoring does not include tapping as herein defined.
PAY TELEVISION — The delivery to subscribers, over the cable
communications system, or television signals for a fee or charge to
subscribers over and above the charge for basic subscriber service, on a
per-program, per-channel, or other subscription basis.
PRIVATE CHANNEL — The same as "secure channel". (See below.)
PROGRAMMER — Any person, firm, corporation, institution or entity who
or which produces or otherwise provides program material for transmission
by video, audio, digital, or other signals either live or from recorded tapes
or films, or by other means to subscriber, by means of the cable
communications system.
PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel where any member of the
general public may be a programmer, on a first-come-first-served,
nondiscriminatory basis.
PUBLIC STREET — The surface of and the space above and below any
public street, avenue, highway, boulevard, concourse, driveway, bridge,
tunnel, park, parkway, waterway, dock, bulkhead, wharf, pier, alley, right-ofway,
public utility easement, public utility, and any other public ground or
water subject to the jurisdiction and control of the Town of Sykesville.
RESIDENTIAL SUBSCRIBER — A subscriber who receives a service in an
individual dwelling unit, where the service is not to be utilized in connection
with a business, trade, profession or institution.
SECURE CHANNEL — Any channel so arranged electronically as to be
available only to subscribers who possess special decoding equipment in
order to receive a usable signal.
SERVICE AREA — The geographic area in which the franchisee provides
CATV service.
SUBSCRIBER — Any person, firm, institution, corporation or other entity
who or which elects to receive, for any purpose, a service provided by the
franchisee by means of or in connection with the cable television system.
§ 66-1 BUILDING CODE § 66-1
62:63
SUBSCRIBER SERVICE DROP — Each extension wiring from the
franchisee's distribution lines to a subscriber point of use.
TAPPING — Observing a two-way communications signal exchange whether
the communications signal exchange is observed by visual or electronic
means, for any purpose whatsoever, without the consent of all parties to
the communication, subject, however, to the authority provided pursuant to
Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article, § 10-401 et seq., of the Annotated
Code of Maryland to intercept communications.
TOTAL GROSS RECEIPTS — Any and all compensation and other
consideration collected or received or in any manner gained or derived by a
franchisee from the operation of its CATV service within the service area of
the Town.
TOWN — The Town of Sykesville, Maryland, a Maryland municipal
corporation and all the territory now or hereafter acquired or annexed,
within its territorial corporate limits, as set forth in the Charter of the Town.
TOWN AGENCY — The person, department, committee or agency
designated by the Council to act for it in certain matters relating to cable
television; or, if designated by the Council, the Council itself.
TOWN MANAGER — The Town Administrator of the Town of Sykesville,
Maryland.[Added 6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 268]
§ 66-2. Application procedures.
The Town shall advertise for application for a CATV franchise(s) in local
newspapers having general circulation and in one or more national cable
industry publications. The written application for a franchise submitted to
the Council shall contain the following information:
The name, address and form of business of the applicant. If the
applicant is a corporation, it shall also state the percentage of
ownership, and the names, address and occupations of its officers,
directors and major stockholders (5% or more), and the names and
addresses of any parent or subsidiary companies. If applicant is a
corporation controlled by another corporation, the names, addresses
and occupations of the officers, directors and major stockholders
(owner of 5% or more) of the controlling corporation shall also be
stated. If the applicant is a partnership or other unincorporated
association, the percentage of ownership and the name and address
of each member, whether active or inactive, shall be set forth, and
if one or more partners are corporations, the names, addresses and
occupations of such corporation's officers, directors and major
stockholders shall also be stated. It shall also specify the names and
technical and professional qualifications and career backgrounds of the
persons who will manage the system proposed by the applicant.
A.
A list of all other cable television systems, if any, in which the applicant
(or any partner or major stockholder of applicant) has substantial
B.
§ 66-1 SYKESVILLE CODE § 66-2
62:64
interest (5% or more), stating the location, approximate number of
homes served, the name and address of the local franchising body.
A thorough description of the proposed cable television system to be
installed and operated and the time schedule for such installation,
and the manner in which the applicant proposes to conduct, install,
maintain and operate the same. The description shall contain sufficient
technical detail to enable the Council to make a determination as to
whether the proposed system is technically equal to or superior to that
proposed by other applicants.
C.
A schedule of proposed rates and charges to all classes of subscribers
for both installation and monthly service.
D.
A statement setting forth all agreements and understandings, whether
written, oral or implied, existing between the applicant and any person,
firm or corporation with respect to the proposed franchise or the
proposed CATV operation. If a franchise is granted hereafter to a
person, firm or corporation posing as a front or as the representative
of another person, firm or corporation, and such information is not
disclosed in the original application, such franchise shall be forfeited
and the franchisee shall forfeit all revenues and any bond to the Town.
E.
A financial statement prepared by a certified public accountant, or
person otherwise satisfactory to the Council, and/or such other
financial documents as may be required by the Council, showing
applicant's financial status and his financial ability to complete the
construction and installation of the approved CATV system. Such
statements shall include, in addition to the foregoing, a responsible
estimate of the costs of construction and installation of such CATV
system and a detailed statement of the financing of such costs, the
amount of borrowed funds, if any, which may be required and including
the source and availability thereof.
F.
The Council may at any time demand, and applicant shall provide,
such supplementary, additional or other information as the Council
deems reasonably necessary to show the applicant's true ownership
and control and financial, technical and character qualifications.
G.
The applicant shall specifically set forth that it will comply with each of
the provisions of this chapter and/or Town rules and regulations related
thereto.
H.
The applicant may submit any other information it feels relevant or that
will enhance its proposal.
I.
The applicant will accompany its application with a cash deposit or
certified check as specified in the request for proposal, payable to the
Town which sum shall be returned (without interest) to the applicant
if it is not successful in being awarded a franchise. In the event the
applicant is successful, the said deposit shall be returned (without
interest) to the applicant at the time the franchise is accepted by the
J.
§ 66-2 BUILDING CODE § 66-2
62:65
§ 66-3. Public hearing; award of contact.
§ 66-4. Franchise provisions and restrictions.
applicant and a performance bond, as hereafter required, is filed with
the Town; provided, however, that, if a franchise is awarded and not
accepted within 60 days of the award, or the performance bond is not
filed within that time, said deposit shall be forfeited to the Town as
liquidated damages, and the Council shall have no further obligation to
the applicant.
In addition to the deposit mentioned in Subsection J above, the
applicant will accompany the application with a check made payable
to the Town in the amount of not less than $1,000 to help defray the
administrative costs involved in the processing of applications. No part
of this sum shall be refundable. In addition, the successful bidder shall
remit to the Town the difference between the aggregate of application
deposits received and the actual prefranchise award administrative
costs incurred by the Town if any. Payment must be received by the
Town prior to its execution of the franchise agreement.
K.
The Council reserves the right to reject any or all applications. The
Council, following the receipt of application(s) may hold a public
hearing to hear comments on the application(s), may give the public
30 days advance notice of any such hearing by publishing the notice
in a newspaper of general circulation in Carroll County. At such public
hearing, if any, the applicant(s) shall be requested to make a
presentation and answer questions propounded by the public or Council
relating to any aspect of their application. [Amended 3-12-1984 by
Ord. No. 135]
A.
Following the public hearing(s), although not necessarily on the same
date(s), the Council may reject any or all applications or take such
action empowered to it by law.
B.
By resolution, the Council may grant a franchise for a CATV system
to any such applicant(s) as may appear from said application(s) to be,
in the Council's opinion, best qualified to render proper and efficient
CATV service to television viewers and subscribers in the service area.
If favorably considered, the application submitted shall constitute and
form part of the franchise agreement, except as otherwise indicated in
the franchise agreement.
C.
General provisions. Every franchisee granted pursuant to this chapter
shall be subject to the following:
Federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations, ordinances and
resolutions, including those governing the monitoring and tapping
of cablecast signal and the penalties for violation thereof.
(1)
A.
§ 66-2 SYKESVILLE CODE § 66-4
62:66
Any franchise granted hereunder shall be subject to the right of the
Council:
To terminate the same for misuse, or failure to comply with any
material provisions of this chapter, or any federal, state or local
laws, ordinances, rules or regulations.
(a)
To require proper and adequate extension of plant, service
and maintenance thereof at the highest practicable standards
consistent with the current state of the art.
(b)
To control and regulate the use of its streets, alleys, bridges
and public places and the space above and beneath them. Each
franchisee shall pay such part of the cost of improvement or
maintenance of streets, alleys, bridges and public places, as
shall arise from the franchisee's use thereof and shall protect
and save the county, Town, the Council, their agents,
employees and servants harmless from all claims and/or
damages arising from said use.
(c)
To require joint use of the property and appurtenances of each
franchisee located in the streets, alleys and public places of
the Town, by the Council and insofar as such joint use may be
reasonable and practicable.
(d)
Through its appropriately designated representatives, to
inspect all construction or installation work performed subject
to the provisions of the franchise agreement, and this chapter
and any amendments, rule or regulation thereunder and make
such inspections as it shall feel necessary to insure compliance
therewith. However, the franchise shall remain primarily
responsible for design and installation and for compliance with
all requirements.
(e)
To require, at the expiration of the term for which this
franchise is granted or upon the termination and cancellation
as provided herein, the franchisee to remove, at its own
expense any and all portions of the CATV system from the
public ways within the service area within a reasonable period
of time, as established by the Council.
(f)
(2)
The franchise shall not be transferred or assigned, either in whole
or in part, or leased, sublet, or mortgaged in any manner, nor
shall title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right, interest
or property therein, pass to or vest in any person, corporation,
association or other entity either by act of the franchisee or by
operation of law, without the written consent of the Council and
under such terms and conditions as the Council may require after
formal Council action.
(3)
Prior approval of the Council (following formal Council action) shall
be required where control of more than 25% of the franchisee
(4)
§ 66-4 BUILDING CODE § 66-4
62:67
is proposed to be acquired by a person, partnership, association,
corporation or group of persons acting in concert, none of whom
own or control 25% or more of such right of control, singularly or
collectively at the time the franchise is granted. By its acceptance
of a franchise, the franchisee specifically acknowledges and agrees
that any such acquisition occurring without prior approval of the
Council shall constitute a material violation of a franchise.
The franchise shall be nonexclusive and shall be for terms of up to
15 years which may be renewed under such conditions as may be
in effect at that time. [Amended 5-8-2000 by Ord. No. 218]
(5)
Unless waived by the Council in writing, the franchisee shall be
bound and governed by the rules and regulations contained in the
FCC Cable TV Report and Order as set out in 47 CFR Part 76 (1972)
and applicable FCC regulations, except as otherwise modified by
this chapter as well as applicable local and state laws, ordinances
and regulations.
(6)
Selling of lists; monitoring; tapping.
The company, or any of its agents or employees, shall not sell,
or otherwise make available to any party, lists of the names
and addresses of subscribers, or any list which identifies the
viewing habits of individual subscribers, subject, however, to
the right of the Town agency to audit the records of the
franchise to establish compliance with the agreement of the
franchisee and the Town. This section does not prohibit the
company from providing composite ratings of subscriber
viewing to any party.
(a)
No signals transmitted from a subscriber terminal shall be
monitored by the company in order to determine patterns
or practices without the express written permission of the
subscriber. The request for such permission shall be contained
in a separate document with a prominent statement that the
subscriber is authorizing the permission in full knowledge of
its provisions. Such written permission shall be for a limited
period of time not to exceed one year, which shall be renewable
at the option of the subscriber. No penalty shall be invoked
for a subscriber's failure to provide or renew such an
authorization. (This statement must be in authorization.) The
authorization shall be revocable at any time by the subscriber
without penalty of any kind whatsoever. Such authorization
is required for each type or classification of cable television
activity planned; provided, however, that the company shall
be entitled to conduct system-wide or individually addressed
"sweeps" for the purpose of verifying system integrity,
controlling return-path transmission, or billing for pay
services.
(b)
(7)
§ 66-4 SYKESVILLE CODE § 66-4
62:68
(c) Tapping is specifically prohibited. (See § 66-15.)
The application of the franchise shall be incorporated by reference
in the franchise agreement. The franchise agreement shall contain
such further conditions or provisions as may be negotiated by
the Council and the franchisee. In case of conflict or ambiguity
between any terms or provisions of the franchise agreement and
this chapter, the terms of the franchise agreement shall control if
otherwise permitted by law. [Amended 3-12-1984 by Ord. No.
135]
(8)
Detailed plans and specifications for the installation of works of
improvements authorized herein shall first be approved by the
Town of Sykesville or its authorized agents during construction to
ensure quality control and compliance to plans, specifications and
applicable costs. [Amended 5-8-2000 by Ord. No. 218]
(9)
Use of existing facilities.
The franchisee shall, when and where practicable, lease, rent,
or in any other lawful manner, obtain the use of towers, poles,
conduits, lines, cables and other equipment and facilities, from
present holders of public licenses and franchises within the
corporate limits of the Town, and said towers, poles, conduits,
lines, cables, and other equipment and facilities on such terms
as agreed, subject to all existing and future ordinances and
regulations of the county. Copies of all agreements with such
public utilities operating within the Town shall be placed on
file in the office of the Town agency immediately upon their
execution. 9
(a)
Wherever such facilities are not reasonably available from the
sources specified in Subsection A hereof, the franchisee shall
have the right to erect and maintain its own poles, conduits
and related facilities as may be necessary for the proper
construction and maintenance of its cable television
distribution system, subject to applicable laws, ordinances and
regulations and restrictions of titles.
(b)
(10)
Placement and relocation of equipment; road work; restoration of
pavement; tree trimming.
All transmission and distribution structures, lines and
equipment erected by the franchisee within the City shall be
so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper
uses of streets, alleys and of the public ways and places, and
to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable
convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the said
streets, alleys, or other public ways and places. Any opening or
(a)
(11)
9. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 66-4 BUILDING CODE § 66-4
62:69
obstruction in the streets or other public places made by the
franchisee in the course of its operations shall be guarded and
protected at all times by the placement of adequate barriers,
fences or boardings, the bounds of which, during periods of
dusk and darkness, shall be clearly designated by warning
lights.
In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway
or other surfacing, the franchisee shall, at its own cost and
expense and in a manner authorized by the Town replace and
restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway or surface of any street
or alley disturbed, in as good condition as before said work was
commenced, and shall maintain the restoration in an approved
condition.
(b)
In the event that at any time during the period of this franchise
the Town shall lawfully elect to alter, or change the grade of
any public street, water main or sewer mains, the franchisee
upon reasonable notice by the Town shall remove, relay, and
relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes and other telephone fixtures at its own expense.
(c)
The franchisee shall not place new poles or other fixtures
where the same will interfere with any gas, electric or
telephone fixtures, water hydrant or main, sewer main, sewer
and water services, or other fixtures placed in any street and
shall, where practicable, be placed at the outer edge of the
sidewalk and inside the curb line, and those placed in alleys
shall be placed close to the line of the lot abutting on said alley,
and then in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual
travel on said public streets.
(d)
The franchisee shall, upon the request of any person holding a
building moving permit, temporarily raise or lower its wires to
permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary
removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the
person requesting the same, and the franchisee shall have the
authority to require such payment in advance. The franchisee
shall be given no less than 48 hours advance notice to arrange
for such temporary wire changes.
(e)
The franchisee shall be required to trim trees upon and
overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the
Town so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming
in contact with the wires and cables of the franchisee, all
trimming to be done at the expense of the franchisee.
(f)
The construction and maintenance of the cable television system,
including house connections, shall be in accordance with the
provisions of the Electrical Code currently in effect in the Town
and such applicable laws and regulations of the Town, county, State
(12)
§ 66-4 SYKESVILLE CODE § 66-4
62:70
of Maryland, and of the United States, affecting such installations,
which may be presently in effect or may be from time to time
in the future in effect, including a securing of all permits for
such construction and maintenance required by applicable law. All
structures, equipment, lines and connections shall be of permanent
nature, durable, and installed in accordance with good engineering
practice, and maintained in a safe, suitable and substantial
condition in good order and repair wherever situated or located. 10
Copies of all petitions, applications and communications by or to
the franchisee involving the Federal Communications Commission,
Securities and Exchange Commission, or any other state or county
or Town regulatory commission or agency or department having
jurisdiction in respect to any matters affecting the franchisee shall
also be furnished simultaneously to the Town agency by the
franchisee.
(13)
The franchisee or applicant for franchise shall have all necessary
permits and authorizations required in the conduct of its business.
(14)
Upon granting of any franchise as herein contemplated, the
franchisee shall, throughout the life of such franchise, keep the
Town agency, fully informed with respect to the matters specified
below, and the failure to disclose such information during the life
of such franchise shall be considered a material violation of the
franchise, and subject such franchisee, at the discretion of the
Council, to suspension or termination.
Each franchisee shall allow the Town agency to audit all of its
accounting and financial records upon reasonable notice; make
available all of its plans, contracts, and engineering, statistical,
customer and service records relating to its system and to all
other records required to be kept hereunder; and at all times
maintain complete and accurate books of accounts, records of
its business and operations, and all other records required by
this specification.
(a)
Each franchisee shall file annually with the Town agency a
report indicating all persons who, at any time during the
preceding year, did control an interest in the franchise of _____
% or more setting forth for each the extent of this interest
and all creditors, secured and unsecured, in excess of $1,000
setting forth for each the amounts owed.
(b)
Each franchisee shall annually file a report detailing
maintenance, state of the art improvements, signal strength
and signal quality at the subscriber end of the system.
(c)
(15)
10.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 66-4 BUILDING CODE § 66-4
62:71
Each franchisee shall also file annually such other information
concerning its operating as may be required by the Town
agency or Council. The Council shall retain, throughout the life
of any franchise given in pursuance of this chapter, the right
to demand such supplemental, additional or other information
as above noted, and upon proof of the failure to supply such
information upon reasonable demand, the franchise under
which any applicant may be operating may, at the option of
the Council, be suspended upon order of the Council until such
information is forthcoming.
(d)
Each franchisee shall file a plan on an annual basis showing
its plans for extending its service to those parts of the service
area unserved at that time.
(e)
Number of channels. The franchisee's distribution system shall be
capable of carrying all AM, FM and TV signals originated in the
Washington, Baltimore and Harrisburg areas required or allowed to be
carried by the FCC. The system capacity in the forward path shall be
at least 25 channels. The system shall have the capability of providing
simultaneous reverse direction signals for digital, audio and video
signal transmission on all elements of the system when and as allowed
by the FCC.
The antenna, receiving and distribution equipment shall be
installed and maintained so as to provide pictures on subscriber
receivers throughout the system essentially of the same quality as
those received at the antenna site.
(1)
Installation and maintenance of equipment shall be such that
standard NTSC color signals shall be transmitted with full fidelity
to any subscriber color receiver. The franchisee shall maintain its
service in accordance with such reasonable standards regarding
uniformity of transmission, noise levels, channel signal, voltages as
may from time to time be established.
(2)
Whenever it is necessary to shut off or interrupt service for the
purpose of making repairs, adjustments or installations, the
franchisee shall do so at times as will cause the least amount
of inconvenience to its customers, and unless such interruption
is unforeseen and immediately necessary, it shall give reasonable
notice thereof to its customers.
(3)
B.
Use of channels. [Amended 5-8-2000 by Ord. No. 218]
There shall be at least three channels designated as public
channels, one for public access, one for local government access
and one for education access, as defined elsewhere herein.
(1)
Pay TV shall be allowed on secure channels only. Advertising shall
be allowed subject to restrictions imposed by FCC or other
applicable rules or regulations.
(2)
C.
§ 66-4 SYKESVILLE CODE § 66-4
62:72
The franchisee is prohibited from censoring any program which is
cablecast over public channels except such censoring as is required
by FCC or other applicable rules and regulations.
(3)
Charges made by the franchisee to a programmer, except for public
channels, shall be based upon the fair market value of the service
and no other criteria. A franchisee is prohibited from unlawfully
discriminating among users or in favor of himself.
(4)
The educational, government and public access channels shall be
made available free of charge; however, charges for equipment,
personnel and production of public access programming shall be
reasonable and consistent with the goal of affording users a lowcost
means of television access. No equipment, personnel or
production charges shall be made for live public access programs
not exceeding five minutes in length per day.
(5)
The system shall be engineered to provide an audio alert system
to allow authorized officials as designated by the Council to
automatically over-ride the audio signal on all channels and
transmit and report emergency information.
(6)
Subscriber equipment. The franchisee shall provide every subscriber
with all equipment necessary for reception on the subscriber's set of
channels to which he has subscribed; however, a provision shall be
made in the rate schedule whereby the subscriber charge shall be less
if the subscriber furnishes a converter.
D.
State of the art. The franchisee shall continually upgrade its facilities,
equipment and service so that its system is as advanced as the current
state of technology will allow. Compliance with the provision shall be
determined by the agency.
E.
Public service installations and basic service. The franchisee shall
provide one free installation and free basic service at all municipal
buildings, police stations, fire stations, schools, hospitals, jail and
libraries within the service area. Such installations shall be made at
such reasonable locations as shall be requested by the respective units
of government or education institutions. Any charge for relocation of
such installations shall, however, be charged at actual costs. Additional
installations at the same location may be made at cost plus 10%.
No monthly service charges shall be made for distribution of the
franchisee's signals within such publicly owned buildings.
F.
Other business activities. In the conduct of the business franchised
hereunder, neither the franchisee nor its officers, employees, or agents
shall sell, repair or install, or recommend the sale, repair or installation
of radio or television receivers; provided, however, that nothing herein
shall be deemed to prohibit franchisee, at customer's request and
without payment, from examining and adjusting a customer’s receiver
set to determine whether reception difficulties originate in said set or in
franchisee’s system. The franchise granted pursuant hereto authorizes
G.
§ 66-4 BUILDING CODE § 66-4
62:73
§ 66-5. Forfeiture or surrender of franchise.
only the operation of a system as provided for herein, and does not
take the place of any other franchise, license or permit which might be
required by law of the franchisee in order to install its system.
Interconnection. The franchisee shall be capable of interconnecting its
system or any part thereof with any other broadband communications
facility operating in the Town or county and/or the adjacent
jurisdictions. The interconnection shall be made within 60 days of an
order by the Council to proceed, unless for good cause shown by the
franchisee, a reasonable time extension is granted by the Town agency.
H.
Building apartments. No franchisee shall be required to pay any fee to
the building owner(s) to provide cable television service to any member
of the public in any privately owned buildings which are in the Town.
Any disputes between franchisee and any building owner shall be heard
at and resolved by a hearing by the Town agency. Each franchisee shall
report to the Town agency any building owner who requests a fee from
the franchisee as a condition for allowing the franchisee to install a
cable system service in the building owner's building. A franchisee is
expressly prohibited from entering into any agreement with an owner
of a multiple dwelling unit, which would increase the rates, or increase
or decrease services to a subscriber residing in the dwelling other
than with medical organizations or education or charitable institutions;
however, this shall not contravene the provision of Subsection F above.
I.
Repair. Any damage caused to the property of building owners or
users or any other person by the franchisee shall be repaired by the
franchisee.
J.
Removal of facilities upon request. Upon termination of service to
any subscriber, the franchisee shall promptly remove all its facilities
and equipment from the premises of such subscriber upon his written
request. Franchisee shall not charge a fee for same.
K.
Material and tapping violations.
Revocation or surrender of franchise; removal of equipment.
In the event of failure of the franchisee to commence to render
community television service to the residents of the service
area as contemplated and provided or by a franchise within a
period of 12 months from the date of the grant of a franchise,
the Council shall consider this as a material violation of the
franchise and therefore have the right to revoke this franchise
and all rights of the franchisee hereunder.
(a)
If the franchisee shall fail to comply with any of the provisions
of the ordinance, or default in any of its obligations, except
for causes beyond the reasonable control of the franchisee, as
heretofore provided and shall fail, within 30 days after written
(b)
(1)
A.
§ 66-4 SYKESVILLE CODE § 66-5
62:74
notice from the Town to correct such default or noncompliance,
the Council shall consider this as a material violation of the
franchise and therefore have the right to revoke this franchise
and all rights of the franchisee hereunder.
Upon the termination of this franchise or any renewal thereof,
the franchisee shall remove its posts, poles, and all
aboveground equipment from the streets, lanes, sidewalks,
highways, alleys, bridges and other public places in the service
area and shall restore such streets, lanes, highways, sidewalks,
alleys, bridges and other public places to their original
condition. Following termination of this franchise, any property
owned by the franchisee and not removed from properties
within six months from the termination date, will become the
property of the Town to do with as it may choose. Any cost
occurring to the Town in removing the franchisee's former
possessions from Town streets or land will be a claim against
the franchisee.
(c)
The franchisee may surrender this franchise at any time upon
filing with the Town, a written notice of its intention to do so,
at least 60 days before the surrender date. On the surrender
date specified in such notice, all the rights and privileges, and
all of the obligations, duties and liabilities of the franchisee
under this chapter, shall cease and terminate, except that the
franchisee shall have an additional six months to remove its
plant and equipment from Town streets and all other public
lands upon which it is located. At the end of said six months,
any property owned by the franchisee and not removed from
properties will become the property of the Town, to do with as
it may choose. Any costs occurring to the Town in removing the
franchisee's former possessions from Town streets or land will
be a claim against the franchisee.
(d)
Tapping shall constitute immediate grounds for the revocation
of the franchise. The prosecution of any person for tapping
shall not be a bar to the revocation of the franchise granted
hereunder. Upon an allegation that the franchisee has engaged
in tapping, the Council shall give notice to the franchisee
that a hearing will be conducted to consider whether or not
franchisee has engaged in tapping. At the hearing, the
franchisee and any interested person may be heard on the
issue of whether or not the franchisee engaged in tapping.
Should the Council find in its discretion that the franchisee
engaged in tapping, the Council may suspend or revoke the
franchise granted hereunder.
(e)
In order that the Town, or its designee, may exercise its option to
take over the facilities and property of the system as authorized
herein upon expiration or forfeiture or revocation of the rights
and privileges of the franchisee, the franchisee shall not make,
(2)
§ 66-5 BUILDING CODE § 66-5
62:75
§ 66-6. Town’s right of intervention.
The franchisee shall not oppose intervention by the Town in any suit or
proceeding to which the franchisee is a party.
§ 66-7. Local office; complaint procedures.
execute or enter into any deed, deed of trust, mortgage, contract,
conditional sales contract, or any loan, lease pledge, sale gift or
any other agreement concerning any of the rights, facilities or
property, real or personal, of the system without prior approval
of the Council and upon the Council's determination that the
transaction proposed by the franchisee will not be harmful to the
rights of the Town under this franchise; provided, however, that
this section shall not apply to the disposition or replacement of
worn out or obsolete facilities or personal property in the normal
course of carrying on the CATV business, or to routine contractual
relationships entered into in the ordinary course of the cable
business.
The franchise herein granted shall, at the option of the Council, cease
and terminate upon the appointment of a receiver or receivers or
trustee or trustees to take over and conduct the business of the
franchisee whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or
other similar action or proceeding. In the case of a foreclosure or other
judicial sale of the plant, property and equipment of the franchisee,
or any part thereof, including or excluding this franchise, the Council
may serve notice of termination upon the franchisee and the successful
bidder at such sale, in which event, the franchise herein granted and
all rights and privileges of the franchisee hereunder shall cease and
terminate 30 days after service of such notice, unless:
The Council shall have approved the transfer of this franchise, as
and in the manner in this chapter provided; and
(1)
Such successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with the
Council to assume and be bound by all the terms and conditions of
this chapter.
(2)
B.
The franchisee shall maintain within 20 miles of the service area, a
local business office or designated agent for the purpose of receiving
and resolving all complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment
malfunctions and other similar matters.
A.
The franchisee shall provide a toll-free telephone number at which
subscribers may contact the franchisee or agent thereof on a twentyfour-
hour basis in the case of emergencies, and shall list such number
in the local telephone directory, and shall notify its subscribers of such
service.
B.
§ 66-5 SYKESVILLE CODE § 66-7
62:76
§ 66-8. Insurance, bonds, and indemnification.
Complaints by subscribers may be filed with the franchisee is writing
or delivered to the franchisee orally in person or by means of the
telephone.
C.
Any complaints received from subscribers shall be investigated by the
franchisee and service restored at least within 48 hours of their receipt.
In the event service is not restored within 48 hours, the subscriber shall
be credited with a reduction in his monthly payment for each full day
or portion of a day that such service is not restored by determining
from the monthly charge the prorated charge for each day's service,
then multiplying said daily charge by the number of days during which
service was not wholly restored and subtracting the result from the
monthly charge.
D.
The franchisee shall keep a maintenance service log that will indicate
the nature of each complaint, the name of the employee of the
franchisee receiving the complaint, the date and time it was received,
the disposition of the complaint and the time and date thereof. In said
log the franchisee shall state the specific steps taken by the company
to remedy the complaint. This log shall be made available for periodic
inspection by the Town.
E.
The procedure for reporting and resolving complaints shall be stated
in writing by the franchisee to each subscriber at the time of initial
subscription to the cable system.
F.
The franchisee shall maintain the staff and facilities needed to properly
handle system maintenance and complaints.
G.
The franchisee shall maintain a duty roster of qualified technicians
to respond to complaints or malfunctions at other than normal office
hours.
H.
Liability and indemnification of the Town and Council. The franchisee
shall indemnify and hold harmless the Town and Council, its agents,
servants, officials and employees, at all times and specifically agrees
that it will pay all damages and costs which the Town or Council or its
agents, servants, officials or employees may be legally required to pay
arising from the franchise granted herein. Such damages and penalties
shall include, but not be limited to, damages arising out of copyright
infringements, and other damages arising out of the installation,
operation or maintenance of the CATV system authorized, allowed, or
prohibited by the franchise. In the event suit shall be filed against
the Town, Council or its agents, servants, officials or employees either
independently or jointly with the franchisee to recover for any claim or
damages, the franchisee, upon notice to it by the Council shall defend
the Council, Town, or its agents, servants, officials, or employees, as the
case may be, against the action and, in the event of a final judgment
being obtained against any of them, either independently or jointly with
A.
§ 66-7 BUILDING CODE § 66-8
62:77
the franchisee by reason of the acts of the franchisee, the franchisee
will pay said judgment and all costs and legal fees, and hold the Town
and Council, its agents, servants, officials and employees harmless
therefrom.
Faithful performance bond. The franchisee shall, concurrently with
its acceptance of a franchise, file with the Town of Sykesville, at
franchisee's sole expense, a corporate surety bond with a responsible
company approved by the Town of Sykesville and licensed to do
business in Maryland, in the amount of not less than $100,000,
renewable annually, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of
franchisee, and upon the further condition that in the event franchisee
shall fail to comply with any one or more of the provisions of the
franchise[e] agreement or ordinance, there shall be recoverable, jointly
and severally from the principal and surety of such bond, any damages
or losses suffered by the Town of Sykesville or subscribers as a result
thereof, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification
or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the franchisee as
prescribed hereby, plus a reasonable allowance for attorney's fees and
costs, said condition to be a continuing obligation on the part of the
franchisee to the Town of Sykesville that may arise from the acceptance
of the franchise or its renewal or from the exercise of any privilege or
right herein granted. The bond shall provide that at least 30 days' prior
written notice of intention not to renew or to cancel or of any material
change, be given by the surety company by filing the same with the
Town agency. [Amended 5-8-2000 by Ord. No. 218]
B.
Insurance. Franchisee shall carry insurance in such forms and in such
companies as shall be approved by the Town agency, such approval
not to be unreasonably withheld, to protect the Town of Sykesville, its
agents, servants, officials and employees and the franchisee from and
against any and all claims, injury or damage. The insurance policies
and performance bonds obtained by the franchisee in compliance with
this and other sections shall be issued by a company, or companies,
acceptable to the Town agency and a current certificate or certificates
of insurance and bonding, along with written evidence of payment of all
required premiums, shall be filed and maintained with the Town agency
during the term of the franchise and prior to the commencement of
construction. Said policies shall name the Town of Sykesville as an
additional insured and shall contain a provision that a written notice of
cancellation or reduction in coverage of said policy shall be delivered
to the Town agency 30 days in advance of the effective date thereof.
The policies shall protect the Town of Sykesville, its agents, servants,
officials and employees and the franchise from and against any and all
claims, injury or damage to persons or property both real and personal,
caused by the construction, erection, operation or maintenance of the
system. The amount of such insurance shall be in the discretion of the
Town of Sykesville but not be less than the amount set forth in the
franchise agreement. [Amended 5-8-2000 by Ord. No. 218]
C.
§ 66-8 SYKESVILLE CODE § 66-8
62:78
§ 66-9. Area of coverage and construction.
§ 66-10. Rates; changes in rates; refunds.
The franchisee shall receive no consideration whatsoever from its
subscribers for or in connection with its service to its subscribers other
than in accordance with this section, and initial rates shall be established
by agreement between the applicant and the Council and shall be set forth
in the franchise agreement. Subscriber rates shall be at least as favorable
as those offered by the franchisee to other areas of the county; that is, if the
franchisee makes lower subscriber rates applicable elsewhere in the county,
those note rates shall become effective in the service area as of the date
of their applicability elsewhere in the county. To this connection, the term
"franchise" shall include any person, entity or firm that is a subsidiary of the
franchisee or part of its controlled group as that term is used in the Internal
Revenue Code.
Workmen's compensation insurance shall also be provided as required
by the laws of the State of Maryland.
D.
Nonwaiver. Neither the provisions of the section, nor any bonds
accepted by the Council or Town agency pursuant hereto, or any
damage recovered by the Town thereunder, shall be construed to
excuse unfaithful performance by the franchisee or limit the liability of
the franchisee under this chapter or the franchise for damages, either
to the full amount of the bond or otherwise.
E.
The franchisee shall extend the installation of cables, amplifiers, and
related equipment throughout the area covered by the franchise as
rapidly as practicable. Service shall be extended throughout the service
area as soon as practicable or as directed by the Town agency, but no
later than one year following the issuance of the franchise.
A.
The franchisee shall file a map and program report with the agency
at the close of each calendar year, showing the exact area of the
Town being served by the cable television system and the location and
identification of major component parts of the system and plans for
future service extensions by year.
B.
Rate schedule. An applicant for a franchise shall include, as a minimum,
in its application its proposed initial rates and charges for the
categories and types of service listed below. The rates shall remain
in effect for at least one year after commencement of service in the
Town. Thereafter, these rates shall be changed when appropriate, in
accordance with the provisions of this section:
Residential or commercial single subscriber service:
(a) Initial hookup.
(b) Monthly rate: first outlet and each additional outlet.
(1)
A.
§ 66-8 BUILDING CODE § 66-10
62:79
(c) Additional installation after initial installation.
(d) Relocation of existing outlets.
(e) Reconnection after discontinuance of service.
(f) Additional services.
Residential or commercial multiple units, where billing is to single
person, partnership, corporation or entity.
(a) All type service listed under Subsection A(1) above.
(2)
Residential or commercial multiple units, where billing is to
individual subscribers.
(a) All types service listed under Subsection A(1) above.
(3)
Advance charges. The franchisee shall be permitted to require advance
payment for installation fees and for one month's advance service
fee. The franchisee shall require no other deposit, advance payment
or penalty from any subscriber or potential subscriber without prior
approval of the Town agency.
B.
Rate change procedures and requests for rate increases.
The Town shall have the authority to review the following rates,
fees and charges:
Rates for the provision of basic service to subscribers, whether
residential or commercial.
(a)
Rates for the connection, installation and reinstatement
(including converters) of basic service, whether residential or
commercial.
(b)
Rates for installation, connection and reinstatement of basic
service where unusual circumstances exist such as remote
or inaccessible subscriber locations or subscriber-requested
underground service drops.
(c)
(d) Any other rates, as may be permitted under FCC rules.
(1)
The Company may petition the Town for a change in rates by
filing, in quadruplicate, a proposed rate schedule with the which
petition shall include the justification(s) for the proposed schedule.
Said petition shall be filed at least 90 days prior to the requested
implementation date of the rate change. One copy of the petition
shall be available for public inspection at a convenient public place
during normal business hours.
(2)
Within 60 days of the filing of the petition for rate change, the Town
may hold an appropriate public hearing to consider the proposed
rate change, at which hearing all persons desiring to be heard,
(3)
C.
§ 66-10 SYKESVILLE CODE § 66-10
62:80
including the company, shall be heard on any matter, including but
not limited to the performance of the company, its services, and the
proposed new rates.
If within 60 days of the filing of the petition for rate change, a
request for a public hearing is made by petition signed by no less
than 5% of the subscribers in a given service area, the Town shall
schedule a public hearing to be held within 60 days of the filing of
the request for hearing.
(4)
Upon notice of any public hearing as provided in Subsection C(3)
and (4) above, the company shall notify its subscribers of the time,
place and subject matter of the public hearing by announcement
on at least two local origination channels of its system between
the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m., for at least five consecutive
days prior to the hearing. In addition, notice of any public hearing
shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation at least
once, but may be published two or more times, provided that one
publication occurs not less than seven days nor more than 14 days
before the public hearing. The company shall be responsible for
publication and associated costs.
(5)
Within 60 days after said hearing, the Town shall render a written
decision on the company's petition, either accepting, rejecting,
modifying or deferring the same and reciting the basis for its
decision.
The Town shall consider the following factors in approving or
disapproving the petition:
The ability of the company to render system services and
to derive a reasonable profit therefrom under the existing
rate schedule and under the proposed rate schedule;
[1]
[2] The revenues and profits derived from system services;
[3] The efficiency of the company;
[4] The quality of the service offered by the company;
[5] The original cost of the system less depreciation;
A fair rate of return with respect to the cost of borrowing
and the rates of return on investments having similar risks
to that of cable television;
[6]
The extent to which the company has adhered to the terms
of this agreement; and
[7]
[8] Fairness to Town residents, subscribers and users.
(a)
The Town shall not consider any valuation based upon the
franchise granted or the company's good will, and these items
(b)
(6)
§ 66-10 BUILDING CODE § 66-10
62:81
of value shall neither be amortized as an expense nor shall a
return be paid on them.
The decision of the Town must be voted upon by each member of
the Town Council within this sixty-day period.
(7)
If no final decision on the company's petition has been rendered by
the members of the Town Council within 180 days of the request,
the company's petition will be deemed approved. However, no rate
change may take effect if any member of the Town Council has
specifically disapproved the proposed rate change.
(8)
Financial reports and accounting records.
The company's petition for a rate increase shall include, but
not be limited to, the following financial reports, which shall
reflect only the operations of its CATV system for this Town:
[1] Balance sheet.
[2] Income statement.
[3] Cash flow statement.
[4] Statement of sources and applications of funds.
Detailed supporting schedules of expenses, income, assets
and other items as may be required.
[5]
Statement of current and projected subscribers and
penetration.
[6]
(a)
The company's accounting records applicable to the CATV
system shall be available for inspection by the Town at all
reasonable times. The Commission shall have access to records
of financial transactions for the purpose of verifying burden
rates or other indirect costs prorated to the CATV operation.
The documents listed shall include sufficient detail and/or
footnotes as may be necessary to provide the Town with the
information needed to make accurate determinations as to the
financial condition of the system. All financial statements shall
be certified as accurate by an officer of the company.
(b)
(9)
Alternate procedure for rate changes and requests for rate
increases. In lieu of or in addition to procedures set forth above,
the Town of Sykesville may agree in any franchise agreement for
other and different procedures and rate changes and requests for
rate increases including the fixing thereof by any commission now
or hereafter established for this purpose in accordance with the
franchise agreement. [Added 3-12-1984 by Ord. No. 135]
(10)
D. Refunds to subscribers.
§ 66-10 SYKESVILLE CODE § 66-10
62:82
§ 66-11. Franchise fees.
If, during the term of the franchise, the franchisee receives refunds
or any payments made for television or radio signals, it shall, within
a reasonable time, notify the Town agency and suggest a plan for
the flow-through of the refunds to its subscribers.
(1)
If any subscriber terminates service within one year of connection
because of the franchisee's failure to render service to such
subscriber of a type and quality, and in the manner provided for
herein, or because the franchisee ceases to operate the system
authorized herein for any reason except expiration of the franchise,
the franchisee shall refund to such subscriber the initial connection
charges. In cases where customer complaints are unsatisfied by the
franchisee's responses to legitimate complaints of service failures,
poor service, inferior audio or video signals, the Town agency shall
have the power to:
Require the franchisee to adjust billing charges for service
deficiencies in whole or in part, based upon the Town agency's
evaluation of the deficiencies and the equities involved or,
(a)
(b) Require the franchisee to make reasonable refunds.
(2)
Annual fee. During the term of any franchise granted pursuant to this
chapter, the franchisee shall pay the Town of Sykesville for the use of its
streets and public ways and other facilities, as well as the maintenance,
improvements, and supervision thereof, an annual franchise fee as
specified in the franchise agreement. [Amended 5-8-2000 by Ord.
No. 218]
A.
Method of computation. Payments due under the terms of the franchise
shall be computed quarterly and paid within 30 days of the end of
each quarter, that is, within 30 days after December 31, March 31,
June 30 and September 30, respectively. The Town agency shall he
furnished with a statement with each payment, certified as correct by
the franchisee, and an annual statement for the entire year, prepared
by a certified public accountant. All statements shall reflect the total
amount of gross subscriber revenues. Statements accompanying
payments of the franchise fee shall set forth a detailed computation
of the payment. The Town agency reserves the right to reasonable
inspection of the books, records, maps, plans and other material of the
franchisee.
B.
Right of recomputation. No acceptance of any payment shall be
construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claims the
Town may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise
fee under the franchise agreement or for the performance of any other
obligation hereunder.
C.
§ 66-10 BUILDING CODE § 66-11
62:83
§ 66-12. Functions of Town agency.
Until such time as the Council establishes a separate Town agency, the
Council itself shall have the powers of the Town agency. The Town agency,
in addition to any functions assigned to it elsewhere in this chapter, may
have the following functions:
§ 66-13. Citizen advisory committees.
Citizen advisory committees may be established as the need arises.
§ 66-14. Captions; recourse; arbitration; costs.
Failure to make required payment. Failure to pay any fees required by
this section shall be considered a material violation of the franchise in
accordance with the foregoing provisions of this chapter, and shall, at
the option of the Council, result in suspension or termination of the
franchise granted, and reinstatement thereof may, at the option of the
Council, be had upon payment of the delinquent fee or fees, plus any
interest and/or penalties as may be required by the Council.
D.
Advise the Council on matters which might constitute grounds for
revocation of a franchise or other enforcement action in accordance
with this specification.
A.
Resolve disagreements among the franchisee, subscribers and public
and private users of a system; such decision of the Town agency shall be
appealable to the Council in the event the Council does not designate
itself as the Town agency.
B.
Advise the Council on the regulation of rates in accordance with this
chapter.
C.
Coordinate the franchisee's services for best public use of facilities and
channels. of the system.
D.
Determine general policy relating to the service provided subscribers
and the operation and use of public channels, with a view to maximizing
the diversity of programs and services to subscribers. The use of public
charnels shall be allocated on a first-come-first-served basis, subject to
limitations on monopolization of system time or prime times.
E.
Encourage use of public channels among the widest range of
institutions, groups and individuals. This endeavor shall be conducted
with a view toward establishing different categories of uses.
F.
Cooperate with other systems and coordinate interconnection of
systems.
G.
Audit all franchisee records required by this chapter and require the
preparation and filing of information additional to that required herein.
H.
§ 66-11 SYKESVILLE CODE § 66-14
62:84
§ 66-15. Violations and penalties for tapping.11
Tapping shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person found guilty of tapping
is subject to punishment under the provisions of the Courts and Judicial
Proceedings Article, § 10-402 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, when the
act of tapping would be a violation of that Article. When the tapping does
not constitute a violation of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article,
§ 10-401 et seq., any person who is found guilty of tapping shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $1,000 per occurrence, or by imprisonment for
not more than one year, or both.
Chapter 71
COUNTY LEGISLATION
§ 71-1. General exemption from county legislation.
The Town of Sykesville shall be generally exempt from all Carroll County
legislation which involves matters over which the Town has been granted
authority pursuant to Article 23A of the Annotated Code of Maryland. This
exemption shall extend to all legislation in existence or such legislation
as may be passed from time to time by the County Commissioners of
Carroll County, provided that this exemption shall not apply to any items
enumerated in § 71-2 hereunder.
Captions. The captions to sections are inserted solely for information
and shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of the chapter.
A.
Recourse. The franchisee shall have no recourse whatsoever against
the Council or Town or its officers, officials, boards, commissions,
agents or employees for any loss, cost, expense or damage arising out
of any provisions or requirements of this franchise or because of its
enforcement except as may be provided herein.
B.
Arbitration. In the event the Council and franchisee are unable to agree
as to franchise amendments or any other matter that may be made
subject to arbitration by this chapter, then each party shall designate
an arbitrator, and these two arbitrators shall in turn select a third
arbitrator. The three arbitrators, by majority vote, made subject to
arbitration by this chapter. If this method fails or for any reason cannot
be followed, then arbitration shall be conducted in accordance with
§ 3-201 et seq., Courts and Judicial Proceedings, of the Annotated Code
of Maryland.
C.
Costs. Except where otherwise expressly stated herein, all costs
incurred by a franchisee in connection inch any provision of this
chapter shall be borne by the franchisee.
D.
11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 66-14 COUNTY LEGISLATION § 71-2
71:85
§ 71-2. Enforceable county legislation.
The following Carroll County legislation shall be exempt from the provisions
of § 71-1 above:
Chapter 75
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Loitering — See Ch. 105.
§ 75-1. Definitions.
In this chapter, the following definitions apply:
ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately owned place of business carried on for
a profit or any place of amusement or entertainment to which the public is
invited.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
OPERATOR — Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation
operating, managing or conducting any establishment; and whenever used
in any clause prescribing a penalty the term "operator" as applied to
associations or partnerships shall include the members or partners thereof
and, as applied to corporations, shall include the officers thereof.
PARENT — Any natural parent of a minor, a parent by legal adoption, a
guardian, or any person 21 years of age or over, responsible for the care
and custody of a minor.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any sidewalk, street, highway, road, lane, alley, parking
lot, park, playground, vacant lot not privately owned, any public building
or any other place to which the public has access and a right to resort for
business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose.
REMAIN — To loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon.
§ 75-2. Unlawful conduct of minors; exemptions.
The Carroll County Building Code (Chapter 97 of the Code of Public
Local Laws and Ordinances).
A.
The Carroll County Animal Control Ordinance (Chapter 81 of the Code
of Public Local Laws and Ordinances).
B.
The Carroll County Minimum Livability Code (Chapter 141 of the Code
of Public Local Laws and Ordinances).
C.
No minor shall remain in or upon any public place or any establishment
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. official Town time.
A.
§ 71-2 SYKESVILLE CODE § 75-2
71:86
§ 75-3. Parental responsibility.
No parent shall knowingly permit any minor not exempted under § 75-2B to
remain in or upon any public place or any establishment during the curfew
hours as specified in § 75-2A.
§ 75-4. Responsibility of owners or operators of establishments.
No owner or operator of an establishment or his or her agents or employees
shall knowingly permit any minor to remain upon the premises of said
establishment between the curfew hours as specified in § 75-2A, unless the
minor is exempted under § 75-2B.
§ 75-5. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to any minor accompanied
by a parent, relative at least 21 years of age or other person at least
the age of 21 years or to a minor upon an errand directed by such
minor's parent, or to a minor attending a cultural, scholastic, athletic,
or recreational activity supervised by a bona fide organization,
including going directly to and from such a cultural, scholastic, athletic,
or recreational activity and the minor's place of residence, or to any
minor who is employed in gainful, lawful employment, including going
directly to and from such gainful, lawful employment during the curfew
hours set forth in § 75-2A.
B.
Violations.
If a law enforcement officer reasonably believes that a minor is in a
public place or on the premises of an establishment in violation of
§ 75-2A, the officer shall:
(a) Notify the minor that the minor is in violation of § 75-2A;
Require the minor to tell the officer the minor's name, address,
telephone number, and where to contact the minor's parent or
guardian;
(b)
Issue the minor a written warning that the minor is in violation
of the juvenile curfew ordinance if the violation constitutes a
first offense; and
(c)
(d) Order the minor to promptly go home.
(1)
The chief of the local law enforcement agency shall send written
notice of the violation of § 75-2A to the minor's parent or guardian.
(2)
A.
Actions by local law enforcement agency. The local law enforcement
agency may take the minor:
(1) To the minor's home, if appropriate; or
B.
§ 75-2 COUNTY LEGISLATION § 75-5
71:87
Into custody and transport the minor to a local law enforcement
station or designated curfew center when:
The minor has received one previous written warning for a
violation of the juvenile curfew ordinance;
(a)
The local law enforcement officer has reasonable grounds to
believe that the minor has committed a delinquent act; or
(b)
Taking the minor into custody is authorized under § 3-8A-14 of
the Courts Article of the Maryland Annotated Code.
(c)
(2)
Custody. When a minor is taken into custody for a violation of § 75-2A,
the local law enforcement officer shall:
Immediately notify the parent or guardian of the minor to come to
the local law enforcement station to take custody of the minor; and
(1)
Determine whether, consistent with constitutional safeguards, the
minor or the parent or guardian, or both, is in violation of the
juvenile curfew ordinance.
(2)
C.
Release from custody.
When a parent or guardian arrives at the local law enforcement
station as a result of § 75-5C, and the appropriate information is
recorded, the minor shall be released to the custody of the parent
or guardian.
(1)
If the parent or guardian cannot be located or fails to take charge
of the minor, then the minor shall be released to the local
Department of Social Services, the Department of Juvenile
Services, or to another adult who will, on behalf of the parent or
guardian, assume the responsibility of caring for the minor pending
the availability or arrival of the parent or guardian.
(2)
D.
Violations and penalties. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall constitute a municipal infraction. Municipal infractions may be
issued to a minor; parent or guardian of a minor; or an owner, operator,
or employee of an establishment. The penalties for such municipal
infractions shall be as follows:
First offense: notice of violation without fine. Notice is presumed
to be received if it is deposited in a depository for mailing United
States mail, properly addressed and with the proper first-class
postage paid. Mailings may be shown by the records of the sending
agency made in the regular course of its business.
(1)
Second offense: A second violation shall constitute a Class D
municipal infraction as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal
Infractions.
(2)
E.
§ 75-5 SYKESVILLE CODE § 75-5
71:88
Chapter 78
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT OF STORM SEWER
SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain management — See Ch. 89.
Grading and sediment control — See Ch. 91.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 134.
Water and sewer — See Ch. 174.
Water resource management — See Ch. 176.
§ 78-1. Purposes; objectives.
§ 78-2. Definitions.
In this chapter, the following terms have the meanings indicated. Any term
not defined in this chapter shall have the meaning as defined in any chapter
of the Code or in the Natural Resource Article, § 8-1201 et seq., Annotated
Code of Maryland.12 Any term not defined in the Code in any chapter shall
have its generally accepted meaning.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPS — Conservation practices or
systems of practices and management measures that minimize adverse
impacts to the environment, including surface water, groundwater flow
and circulation patterns, and to the chemical, physical, and biological
characteristics, BMPs include schedules of activities, prohibitions of
Third and subsequent offenses: A third and all subsequent
violations shall constitute a Class E municipal infraction as
provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal Infractions.
(3)
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and
general welfare of the residents of the Town through the regulation of
nonstormwater discharges to the storm drainage system. This chapter
establishes methods for controlling the introduction of illicit discharges
or pollutants into the Town's separate storm sewer system ("Town
system") in order to comply with requirements of the NPDES permit
process.
A.
The objectives of this chapter include:
Regulation of the contribution of pollutants of the Town system by
stormwater discharges by any user; and
(1)
Prohibition of illicit connections and discharges to the Town
system.
(2)
B.
12.Editor's Note: See now § 5-901 et seq. of the Natural Resources Article of the Annotated
Code of Maryland.
§ 75-5 ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT OF STORM § 78-2
78:89
practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or
indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance
systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and
practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal,
or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments.
COMAR — Code of Maryland Regulations.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — An activity subject to NPDES construction
permits, including a construction project resulting in land disturbance of
one acre or more, clearing, grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
DRAINAGE BASIN — An area drained by an ordered stream system and
classified by the highest order stream that forms its discharge.
ENHANCEMENT — An action performed to provide additional protection to
create or improve the function of an ecosystem.
FACILITY — Any structure or complex of structures where runoff is
discharged into a Town system.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste,
or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — A surface or subsurface drain or conveyance
which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system, including
but not limited to:
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Any discharge to any Town system that is not
composed entirely of stormwater runoff except discharges resulting from
common residential stormwater runoff, fire-fighting activities or from any
legally permitted discharge. The direct discharge of any sanitary discharge,
including domestic sewage or other pollutants into any Town system, will be
considered an illicit discharge.
A conveyance which allows a nonstormwater discharge, including
sewage, process wastewater, and wash water, to enter the storm drain
system or a connection to the storm drain system from an indoor
drain or sink, regardless of whether the drain or connection had been
previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized
enforcement agency; or
A.
A drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land
use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in
plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized
enforcement agency.
B.
§ 78-2 SYKESVILLE CODE § 78-2
78:90
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — An activity subject to NPDES industrial permits
as defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14).
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
NPDES STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the
Environmental Protection Agency or the state that authorized the discharge
of pollutants to waters of the United States.
OUTFALL — The point where a storm sewer system discharges.
PERSON — Includes the federal government, the state, any county,
municipal corporation, or other political subdivision of the state, or any
of their units, or an individual, receiver, trustee, guardian, executor,
administrator, fiduciary, or representative of any kind, or any partnership,
firm, association, public or private corporation, or any other entity.
POLLUTANT —
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — The equivalent of a municipal
separate storm sewer system ("municipal system") as defined in 40 CFR
122.26. A conveyance or system of conveyance, including but not limited
to drainage systems, public streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches,
swales, constructed channels, storm drains, associated underground piping
and any on-site stormwater management facilities that are:
A contaminant that may result in any alteration of the physical,
chemical, or biological properties of groundwater or surface water,
including any change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor
of the receiving waters or discharge or deposit of any organic matter,
harmful organism, or liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other
substance into groundwater or surface water that may render the
waters harmful, or detrimental to the public health or welfare, to any
domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other
legitimate beneficial use of the water, to any livestock, wild animals,
birds, fish or other aquatic species that may use the water; or
A.
Any substance that may cause or contribute to pollution, including, but
not limited to, paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive
fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse,
rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects,
ordnances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to
pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous
substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens;
dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues
that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or
offensive matters of any kind.
B.
Designed or used for the collection and conveyance of stormwater
runoff (either immediate or delayed) from any form of precipitation
event;
A.
B. Not any part of a combined sewer system; and
§ 78-2 ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT OF STORM § 78-2
78:91
SIGNIFICANT MATERIALS — Includes, but is not limited to, raw materials,
petroleum derivative products; any controlled hazardous substances
pursuant to COMAR 26.13; industrial waste pursuant to COMAR
26.08.01.01; infectious waste pursuant to COMAR 26.04.07.02; materials
such as solvents or detergents; finished materials such as metallic products;
raw materials used in food processing or production; fertilizers; pesticides;
waste products such as ashes, slag and sludge or any other material that
could result in pollution of waters of the state as a constituent in stormwater
discharge.
STATE — The State of Maryland.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Any facilities by which stormwater is
collected or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage
systems, streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping
facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and man-made or altered
drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
STORMWATER — Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely
of water resulting from any form of natural precipitation.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed, the use of which requires fixed
location on the ground or which is attached to something having fixed
location.
TOWN — The Town of Sykesville, Maryland.
TOWN SEPARATE STORM SEWER or TOWN SYSTEM — A separate storm
sewer system that is owned or maintained by the Town and designed to
convey stormwater runoff to a point of discharge into waters of the state.
WASTEWATER — Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
stormwater, discharged from a facility.
WATERCOURSE — Any natural or artificial stream, river, creek, ditch,
channel, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash, in
and including any adjacent area that is subject to inundation from overflow
or floodwaters and their associated wetlands.
§ 78-3. Discharges.
Not part of or discharging into any publicly owned treatment works
(POTW) as defined in 40 CFR 122.2.
C.
No new connection to a Town system may be effected without prior
approval of the Town.
A.
No person may:
Discharge any significant materials or pollutant into any
component of any Town system that would constitute an illicit
discharge;
(1)
(2) Continue any illicit discharge to any Town system;
B.
§ 78-2 SYKESVILLE CODE § 78-3
78:92
§ 78-4. Exemptions.
The following discharges are exempt from the prohibitions established by
this chapter:
Create any condition that may result in an illicit discharge or
pollution of stormwater conveyed and discharged from any outfall
of those systems;
(3)
Cause or contribute to any type of illicit discharge into a Town
system or watercourse that may result in a potential for adverse
impact;
(4)
Alter or create an obstruction to flow of a Town system or
watercourse that reduces its capacity or ability to provide its
intended design capacity or natural function; or
(5)
Create a new connection or maintain a connection that may
introduce any discharge other than stormwater into a Town system
or watercourse.
(6)
The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
C.
A. Water line flushing or other potable water sources;
B. Landscape irrigation or lawn watering;
C. Permitted diverted stream flows;
D. Rising groundwater;
E. Groundwater infiltration to storm drains;
F. Uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
G. Uncontaminated discharge from foundation drains or pumps;
H. Air conditioning condensation;
I. Springs;
J. Noncommercial washing of vehicles;
K. Natural riparian habitat or wetland flows;
L. Fire-fighting activities;
M. Any water source not containing pollutants;
Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement agency
as being necessary to protect public health and safety;
N.
Dye testing with prior verbal notification to the authorized enforcement
agency; and
O.
§ 78-3 ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT OF STORM § 78-4
78:93
§ 78-5. Suspensions, terminations and violations.
§ 78-6. Compliance.
A person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater
discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of the permit. Proof of
compliance with the permit shall be submitted in a form acceptable to the
Town prior to allowing any discharge to the Town system.
§ 78-7. Inspections.
This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges,
including construction activity or any other discharge to any Town system.
Any nonstormwater discharge legally permitted under a NPDES permit
issued by the Maryland Department of the Environment, provided that
the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the issued
permit and with all other applicable laws and regulations and with prior
written approval of discharge to the Town system.
P.
The Town may, without prior notice, suspend any approved discharge
access to a Town system to a person, when suspension is necessary to
stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present
imminent and substantial danger to the environment, to public health
or welfare, or to any system, watercourse, or designated sensitive
resource. If a person fails to comply with a suspension order, the Town
may take steps to prevent or minimize damage to any storm sewer
system, watercourse, or sensitive resource or to minimize an identified
danger or hazard to the general health and welfare.
A.
A person discharging to a Town system or watercourse in violation of
this chapter may have the system access terminated if such termination
would abate, reduce, or eliminate an illicit discharge. The Town shall
notify a violator in writing of the proposed termination of system
access. The violator may petition the Town for reconsideration.
Reinstatement of a discharge, connection, or access which has been
terminated pursuant to this section without the Town's approval
constitutes a violation of this chapter.
B.
A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute
a Class E municipal infraction as provided in Chapter 1, Article I,
Municipal Infractions. Each time a violation occurs shall constitute a
separate offense and a Class E municipal infraction.
C.
The Town may, upon notification, enter and inspect the source of any
discharge, including those under an individual or general NPDES
permit, that are subject to this chapter when necessary to determine
compliance. Failure to cooperate with an inspection constitutes a
violation of this chapter.
A.
§ 78-4 SYKESVILLE CODE § 78-7
78:94
§ 78-8. Control of illicit discharges.
§ 78-9. Watercourse protection.
§ 78-10. Notification of spills or accidental discharges.
To determine compliance, the Town may inspect, sample, examine and
investigate the source of any discharge to a Town system. In support
of any investigation, the Town may review and copy any records
maintained pursuant to the conditions of any discharge permit or this
chapter.
B.
The Town may require the discharger to install monitoring equipment
if the nature of the discharge warrants. The facility's sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained in a safe and proper
operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices
used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to
ensure accuracy.
C.
The owner of any property shall prevent accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or pollutants into Town system or watercourses
through the use of structural and nonstructural BMPs.
A.
Any person who is the source of an illicit discharge may be required
to implement, at the person's expense, additional structural and
nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to
any Town system. Compliance with the terms and conditions of a valid
NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater constitutes
compliance with this section.
B.
The owner of property through which a watercourse passes shall keep
and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property generally
free of man-made obstructions or sources of pollutants.
A.
The owner shall maintain existing privately owned structures within
or adjacent to a watercourse, so that the structures will not become a
hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.
B.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, any person responsible
for a site who has information of an illicit discharge or discharge of
pollutants into stormwater, the storm sewer system, or watercourse
shall contain and clean up the release.
A.
Time.
For a release of hazardous materials, the person shall immediately
notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via
emergency dispatch services.
(1)
For a release of nonhazardous materials, the person shall notify the
Town in person or by telephone or facsimile no later than the next
business day.
(2)
B.
§ 78-7 ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT OF STORM § 78-10
78:95
§ 78-11. Guaranty.
The Town may require a surety, cash bond, irrevocable letter of credit,
or other means of security acceptable to the Town as a guaranty under
certain requirements of this chapter. In cases when a guaranty is required,
the amount required shall be no less than the total estimated cost of the
action required. The guaranty shall include forfeiture provisions for failure
to complete the required activity within the time specified. The guaranty
may not be released prior to final inspection which verifies compliance
with this chapter. No partial releases may be made. In the event that the
guarantor fails to perform or complete the required activity, the Town may
use the guaranty to complete the work.
§ 78-12. Enforcement.
§ 78-13. Appeals.
Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written
notification addressed and mailed to the Town within three
business days of the notice by telephone.
(3)
If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial
or industrial use, the owner or operator shall retain an on-site written
record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence.
C.
Whenever the Town finds that a person has violated this chapter, the
Town shall issue a notice of violation.
A.
If abatement of a violation or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration shall be completed. The notice shall state
that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the
established deadline, the work will be contracted for completion by the
Town and the costs shall be charged to the violator.
B.
If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this
chapter, the Town may petition for a preliminary or permanent
injunction restraining the person from activities which would create
further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or
remediation of the violation.
C.
Any person aggrieved by issuance of a written notice of violation of this
chapter may appeal the action to the Town Council, which shall hold a
hearing on the appeal.
A.
The appeal shall:
Be filed in writing within 30 days of the date of written transmittal
of the final decision or determination of the applicant, or notice of
violation; and
(1)
(2) State clearly the grounds on which the appeal is based.
B.
§ 78-10 SYKESVILLE CODE § 78-13
78:96
Chapter 80
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 180.
Appeal fees.
The appellant shall pay a nonrefundable filing fee as determined by
the Town.
(1)
The appellant shall pay all costs of the appeal as assessed by the
Town Council.
(2)
C.
§ 78-13 ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT OF STORM § 78-13
78:97

ARTICLE I
Development Impact Fees
[Adopted 11-9-1987 by Ord. No. 152]
§ 80-1. Definitions.
In this article, the following words have the meanings indicated.
DEVELOPMENT — Any activity, other than normal agricultural, activity,
which materially affects the existing condition or use of any land or
structure so as to result in the construction, establishment or placement of
a dwelling unit or units or an additional dwelling unit or units.
DWELLING UNIT — A portion or all of a building or structure, arranged,
designed or used for the residential living facilities of a single family, but not
including any tent, cabin, motel or hotel room, recreational vehicle, nursing
home for the elderly or other similar institutions for human care. One or
more dwelling units may comprise a single structure, such as a duplex or
apartment building.
PERSON — Includes firm, association, organization, partnership, trust,
company, corporation and an individual. Does not include a county, State
of Maryland or federal governmental entity or a religious institution or
nonprofit health facility.
TOWN ZONING CERTIFICATE — A written statement issued by appropriate
office of the Town of Sykesville authorizing buildings and structures in
accordance with the applicable Building and Zoning Code. 13
§ 80-2. Payment of development impact fees.
Before the issuance of a Town zoning certificate for a building or
structure or an addition to a building or structure which contains one
or more dwelling units, a development impact fee shall be paid to
the Town of Sykesville, in accordance with the schedule set forth in
Subsection B.
A.
Development impact fees shall be due in accordance with the following
schedule: for each new or additional dwelling unit: $1,668. [Amended
by 1-11-1993 by Ord. No. 198; 12-12-1994 by Ord. No. 202;
11-10-2003 by Ord. No. 239; 2-27-2012 by Ord. No. 279]
B.
The fee schedule set forth above in Subsection B may be modified from
time to time by the Town of Sykesville so as to apportion a fair share of
the cost of the necessary infrastructure improvements, capital projects,
police protection, fire protection and governmental administration, etc.,
to new developments within the Town of Sykesville. [Amended by
1-11-1993 by Ord. No. 198; 12-12-1994 by Ord. No. 202;
11-10-2003 by Ord. No. 239]
C.
13.Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Zoning.
§ 80-1 ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT OF STORM § 80-2
78:99
§ 80-3. Lien on property.
The development impact fees provided for in this article are a lien against
the real property secured and shall be levied, collected and enforced in the
same manner as Town of Sykesville real property taxes, and shall have the
same priority and bear the same rate of interest and penalties as the Town
of Sykesville real property taxes, for lien purposes.
§ 80-4. Creation of development impact fee account. [Amended
6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 268]
The Town of Sykesville shall establish a special trust account on its general
fund books for the development impact fee levied in accordance with this
article. A separate bank account is not required. Interest shall be credited to
the development impact fee account monthly, based on the average balance
in the account and the average percent of interest realized by the Town of
Sykesville during that month. The monies from levies and interest credited
to the development impact fee account may be obligated only by the normal
Town of Sykesville budget procedure. It shall be the duty of the Treasurer of
Sykesville to account for such funds and establish the necessary audits and
other records to insure that all collections of development impact fees are in
accordance with the issuance of Town zoning permits as set forth in § 80-2
hereof. Should, at any time, such fund be determined to have a balance in
excess of needs in any five-year period, the Town of Sykesville shall consider
any amendment lowering or eliminating the development impact fee making
up such fund. Should the need for this assessment be eliminated due to
an action of the part of the state or federal governments or by the County
Commissioners of Carroll County, the balance in the trust account along
with any unexpended appropriations residing in any fund shall revert to the
unappropriated surplus of the Town of Sykesville.
§ 80-5. Use of development impact fee funds. [Amended 1-11-1993
by Ord. No. 198]
The Town of Sykesville shall have the sole power to appropriate monies from
the development impact fee account created in accordance with § 80-4 of
this article.
Development impact fees shall not be collected for issuance of a Town
zoning permit to replace the same existing dwelling units; however,
development impact fees shall be collected for additional or increased
dwelling units on a parcel of land.
D.
All funds shall be used for the following enumerated purposes:
(1) Police protection.
(2) Fire protection.
(3) General Town government administration.
(4) Road construction.
A.
§ 80-2 SYKESVILLE CODE § 80-5
78:100
(5) Acquisition of roads and rights-of-way.
(6) Office equipment.
(7) Capital projects approved and listed in the Town's capital program.
All funds shall be used so as to benefit reasonably the existing and
future Town residents resulting from new development in the Town of
Sykesville for which the development impact fees are paid.
B.
§ 80-5 ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT OF STORM § 80-5
78:101

ARTICLE II
Parking Impact Fees
[Adopted 12-11-2000 by Ord. No. 222]
§ 80-6. Definitions.
In this article, the following words have the meanings indicated:
DEVELOPMENT — Any activity which materially affects the existing
condition or use of any land or structure so as to increase in size or change
in use the land or structure, or any portion thereof.
DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT — The zoning district established in
Chapter 180, Zoning, § 180-3C, as shown on the Downtown Business
District Map.
PARKING — Parking facilities required to be located off-street pursuant
to Chapter 180, Zoning, § 180-88A, Off-street parking spaces, as amended
from time to time.
PARKING IMPACT FEE — The fee in lieu of on-site parking established in
Chapter 180, Zoning, § 180-88A(11), as amended from time to time.
PERSON — Includes firm, association, organization, partnership, trust,
company, corporation and an individual.
TOWN ZONING CERTIFICATE — A written statement issued by appropriate
office of the Town of Sykesville authorizing buildings and structures in
accordance with the applicable Building and Zoning Code.
ZONING CODE — Town of Sykesville Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 180), as
amended from time to time.
§ 80-7. Payment of parking impact fees.
Before the issuance of a Town zoning certificate for a building or
structure located within the Downtown Business District which
requires off-street parking not provided for in the plans for the
development, a parking impact fee shall be paid to the Town of
Sykesville, in accordance with the schedule set forth in Subsection B.
A.
Parking impact fees shall be due in accordance with the following
structure: for each parking space required in accordance with the
Zoning Code (§ 180-88A) which is not provided for in the plan for the
development of the parcel of land: $1,000.
B.
The fee schedule set forth above in Subsection B may be modified from
time to time by the Town of Sykesville so as to apportion a fair share
of the cost of the necessary infrastructure improvements and capital
projects to new Developments within the Downtown Business District.
C.
Parking impact fees shall not be collected for issuance of a Town zoning
certificate to replace or renovate existing buildings with no change in
interior size or use; however, parking impact fees shall be collected
D.
§ 80-6 ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT OF STORM § 80-7
78:103
§ 80-8. Lien on property.
The parking impact fees provided for in this article are a lien against the
real property secured and shall be levied, collected and enforced in the
same manner as Town of Sykesville real property taxes, and shall have the
same priority and bear the same rate of interest and penalties as the Town
of Sykesville real property taxes, for lien purposes.
§ 80-9. Creation of parking impact fee account. [Amended
6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 268]
The Town of Sykesville shall establish a special trust account on its general
fund books for the parking impact fees levied in accordance with this
article. A separate bank account is not required. Interest shall be credited
for the increase in required parking for a parcel of land caused by the
increase in building size, or a change in use, whichever results in the
greater increase in required parking.
Notwithstanding Subsection B of this section, in the event an owner
of a property within the Downtown Business District donates a portion
of that property (the "donated parcel") to the Town in fee simple for
use as a municipal parking lot within the Downtown Business District,
at the time of application by such owner of the parcel retained by
owner after such donation (the "retained parcel"), or by any subsequent
owner of the retained parcel, to the Town for issuance of a Town
zoning certificate for either (1) replacement or renovation of an existing
building upon the retained parcel with an increase in interior building
size, or (2) a change in use upon the retained parcel, parking impact
fees shall be collected on the lesser of (a) the increase in required
parking caused by the increase in interior building size or change in
use, or (b) the difference, if any, between the required parking for the
retained parcel based on the increased interior building size or change
in use and the number obtained by dividing 60% of the number of
square feet of the donated parcel by 180 square feet. In the event
the retained parcel is subsequently subdivided, the difference under
(2)(b) above shall be prorated among the resulting subdivided parcels
based on the percentage of square feet in each parcel and the resulting
prorations shall be reflected on the subdivision plat for the purpose of
public notice to subsequent landowners. [Added 2-28-2005 by Ord.
No. 258]
E.
In the event an owner of a property within the Downtown Business
District donates a portion of a property to the Town in fee simple for
use as a municipal parking lot within the Downtown Business District
and retains and reserves any rights to dedicated parking spaces within
the donated property at the time of donation in the form of an easement
or otherwise, any credit received for such donation pursuant to § 80-7E
above shall be reduced by an amount equal to the number of parking
spaces so retained or reserved. [Added 11-14-2005 by Ord. No. 264]
F.
§ 80-7 SYKESVILLE CODE § 80-9
78:104
to the parking impact fee account monthly, based on the average balance
in the account and the average percent of interest realized by the Town of
Sykesville during that month. The monies from levies and interest credited
to the parking impact fee account may be obligated only by the normal
Town of Sykesville budget procedure. It shall be the duty of the Treasurer
of Sykesville to account for such funds and establish the necessary audits
and other records to insure that all collections of parking impact fees are in
accordance with the issuance of Town zoning permits as set forth in § 80-7
hereof. Should, at any time, such fund be determined to have a balance in
excess of needs in any five-year period, the Town of Sykesville shall consider
any amendment lowering or eliminating the parking impact fee making up
such fund. Should the need for this assessment be eliminated due to an
action of the part of the state or federal governments or by the trust account
along with any unexpended appropriations residing in any fund shall revert
to the unappropriated surplus of the Town of Sykesville.
§ 80-10. Use of parking impact fee funds.
§ 80-11. Amount of parking impact fees. [Added 2-27-2017 by Ord.
No. 299]
The amount of any parking impact fee provided for by this article may be
set by resolution of the Mayor and Town Council.
The Town of Sykesville shall have the sole power to appropriate monies
from the parking impact fee account created in accordance with § 80-9
of this article. All funds shall be used for the following enumerated
parking purposes:
(1) Feasibility studies
(2) Acquisition of land, easements, roads and rights-of-way.
(3) Parking design, engineering and construction.
(4) Office equipment and general Town government administration.
(5) Capital projects approved and listed in the Town's capital program.
A.
All funds shall be used so as to reasonably benefit parking-related
needs in the Downtown Business District for which the parking impact
fees are paid.
B.
§ 80-9 ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT OF STORM § 80-11
78:105
Chapter 84
FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES
§ 84-1. Discharge of firearms prohibited. [Amended 3-12-2001 by
Ord. No. 223a]
It shall be unlawful for any person to use, fire, discharge or activate any
firearms, electrical devices such as stun guns, air rifles, sling shots, fire
crackers, torpedoes, or other explosives, or any other deadly or dangerous
weapons within the corporate limits of Sykesville, except as provided in
§ 84-2 of this chapter.
§ 84-2. Exceptions for discharge of certain explosives.
Use of explosives to clear a lot or building site of rock is permitted, provided
that:
§ 84-3. Carrying concealed weapons.
The devices, firearms, weapons and explosives listed in § 84-1 of this
chapter shall be considered deadly or dangerous weapons, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to carry them concealed on his body.
§ 84-4. Violations and penalties.14
Any person found violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
subject to a fine of not to exceed $1,000.
Such demolition is performed by a contractor duly licensed for the use
of explosives in the State of Maryland;
A.
Such activity is performed in accordance with Maryland law and
contractor's fulfillment of all regulatory requirements of Maryland law,
including, but not limited to, inspection, as necessary, of the site by the
State Fire Marshal;
B.
Satisfaction of the foregoing conditions are properly evidenced to the
Town Manager at least 48 hours prior to commencement of such
activity; and
C.
The time for such activity is reviewed and approved by the Town
Manager and Chief of Police.
D.
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 80-11 SYKESVILLE CODE § 84-4
84:106
Chapter 89
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater management — See Ch. 134.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 145.
Water resource management — See Ch. 176.
Zoning — See Ch. 180.
§ 89-1. Adoption of records by reference.
Those public records entitled "Flood Insurance Study for Carroll County,
Maryland and Incorporated Areas" with an effective date of October 2,
2015, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps with an effective date
of October 2, 2015, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, copies
of which shall be kept on file in the Town office of the Town of Sykesville,
are hereby adopted by reference, as the basis for establishing the special
flood hazard areas for floodplain management in the Town of Sykesville. The
special flood hazard areas documented in the Flood Insurance Study and
Flood Insurance Rate Maps are the minimum area of applicability of the
floodplain management regulations and may be supplemented by studies for
other areas as allowed in the regulations.
§ 89-2. Adoption of County provisions.
That public record designated as the "Floodplain Management Regulations
for Carroll County," known as "Chapter 153, Floodplain Management, of
the Carroll County Code," dated September 3, 2015, and all subsequent
amendments and/or revisions, copies ofwhich shall be kept on file in the
Town office of the Town of Sykesville, is hereby adopted as the legal basis
for implementing floodplain management in the Town of Sykesville.
§ 89-3. Management responsibility.
The Town of Sykesville delegates the responsibility of floodplain
management to Carroll County as provided in an executed resolution dated
September 14, 2015. Per 44 CFR 59.22(b), the Town Manager or his/her
designee is designated as the official responsible for the implementation
of floodplain management for the Town of Sykesville and will serve as the
community point of contact on National Flood Insurance Program issues for
county, state and federal officials.
§ 89-4. Enforcement.
Carroll County shall have the right and authority to fully enforce the
provisions of this chapter within the corporate limits of the Town of
Sykesville.
§ 84-4 FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES § 89-4
84:107
Chapter 90
FOREST CONSERVATION
§ 90-1. Applicability of county regulations.
Chapter 115, Forest Conservation, of the Code of Public Local Laws and
Ordinances of Carroll County, Maryland, as amended from time to time,
shall be the official Forest Conservation Chapter for the Town, and such
chapter is hereby adopted by reference. The official of Carroll County
shall be the inspector and/or enforcement official for the Town for this
purpose. Any other provision of any chapter of the Code of the Town that
is contradictory or inconsistent with Chapter 15 of the Code of Public Local
Laws and Ordinances of Carroll County is hereby repealed and deleted.
Chapter 91
GRADING AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain management — See Ch. 89.
Landscaping — See Ch. 96.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 134.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 140.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 145.
Water resource management — See Ch. 176.
§ 91-1. Applicability of county regulations.
Chapter 121, Grading and Sediment Control, of the Code of Public Local
Laws and Ordinances of Carroll County, Maryland ("Chapter 121"), shall
be the applicable law in the Town for all matters governed by Chapter
121. The Board of Commissioners of Carroll County and its official staff,
representatives and employees shall be responsible for review, inspection,
and enforcement of Chapter 121 within the Town in the same manner and
to the same extent as carried on and conducted in Carroll County outside of
the corporate limits of the Town. Any other provision of any chapter of the
Code of the Town that is contradictory or inconsistent with Chapter 121 is
hereby repealed and deleted.
Chapter 92
HELMET SAFETY
§ 92-1. Title.
This chapter shall hereinafter be referred to as the "Helmet Safety Law."
§ 92-2. Scope.
§ 89-4 SYKESVILLE CODE § 92-2
90:108
§ 92-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BICYCLE — A light vehicle:
HELMET — A protective helmet designed for bicycle, scooter, skates,
skateboard, and/or motorized scooter operators and that is approved by
the American National Standards Institute, or found by the Director of the
Department of Transportation to meet an equivalent standard.
MOTORIZED SCOOTER — A vehicle that:[Amended 5-24-2004 by Ord.
No. 245]
SCOOTER — A two-wheeled vehicle that:
SKATEBOARD — A four-wheeled vehicle comprised of a narrow board with
wheels attached that:
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable throughout the Town
of Sykesville on public rights-of-way and publicly owned facilities under
the jurisdiction of the Town, such as Town parks, linear parkways, etc.
A.
B. No person, regardless of age, shall knowingly violate this chapter.
A. Designed to be propelled only by physical exertion (human power);
Upon which any person may ride, designed to carry one or more
persons; and
B.
Having two wheels, one behind the other, one which is 16 or more
inches in diameter. It shall not include motor-propelled vehicles.
C.
A. Has handlebars;
Is designed to be stood upon or sat upon, if equipped with a seat, by the
operator; and
B.
Is propelled by a motor with a rating of 2.7 braking horsepower or less,
or a capacity of 50 cubic centimeters position displacement or less, if
the motor is an internal combustion engine.
C.
A. Has handlebars;
B. Is designed to be stood upon by the operator; and
C. Is propelled only by physical exertion (human power).
A. Is designed to be stood upon by the operator;
B. Is propelled only by physical exertion (human power); or
C. Is propelled by a motor.
§ 92-2 GRADING AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 92-3
91:109
SKATES — Four-wheeled or multiple-inline-wheeled vehicle that is
propelled only by physical exertion (human power). This definition is
intended to include both roller skates and roller blades.
§ 92-4. Required safety equipment. [Amended 3-26-2012 by Ord.
No. 280]
Any person under the age of 17, while in the Town limits of Sykesville,
operating, riding, or using a bicycle, scooter, skates, skateboard or
motorized scooter on a public roadway, bicycle path, linear parkway, Town
park, or any right-of-way under the jurisdiction and control of the Town
shall wear a protective helmet designed for public safety. Such a helmet
shall meet or exceed the standards set by the American National Standards
Institute or the Director of the Department of Transportation standards.
§ 92-4.1. Compliance with traffic laws. [Amended 5-24-2004 by Ord.
No. 245]
Any person operating a bicycle or a motorized scooter shall comply with all
state, county, and municipal traffic laws.
§ 92-5. Enforcement. [Amended 5-24-2004 by Ord. No. 245]
It shall be the duty of the Sykesville Police Department or any other agency
or Code Enforcement Official designated by the Mayor and Town Council
to enforce the Helmet Safety Law and its provisions. Enforcement may
also include public education, including talks to community groups and
education flyers.
§ 92-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-24-2004 by Ord. No.
245; 9-27-2004 by Ord. No. 247]
A violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a municipal
infraction. The penalties for such municipal infraction shall be as follows:
Chapter 93
First offense: A warning by a written citation shall be issued to any
person found violating this chapter for the first time.
A.
Second offense: A second violation shall constitute a Class A municipal
infraction as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal Infractions.
B.
Third offense: A third violation shall constitute a Class B municipal
infraction as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal Infractions.
C.
Fourth and subsequent offenses: A fourth and all subsequent violations
shall constitute a Class C municipal infraction as provided in Chapter 1,
Article I, Municipal Infractions. In addition, the bicycle, scooter, skates,
skateboard and/or motorized scooter of any such repeat offender may
be impounded until the fine is paid.
D.
§ 92-3 SYKESVILLE CODE § 92-6
91:110
HISTORIC DISTRICTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 180.
§ 93-1. Findings.
The preservation of sites and structures of cultural, historic, architectural,
or archeological significance together with their appurtenances and
environmental settings is a public purpose in this Town. The Mayor and
Council of the Town of Sykesville believe that the public interest and
convenience requires the preservation and protection of certain places and
areas of historic interest, exterior architectural or archeological features
and examples of the types of architecture found in older areas of the Town
of Sykesville.
§ 93-2. Purposes.
The purposes of this chapter shall be:
§ 93-3. Legislative authority.
The Mayor and Town Council of the Town of Sykesville derive authority for
this chapter by virtue of the terms of the Maryland Code, Historic Area
Zoning, Article 66B, §§ 8.01 through 8.17, as amended from time to time.
§ 93-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPURTENANCES and ENVIRONMENTAL SETTINGS — Includes
walkways and driveways (whether paved or not), trees, landscaping,
pastures, croplands, waterways, and rocks.
To safeguard the heritage of the Town of Sykesville by preserving sites,
structures, or districts therein which reflect elements of cultural, social,
economic, political, archeological or architectural history;
A.
To stabilize and improve property values of such sites, structures or
districts;
B.
C. To foster civic beauty;
D. To strengthen the local economy;
To promote the preservation and appreciation of the sites structures,
and districts for the education and welfare of the residents of the Town
of Sykesville and Carroll County.
E.
§ 92-6 GRADING AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 93-4
91:111
DEMOLITION — Includes any willful neglect in maintenance and repair of
a structure, not including any appurtenances and environmental settings,
that does not result from financial inability to maintain and repair the
structure and that threatens to result in any substantial deterioration of the
exterior features of the structure.
DISTRICT — A significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites,
structures, or objects united historically or aesthetically by plan or physical
development.
ROUTINE MAINTENANCE — Work that does not alter the exterior fabric or
features of a site or structure and has no material effect on the historical,
archeological, or architectural significance of the historical site or
structure.
SITE — The location of an event of historic significance or a structure,
whether standing or ruined, which possess historic, archeological, or
cultural significance.
STRUCTURE — A combination of material to form a construction that is
stable; including among other things, buildings, stadiums, reviewing stands,
platforms, stagings, observation towers, radio towers, water tanks and
towers, trestles, bridges, piers, paving, bulkheads, wharves, sheds, coal
bins, shelters, fences and display signs visible or intended to be visible
from a public way. The term also includes natural land formations and
appurtenances and environmental settings. The term shall be construed as
if followed by the words "or part thereof."
§ 93-5. Historic Districts established.
The Town of Sykesville Historic Districts shall consist of two districts. The
first district covers the area as shown on the Downtown Historic District
Map, which is hereby incorporated as part of this chapter (the "Downtown
Historic District"). The second district covers the area as shown on the
Warfield Historic District Map, which is hereby incorporated as part of this
chapter (the "Warfield Historic District") Collectively, they are referred to as
the "Historic Districts."15
§ 93-6. Historic District Commission.
The Mayor and Council of the Town of Sykesville hereby creates a
commission to be called the "Historic District Commission"
(Commission).
A.
The Commission shall have a membership of seven persons, all of
whom possess a demonstrated special interest, specific knowledge, or
professional or academic training in such fields as history, architecture,
architectural history, planning, archeology, anthropology, curation,
conservation, landscape architecture, historic preservation, urban
design or related disciplines and agree to serve on this Commission.
B.
15.Editor's Note: The maps referred to are on file in the Town Manager's office (or in the
office of any staff member who may be designated by the Town Manager).
§ 93-4 SYKESVILLE CODE § 93-6
91:112
§ 93-7. Architectural easements.
The Commission may require, as part of a permit approval, that easements
in connection with individual sites or structures, or with sites or structures
located in or adjacent to the Town's Historic Districts, be granted to the
Town. Such easements may grant to the Town, the Commission, the
residents of the Historic Districts, and the general public the right to ensure
that any site or any structure and surrounding property upon which it is
applied is protected, in perpetuity, from changes which would affect its
historical, archeological, or architectural significance.
§ 93-8. Application to Commission required.
The criteria for Commission membership under the category of
"demonstrated special interest" may be satisfied either by formal
training in one or more of the fields listed in Subsection A of this
section, or membership in a preservation-related organization. The
criteria for membership under the category of "specific knowledge"
may be satisfied by formal, post-secondary education, employment or
practical experience in one or more of the above-listed fields. The
criteria for Commission membership under the category of
"professional or academic training" may be satisfied by, at a minimum,
two years' experience as a professional or a bachelor's degree in one or
more of the above-listed fields.
C.
The member shall be appointed for terms of three years each except
that in making the initial appointments, some appointments shall be
established for less than three years in order that, as these initial terms
expire, all subsequent appointments shall be for three years and shall
not expire at the same time. Members of the Commission are eligible
for reappointment.
D.
Any member of the Commission may be removed by the Mayor with
approval of the Council after a public hearing, for inefficiency, neglect
of duty or malfeasance in office. The Mayor shall file with the Town
Clerk a written statement of the reason or reasons for the removal.
E.
Any vacancy on the Commission shall be filled by the Mayor with
approval of the Council upon recommendation by the Commission for
the unexpired term of the particular position.
F.
A majority of the then members of the Commission shall constitute
a majority for the transaction of business, and a majority vote of the
members present shall control any action of the Commission.
G.
The Commission, on behalf of the Town, shall have the right to accept
and use gifts and donations made to the Town or to the Commission
for the exercise of the Commission's functions. Gifts or donations shall
not be made directly to a Commission member, nor shall such gifts or
donations otherwise violate any Town, state, or federal laws regarding
ethics or conflicts of interest.
H.
§ 93-6 GRADING AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 93-8
91:113
§ 93-9. Commission considerations.
In reviewing applications, the Commission shall give consideration to:
§ 93-10. Additional considerations; design guidelines.
Before the construction, exterior alteration, reconstruction, moving or
demolition of any site or structure within the Historic Districts, any
portion of which is visible or intended to be visible from a public
way, the person, individual, firm, or corporation proposing to make
the construction or change shall file with the Commission, through the
Town Manager (or such other staff member who may be designated
by the Town Manager), an application for permission to construct,
alter, reconstruct, move or demolish the site or structure. Every such
application shall be referred to and considered by the Commission
and accepted or rejected by the Commission. An application which is
identical to a rejected application shall not be resubmitted within a
period of one year after the rejection. No permit for any such change
may be granted until the Commission has acted thereon as hereinafter
provided. [Amended 6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 268]
A.
The Commission may recommend and the Town may adopt, by
resolution, rehabilitation and new construction design guidelines
consistent with those generally recognized by the Maryland Historical
Trust. Guidelines may include design characteristics intended to meet
the needs of particular types of sites, structures, and districts, and may
identify categories or changes that are so minimal in nature that they
do not affect historic, archeological, or architectural significance and
require no review by the Commission. These guidelines shall be utilized
by the Commission in its review of applications.
B.
The historic, archeological, or architectural significance of the site
or structure and its relationship to the historic, archeological, or
architectural significance of the surrounding area.
A.
The relationship of the exterior architectural features of a structure to
the remainder of the structure and to the surrounding area.
B.
The general compatibility of the exterior design, scale, proportion,
arrangement, texture, and materials proposed to be used.
C.
Any other factors, including aesthetic factors which the Commission
deems to be pertinent.
D.
The Commission shall consider only exterior features of a structure
and shall not consider any interior arrangements. Also, the Commission
shall not disapprove an application except with respect to the several
factors specified in this section and in § 93-9 above.
A.
The map entitled "Downtown Historic District Sykesville, Maryland
1995," attached to this chapter, is hereby adopted as a guide to the
ranking of the significance of buildings in the Downtown Historic
B.
§ 93-8 SYKESVILLE CODE § 93-10
91:114
District. The map shall be utilized as a guide for the Commission's
decisions under this chapter.16
Downtown Historic District design guidelines.17
The Commission's decisions applicable to the Downtown Historic
District shall be guided by the Town of Sykesville Historic District
Design Guidelines (2000), as amended from time to time by the
Historic District Commission, provided that such amendments to
the Town of Sykesville Historic District Guidelines (2000) have
been approved by resolution of the Mayor and Town Council of the
Town of Sykesville, the provisions of which are hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference; and
(1)
The Commission's decisions applicable to the Downtown Historic
District shall be guided by the Secretary of the Interior's Standards
for Rehabilitation and guidelines for rehabilitating historic
buildings, as amended from time to time, the provisions of which
are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference.
(2)
C.
Warfield Historic District design guidelines.18
The Commission's decisions applicable to the Warfield Historic
District shall be guided by the Secretary of the Interior's Standards
for Rehabilitation and guidelines for rehabilitating historic
buildings, as amended from time to time, the provisions of which
are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference.
(1)
In addition to all other applicable provisions of this chapter
regarding rehabilitation of historic buildings lying within the
Warfield Historic District (identified as Buildings A, B, C, D, E, F,
G, H, I, T, W, Auditorium, Engine House, Hubner and Root Cellar
and any appurtenances thereto, as located on the attached "Site
Map of the Warfield Complex"), the Historic District Commission's
decisions shall be guided by the Historic Preservation Guidelines
for the Warfield Complex and Summary of Historic Preservation
Guidelines for the Warfield Complex, as amended from time to
time by the Historic District Commission and provided that such
amendments have been approved by resolution of the Mayor and
Town Council of the Town of Sykesville, the provisions of which
are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference. [Added
5-28-2002 by Ord. No. 228; amended 1-24-2011 by Ord. No.
273]
(2)
D.
16.Editor's Note: The map referred to is on file in the Town Manager's office (or in the office
of such other staff member who may be designated by the Town Manager).
17.Editor's Note: The design guidelines referred to in Subsection C(1) and (2) are on file in
the Town Manager's office (or in the office of such other staff member who may be
designated by the Town Manager).
18.Editor's Note: The design guidelines referred to in Subsection D(1), (2) and (3) are on file
in the Town Manager's office (or in the office of such other staff member who may be
designated by the Town Manager).
§ 93-10 GRADING AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 93-10
91:115
§ 93-11. Standard for judgment.
The Commission shall be strict in its judgment of plans for sites or
structures determined by research to be of historic, archeological, or
architectural significance. The Commission shall be lenient in its judgment
of plans for sites or structures of little historic, archeological or
architectural significance, or for plans involving new construction, unless
such plans would seriously impair the historic, archeological, or
architectural significance of the surrounding site or structure. The
Commission is not required to limit construction, reconstruction, or
alteration to the architectural style of any one period.
§ 93-12. Structures of unusual importance.
In addition to all other applicable provisions of this chapter
regarding new construction within the Warfield Historic District,
the Historic District Commission's decisions shall be guided by
the "Warfield Commercial Center: New Construction Guidelines
and Standards for Signs and Energy Efficiency," along with its
Appendix, as amended from time to time by the Historic District
Commission and provided that such amendments have been
approved by resolution of the Mayor and Town Council of the
Town of Sykesville, the provisions of which are hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference.
(3)
If an application is submitted for construction, reconstruction, or
alterations affecting a site or the exterior appearance of a structure,
or for the moving or demolition of a structure, the preservation of
which the Commission considers to be of unusual importance to the
Town of Sykesville or Carroll County or of unusual importance to the
entire state or nation, the Commission shall attempt, with the owner
of the structure, to formulate an economically feasible plan for the
preservation of the site or structure. Unless in these circumstances
the Commission is satisfied that the proposed construction, alteration
or reconstruction will not materially impair the historic, archeological,
or architectural significance of the site or structure, the Commission
shall reject the application, filing a copy of its rejection with the Zoning
Administrator and the Carroll County Office of Permits and Inspections.
A.
If an application is submitted for construction, reconstruction, or
alteration affecting a site or the exterior of a structure or for the
moving or demolition of a structure that the Commission considers
to be of unusual importance and no economically feasible plan can
be formulated, the Commission shall have 90 days from the time it
concludes that no economically feasible plan can be formulated to
negotiate with the owner and other parties in an effort to find a means
of preserving the site or structure.
B.
§ 93-10 SYKESVILLE CODE § 93-13
91:116
§ 93-13. Structures valuable for period of architecture represented.
In the case of a site or structure considered to be valuable for its historic,
archeological, or architectural significance, the Commission may approve
the proposed construction, reconstruction, alteration, moving, or demolition
despite the fact the changes come within the provisions of § 93-12 of this
chapter if:
§ 93-14. Meetings and records.
The Commission shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary
for the proper transaction of its business. Any interested person or a
person's representative is entitled to appear and be heard at any public
hearing conducted by the Commission.
§ 93-15. Certificate of approval required; time limit for approval.
§ 93-16. Nonapplicability.
Nothing in this chapter shall be taken or construed to prevent routine
maintenance, customary farming operations, or landscaping which will have
no material effect on the historic, archeological, or architectural
significance of a designated site, structure, or district. Nothing in this
chapter affects the right to complete any work covered by a permit or
authorization issued prior to the effective date of this chapter.
The site or structure is a deterrent to a major improvement program,
which will be of substantial benefit to the Town of Sykesville;
A.
Retention of the site or structure would cause undue financial hardship
on the owner; or
B.
The retention of the site or structure would not be in the best interests
of a majority of persons in the community.
C.
The Commission shall file with the Zoning Administrator and the Carroll
County Office of Permits and Inspections a certificate of its approval,
modification or rejection of all applications and plans submitted for its
review. Work shall not be commenced on any such project until such
a certificate of approval has been filed, and the Zoning Administrator
and/or the Carroll County Permits and Inspections shall not issue a
building permit for such change or construction unless and until he has
received such a certificate of approval.
A.
The failure of the Commission to act upon a completed application
within 45 days from the date the completed application was filed shall
be deemed to constitute automatic approval of the proposed changes
unless an extension of this forty-five-day period is agreed mutually
by the applicant and the Commission or the application has been
withdrawn.
B.
§ 93-13 GRADING AND SEDIMENT CONTROL § 93-17
91:117
§ 93-17. Right of appeal.
Any person or persons, firm or corporation aggrieved by a decision of the
Commission shall have the right of appeal concerning such decision to the
Circuit Court of Carroll County.
§ 93-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-27-2004 by Ord. No.
247]
Chapter 96
LANDSCAPING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision Regulations — See Ch. 145. Zoning — See Ch. 180.
§ 96-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
COMMISSION — The Town of Sykesville Planning and Zoning Commission.
COUNCIL — The Council of the Town of Sykesville, Maryland.
LANDSCAPE MANUAL — The manual adopted by the Mayor and Town
Council as amended from time to time by the Town Council.
Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a municipal infraction.
Each day the violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. The
penalties for such municipal infraction shall be as follows:
First offense: A first violation shall constitute a Class C municipal
infraction as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal Infractions.
(1)
Second offense: A second offense shall constitute a Class D
municipal infraction as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal
Infractions.
(2)
Third and subsequent offenses: A third and all subsequent
violations shall constitute a Class E municipal infraction as
provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal Infractions. The
imposition of penalties shall be subject to a waiver if the violator
can show compliance with this chapter within 45 days of the
violation of this chapter.
(3)
A.
In addition to any other remedies and penalties, upon violation of
this chapter, the Town, the Zoning Administrator, the Commission or
the Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the authority to institute an
appropriate action to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove such violation.
B.
§ 93-17 SYKESVILLE CODE § 96-1
96:118
MASTER PLAN — Policies, statements, goals, and interrelated plans for
private and public land use, transportation and community facilties
documented in text and maps which constitute the guide for the Town's
future development.
SITE PLAN — Consists of a plan indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, structures, signs, paved areas, walkways, vegetative
cover, existing and proposed grades, initial landscaping and screening with
the site.
TOWN — The Town of Sykesville, Maryland.
§ 96-2. Adoption and application of Landscape Manual.
The following guidelines, as provided by the Landscape Manual, shall be
applicable to projects requiring the submission of site plans to the
Commission in accordance with the Master Plan of the Town.19
§ 96-3. Conflicts.
The requirements of the Landscape Manual adopted by the Town shall
prevail over any conflict or inconsistency with any other provisions required
for the landscaping under any other ordinance.
§ 96-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-22-2004 by Ord. No.
24320]
In addition to all other remedies provided by law, any violation of this
chapter shall constitute a Class D municipal infraction as provided by
Ordinance No. 240.21 Each day a violation occurs or continues shall
constitute a separate offense and a Class D municipal infraction. Further,
the Town may institute any appropriate actions or proceedings to prevent
any violation of this chapter.
Chapter 98
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 60.
Littering in parks — See Ch. 111.
Solid waste — See Ch. 129.
Junk vehicles — See Ch. 169.
19.Editor's Note: The Landscape Manual is on file in the Town offices.
20.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original Section 3, Exceptions, of Ord. No.
242.
21.Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I, Municipal Infractions.
§ 96-1 LITTERING § 98-1
98:119
§ 98-1. Purpose.
The purposes of this chapter shall be to:
§ 98-2. Legislative authority.
The Mayor and Council of the Town of Sykesville derive authority for this
chapter by virtue of the terms of the Criminal Law of the State of Maryland,
§ 10-110, the Litter Control Law.
§ 98-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the
following words or phrases shall have the following meanings:
LITTER — All rubbish, waste matter, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead
animals or other discarded materials of every kind and description.
PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY — The right-of-way of any road or highway,
any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any
park, parking facility, playground, public service company property or
transmission line right-of-way, building, refuge or conservation or
recreation area, any residential or farm properties, timberlands or forest.
§ 98-4. Unlawful activities.
Prohibit any and all littering on public or private property within the
Town of Sykesville.
A.
B. Curb the desecration of the beauty of the Town.
Prevent harm to the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of the
Town by individuals who litter.
C.
Prohibit the transportation of litter from without the Town to within the
Town for the purpose of depositing the litter within the Town.
D.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw
or leave, or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing,
throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the
Town unless:
Such litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed
on such property; and
(1)
Such person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of the
property where such litter receptacle or container is placed; or has
first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession,
or unless the act is done under the personal direction of said owner
or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare.
(2)
A.
It shall be unlawful for any person who is not the owner or tenant in
lawful possession of property located within the Town to enter into the
B.
§ 98-1 SYKESVILLE CODE § 98-4
98:120
§ 98-5. Presumption of responsibility for violation.
Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor
vehicle, boat, airplane or other conveyance in violation of § 98-4 of this
chapter, and if the vehicle, boat, airplane or other conveyance has two or
more occupants and it cannot be determined which occupant is the violator,
the owner of the vehicle, boat, airplane or other conveyance, if present,
shall be presumed to be responsible for the violation; in the absence of the
owner of the vehicle, boat, airplane or other conveyance, the operator shall
be presumed to be responsible for the violation.
§ 98-6. Owner of property where violation occurred need not be
present in court.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if the facts of any case in which
a person is charged with violating this chapter are sufficient to prove that
the person is responsible for the violation, it is not necessary that the owner
of the property on which the violation allegedly occurred be present at any
court proceeding regarding that case.
§ 98-7. Violations and penalties.22
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a municipal
infraction. The penalties for such municipal infraction shall be as follows:
Chapter 100
LIVABILITY STANDARDS
Town and dump, deposit, throw or leave litter on any public or private
property within the Town.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to throw, dump, or deposit
any trash, junk, or other refuse upon any roadway, or to perform any
act which constitutes a violation of the State of Maryland's Vehicle
Laws relative to putting trash, glass and other prohibited substances on
roadways.
C.
First offense: A first violation shall constitute a Class A municipal
infraction as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal Infractions.
A.
Second offense: A second violation shall constitute a Class B municipal
infraction as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal Infractions.
B.
Third and subsequent offenses: A third and all subsequent violations
shall constitute a Class C municipal infraction as provided in Chapter 1,
Article I, Municipal Infractions.
C.
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 98-4 LIVABILITY STANDARDS § 100-1
100:121
§ 100-1. Applicability of county regulations.
Chapter 141, Livability Standards, of the Code of Public Local Laws and
Ordinances of Carroll County, Maryland ("Chapter 141"), as amended from
time to time, shall be the applicable law in the Town for all matters
governed by Chapter 141. The Board of Commissioners of Carroll County
and its official staff, representatives and employees shall be responsible for
review, inspection, and enforcement of Chapter 141 within the Town in the
same manner and to the same extent as carried on and conducted in Carroll
County outside of the corporate limits of the Town. Any other provision of
any chapter of the Code of the Town that is contradictory or inconsistent
with Chapter 141 is hereby repealed and deleted.
Chapter 105
LOITERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 75. Loitering in parks — See Ch. 111, § 111-5.
§ 105-1. Definitions.
The following words as used in this chapter shall have the meanings set
forth below:
COMMERCIAL PREMISES — Any business premises operated for profit
to which the general public is invited or permitted, including parking lots
adjacent to or connected with such premises and sidewalks used by the
general public in gaining access to such premises.
LOITER — To idle, stand, remain, gather or be a member of a group or
crowd of people who are gathered together on any commercial premises
without conducting any lawful business with the owner or operation thereof,
or having patronized such business establishments to remain on such
premises an unreasonable length of time after having been directed to leave
by such owner, operator, or an authorized agent.
§ 105-2. Loitering on commercial premises prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter on or about any commercial
premises, during ordinary business hours, after having been requested to
leave by the owner, operator, or any authorized agent of the owner.
§ 105-3. Obstructing sidewalks prohibited; lawful assembly not
regulated.
It shall be unlawful for a person or group of persons to assemble on a
public sidewalk in the Town of Sykesville and so conduct themselves in
such a manner as to unnecessarily interfere with the use of the sidewalk
§ 100-1 SYKESVILLE CODE § 105-3
105:122
as thoroughfare by the general public. However, nothing herein shall be
construed so as to prevent any orderly picketing or other lawful assembly.
§ 105-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a
fine of not more than $100 or imprisoned for a term not to exceed 30 days,
or both fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.
Chapter 111
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Helmet safety — See Ch. 92. Littering — See Ch.98.
§ 111-1. Definitions. [Amended 9-27-2004 by Ord. No. 247]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FOR-PROFIT ACTIVITY — Any activity conducted for a fee or charge by
an individual, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, club,
association, organization or other entity with the purpose of making a profit
from such activity.[Added 11-11-2012 by Ord. No. 283]
RESERVATION FACILITY — Any picnic pavilion, amphitheater or other
indoor or outdoor facility within a Town park made available for reservation
of use upon obtaining a reservation permit from the Town.[Added
11-11-2012 by Ord. No. 283]
RESERVATION PERMIT — A permit issued by the Town to secure the use of
a reservation facility for a specified time. A reservation permit fee schedule
shall be adopted by resolution by the Town Council and amended from time
to time.[Added 11-11-2012 by Ord. No. 283]
TOWN PARK or PARKS — Refers to parks, tot-lots, fitness trails or other
open space now or hereafter owned or operated by the Town.
TOWN-SPONSORED EVENT — Any event or activity sponsored by the
Town.[Added 11-11-2012 by Ord. No. 283]
§ 111-2. Prohibited actions against park property.
No person in a Town park shall:
Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or
remove any structure or portion thereof, any equipment, any facilities
A.
§ 105-3 LOITERING § 111-2
105:123
§ 111-3. Animals and birds.
No person shall hunt, molest, harm, kill, trap or intentionally frighten any
animal, reptile or bird, nor shall any person give or offer, or attempt to give
or offer, any animal or bird any noxious substance.
§ 111-4. Refuse and trash.
No littering shall be allowed. No refuse or trash shall be placed in any
waters of a Town park. All trash shall be placed in proper receptacles
where those are provided, and where such receptacles are not provided, all
rubbish or waste should be carried away by the person responsible for its
presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
§ 111-5. Regulated conduct.
Conduct in a Town park is regulated as follows:
or any park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or
personal.
Dig or remove any sand, soil, rocks, stones, trees, shrubs, or plants or
make any excavation by tool or equipment or other means.
B.
Construct or erect any structure of any kind, whether permanent or
temporary in character, except on special written permission of the
Town.
C.
Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant, or attach
any rope, wire, or other item to any tree or plant, or in any other way
injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area.
D.
The use of motorized vehicles, including but not limited to motorized
dirt bikes, motorcycles or any other self-propelled vehicle, is prohibited.
Exception is made for baby carriages, handicapped vehicles and
vehicles in the service of the Town.
A.
Any person riding bicycles or using skateboards shall yield the right-ofway
to all pedestrians, handicapped vehicles, and baby carriages.
B.
C. The consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages is prohibited.
All pet animals must be on a leash or under the complete control
and supervision of the pet's owner at all times. The pet's owner is
responsible for the cleanup and removal of all wastes deposited by the
pet animal on Town's property.
D.
The making or use of fires shall be prohibited unless a permit is
obtained from the Town of Sykesville. The making, use or possession of
fireworks or explosives is absolutely prohibited.
E.
Loitering, vagrancy, peddling or solicitation of other park visitors is
prohibited.
F.
§ 111-2 SYKESVILLE CODE § 111-5
105:124
§ 111-6. Noises and disturbances.
No person shall conduct themselves so as to frighten, annoy, or disturb
other park visitors, by loud noises or by other annoying or disturbing
behavior.
§ 111-7. Park operating policy.
§ 111-8. Liability.
The Town parks and park facilities are available to Town inhabitants for
their nonexclusive use, at their own risk. The Town and its officials and
employees are not responsible or liable for any accidents or injuries
resulting from the use of the Town's parks and park facilities.
§ 111-9. Enforcement; violations and penalties.23
For-profit activity in Town parks shall be prohibited, except: when a
reservation permit is obtained from the Town, or for uses in connection
with a Town-sponsored event. All other appropriate licenses, pursuant
to the Town Code or other applicable law, must be obtained in
conjunction with any uses falling within the foregoing exceptions to
such prohibition. [Added 11-11-2012 by Ord. No. 283]
G.
Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, Town parks shall be
open to the public every day of the year from dawn until dusk. Any
section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public by
the Town for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular and
stated intervals and either entirely or merely for certain uses as the
Town may find reasonably necessary.
A.
Where the Town park contains picnic pavilions or amphitheaters, such
facilities may be rented and reserved by calling the Town office during
business hours. Town park visitors using the pavilions or amphitheater
without a reservation must vacate the area in favor of a party who has
a reservation permit approved by the Town. The permittee is solely
responsible for any loss or damage, etc., resulting from the use of the
park facilities during the period so reserved.
B.
Certain Town tennis court facilities are available for use by Town
residents and are available on a first-come-first-serve basis.
C.
Certain sports equipment may be available for use in the Town parks
and may be obtained by calling the Town office. All equipment must be
picked up and returned the same day or the following business day.
D.
The Town Manager shall have the power to adopt further rules and
regulations in the furtherance of this chapter as may be deemed
A.
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 111-5 LOITERING § 111-9
105:125
Chapter 117
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling in parks — See Ch. 111, § 111-5.
§ 117-1. Legislative intent.
This chapter is adopted to regulate the distribution of certain materials,
peddling, soliciting and related activities within the Town of Sykesville.
The registration of persons engaged in the above-mentioned activities is
required so that the identity of persons going door to door or distributing
materials within the Town may be established, so that general regulations
may be more effectively enforced, for the protection and maintenance of
the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the Town and to prevent
dishonest business practices and dishonest solicitation of funds in the Town.
necessary and proper to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
Town inhabitants using Town parks and park facilities.
Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a municipal infraction. The
penalties for such municipal infractions shall be as follows:
First offense: A first violation shall constitute a Class A municipal
infraction as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal Infractions.
(1)
Second offense: A second violation shall constitute a Class B
municipal infraction as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal
Infractions.
(2)
Third and subsequent offenses: A third and all subsequent
violations shall constitute a Class C municipal infraction as
provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal Infractions.
(3)
B.
In addition to the imposition of penalties for a municipal infraction, the
Town Manager and any Town employee shall have the authority to eject
from any Town park any person acting in violation of this chapter or in
violation of the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant hereto.
C.
In addition to the above, the Town Manager and any Town employee
shall have the authority to seize and confiscate any property, thing or
device in any Town park or used in any Town park, or in the possession
of any park visitor, in violation of this chapter or in violation of the rules
and regulations promulgated pursuant hereto.
D.
§ 111-9 SYKESVILLE CODE § 117-2
105:126
§ 117-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISTRIBUTOR — Any person who distributes or causes to be distributed on
any street or public place within the Town any newspaper, periodical, book,
magazine, handbill, circular, card or pamphlet or printed material of any
kind.
MERCHANDISE — All goods, wares, food, meat, fish, ice cream, fruit,
vegetables, magazines, periodicals, printed material, farm products,
services and orders or contracts for services, home improvements or
alterations and anything that may be sold or distributed by peddlers,
solicitors or distributors, as defined herein.
PEDDLER — Any person, whether a resident of the Town or not, who goes
from house to house, from place to place or from street to street, traveling
by foot or automotive vehicle or any other type of conveyance, carrying
or transporting merchandise for the purpose of selling and delivering the
merchandise to customers. The word "peddler" shall also include the words
"hawker" and "huckster."
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, organization,
club, association or any principal or agent thereof.
SOLICITOR — Any person, whether a resident of the Town or not, who goes
from house to house, from place to place or from street to street, traveling
by foot or automotive vehicle or any other type of conveyance, soliciting,
taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of merchandise or services
of any kind for present or future performance or delivery, whether or not
such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the merchandise
or services and whether or not he is collecting advance payments on such
sales or orders, or who engages in any of the foregoing activities from a
stationary location on any street or other public place. The word "solicitor"
shall also include the word "canvasser", or any person who goes from door
to door, as described above, for the purpose of soliciting and/or who collects
funds from a stationary location on any street or other public place.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT — Any person engaging in the activities
commonly referred to as "transient merchant" or "itinerant vendor," who
merchandises or sells with the intent to close out or discontinue such
business within a period of one year from the date of commencement and
occupies a room, building, tent, lot or other premises for the purpose of
selling merchandise.
§ 117-3. Registration required.
It shall be unlawful for any peddler, solicitor, distributor or transient
merchant to sell, offer for sale or distribute merchandise printed material or
services within the Town without first registering with, filing an application
for registration, paying a registration fee and obtaining a registration
certificate from the Town of Sykesville.
§ 117-2 LOITERING § 117-4
105:127
§ 117-4. Registration certificate.
Upon obtaining a registration certificate as hereinafter provided, a peddler,
solicitor, distributor, or transient merchant may conduct his activities within
the Town only as long as he adheres to the regulations set forth herein
and carries the registration certificate upon his person at all times during
the conduct of his activities. The registration certificate shall identify the
person and the type of activity for which he has registered and shall be
shown to any person or police officer upon request. A registration certificate
shall be valid for a period of six months from its date of issue.
§ 117-5. Application for certificate.
§ 117-6. Investigation of applicant.
Every applicant for a certificate under this chapter shall file with the
Town Manager or authorized agent a sworn, written application on
a form to be furnished by said Town Manager or authorized agent
which shall give or be accompanied by the following information or
documents: [Amended 6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 268]
The name and description of the applicant, including color of hair
and eyes, height and weight.
(1)
The permanent home address and full local address and telephone
number of the applicant.
(2)
A brief statement of the nature of the business, including frequency
of solicitations, and a description of the merchandise or service to
be sold.
(3)
If representing an organization of any nature, the name, address
and telephone number of the organization, together with
credentials establishing the exact relationship.
(4)
If a vehicle is to be used, a description of such vehicle and its
license number.
(5)
The place where the merchandise or services to be sold or offered
for sale are manufactured or produced, where such goods or
property are located at the time such application is filed and the
proposed method of delivery.
(6)
A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of
any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance,
the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed
therefor.
(7)
A.
B. The appropriate fee must accompany the application.
When the application is properly filled out and signed by the applicant,
the original and duplicate thereof shall be filed with the Chief of Police,
who shall make or cause to be made within five days such investigation
A.
§ 117-4 SYKESVILLE CODE § 117-6
105:128
§ 117-7. Denial or issuance of certificate.
§ 117-8. Fees.
of the applicant's business responsibility and character as he deems
necessary for protection of the public good.
If as a result of such an investigation the applicant's character or
business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police
shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons
therefor. Any determination by the Chief of Police that an application is
unsatisfactory shall be based on one or more of the following findings
with respect to the applicant:
(1) Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude.
(2) Prior violation of a peddling or soliciting ordinance.
(3) Previous fraudulent acts or conduct.
(4) Evidence of bad character.
(5) Any misrepresentation on the application.
B.
In the absence of any such finding, the Chief of Police shall find the
application satisfactory and shall endorse his approval on the
application.
C.
If an application is found unsatisfactory by the Chief of Police, or his
agent, he shall notify the applicant by mail that the application is
disapproved and shall deny the applicant any registration certificate.
A.
If an application is found satisfactory by the Chief of Police, or his
agent, he shall issue a registration certificate addressed to the
applicant to conduct the business applied for. Such certificate shall
contain the signature of the issuing officer and shall show the name,
address and telephone number of the applicant, the type of business
(peddler, solicitor, distributor, or transient merchant) the applicant has
registered for, the kind of goods or services to be sold thereunder,
the date of issue, the length of time for which the certificate shall be
operative and the license number and other identifying description of
any vehicle used in the activity licensed.
B.
At the time of issuance of a registration certificate, a fee of $10 shall
be paid by the applicant to cover the costs of investigation and the
administration and enforcement of this chapter. Such fee shall be in
addition to any fee which may be chargeable under any mercantile
licensing or other ordinance of the Town.
A.
Where an organization has several agents peddling, soliciting or
distributing merchandise or printed material, each agent shall be
registered separately, and each shall pay the appropriate fee.
B.
§ 117-6 LOITERING § 117-8
105:129
§ 117-9. Appeals from denial of certificate.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police in the denial of
a certificate, as provided in § 117-7 of this chapter, shall have the right of
appeal to the Town Council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the
Town Council within 14 days after the notice of the action complained of
has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement
setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The Town Council shall set a
time and place for hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall
be given to the applicant in the same manner as provided in § 117-10 of
this chapter for notice of hearing on revocation. The decision of the Town
Council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive.
§ 117-10. Revocations of certificates.
Upon expiration of a certificate, a new certificate will be issued upon
compliance with all provisions of this chapter and the payment of fees,
except that the investigation and waiting period therefor may be waived
by the Chief of Police.
C.
Certificates issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked
by the Town Council after notice and hearing for any of the following
causes:
Fraud, misrepresentation or a material incorrect statement
contained in the application for a certificate.
(1)
Fraud, misrepresentation or a material incorrect statement made
in the course of carrying on his business as solicitor, peddler,
distributor, or transient merchant.
(2)
(3) Any violation of this chapter.
(4) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor.
Conducting the business of peddler, solicitor, distributor or
transient merchant in an unlawful manner or in such manner as to
constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the
health, safety or general welfare of the public.
(5)
A.
Notice of the hearing for revocation of a certificate shall be given by the
Town Manager or authorized agent in writing, setting forth specifically
the grounds of complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such
notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the holder of the certificate
at the address given on the application at least five days prior to the
date set for the hearing or shall be delivered by the agent of the Town
in the same manner as a summons at least three days prior to the date
set for the hearing. [Amended 6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 268]
B.
Upon revocation, the certificate shall be surrendered to the Town
Manager or authorized agent. [Amended 6-11-2007 by Ord. No.
268]
C.
§ 117-8 SYKESVILLE CODE § 117-11
105:130
§ 117-11. General regulations.
No person or certificate holder shall:
§ 117-12. Exemptions.
The following persons or organizations are exempt from the payment of a
fee, and in the discretion of the Chief of Police or Mayor, the application
and/or investigation procedures, upon compliance with all other provisions
of this chapter and submission of applicable identification and documents
to support the claim to exemption:
Peddle, solicit or distribute merchandise except between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., unless specifically having been invited into a
house by the occupant or having made an appointment with a person
previously.
A.
Attempt to peddle, solicit or distribute merchandise or printed material
without first having identified himself as a peddler, solicitor or
distributor registered with the Town and displaying his certificate.
B.
C. Have exclusive right to any location in the Town.
Operate in any congested area where his operations might impede or
inconvenience the public.
D.
Leave at a property or house or in any public place circulars, samples or
other matter, except newspapers, which shall be defined as a periodical
with a paid circulation of at least 90% of its total circulation, except
when handed to a person or house occupant.
E.
Enter or attempt to enter the land of any resident in the Town without
an express invitation from the occupant of the house.
F.
Conduct himself in such a manner as to become objectionable to or
annoy an occupant of any house.
G.
Distribute obscene merchandise or printed material or that which
advocates unlawful conduct.
H.
Litter the streets, public places or properties within the Town with any
merchandise or printed material.
I.
Any person who is a member of a Volunteer Fire Department serving
the Town of Sykesville and its environs.
A.
Any public utility or its employees, which said public utility is subject to
regulation by the State Board of Public Works; provided, however, that
such employees shall display the identification badge or card issued by
their employer.
B.
Any person engaged in the delivery of goods, wares or merchandise
or other articles or things, in the regular course of business, to the
premises of persons who had previously ordered the same or were
C.
§ 117-11 LOITERING § 117-12
105:131
§ 117-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-27-2004 by Ord. No.
247]
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter, whether by a principal agent
or an employee of another, shall constitute a municipal infraction. The
penalties for such municipal infraction shall be as follows:
Chapter 122
PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 140.
entitled to receive the same by reason of a prior agreement (includes
newsboys).
First offense: A first violation shall constitute a Class C municipal
infraction as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal Infractions.
A.
Second offense: A second violation shall constitute a Class D municipal
infraction as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal Infractions.
B.
Third and subsequent offenses: A third and all subsequent violations
shall constitute a Class E municipal infraction as provided in Chapter 1,
Article I, Municipal Infractions.
C.
§ 117-12 SYKESVILLE CODE § 117-13
122:132
ARTICLE I
Construction and Moving of Mains, Conduits and Pipes
[Derived from Section 18-76 of the Charter; readopted at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 122-1. Submission of plans required.
Any public service corporation, company, or individual, before beginning
any construction of or placing of or changing the location of any main,
conduit, pipe, or other structure in the public ways of the Town, shall submit
plans to the Town and obtain written approval upon such conditions and
subject to such limitations as may be imposed by the Town.
§ 122-2. Removal of unauthorized structures.
If any unauthorized main, conduit, pipe, or other structure interferes with
the operation of the water, sewerage, or storm water systems, the Town may
order it removed.
§ 122-3. Violations and penalties.
Any public service corporation, company, or individual violating the
provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 122-1 PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 122-3
122:133

ARTICLE II
Structures Interfering with Water and Sewer Mains
[Derived from Section 18-77 of the Charter; readopted at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 122-4. Removal or adjustment of obstruction.
All individuals, firms, or corporations having mains, pipes, conduits, or
other structures in, on, or over any public way in the Town or in Carroll
County which impede the establishment, construction, or operation of any
Town sewer or water main shall, upon reasonable notice, remove or adjust
the obstructions at their own expense to the satisfaction of the Town.
§ 122-5. Condemnation.
If necessary to carry out the provisions of this article, the Town may use its
condemnation powers provided in § C-78 of the Charter.
§ 122-6. Violations and penalties.
Any corporation, company, or individual violating the provisions of this
article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 122-4 PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 122-6
122:135

ARTICLE III
Athletic Equipment
[Adopted 11-10-2003 by Ord. No. 238]
§ 122-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EQUIPMENT and APPARATUS — Any item or items, whether permanent or
mobile, that require for their use the congregation of one or more persons
in and about the immediate area of the item or items. This definition is
intended to include, but is not limited to, basketball hoops, skateboard
ramps and hockey goals.
§ 122-8. Prohibited uses.
No equipment or apparatus shall be placed by any person in a public rightof-
way or on private property in the vicinity of any public right-of-way such
that the use of the equipment or apparatus would tend to require any user
to be in the public right-of-way.
§ 122-9. Enforcement.
The enforcement of this ordinance shall be by the Sykesville Police
Department or any other agency or code enforcement official designated by
the Mayor and Town Council.
§ 122-10. Violations and penalties.
A municipal infraction may be levied upon the owner of any equipment
or apparatus found to be in violation of this article. The fines for such
infraction(s) shall be as follows:
First offense. Any person violating the above provision shall be subject
to a warning for the first violation.
A.
Second offense: fine of $100 for any person who commits a second
violation.
B.
Third and subsequent offenses: fine of $250 and confiscation of the
offending equipment or apparatus for any person who commits a third
or subsequent offense.
C.
§ 122-7 PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY § 122-10
122:137
Chapter 129
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 98.
§ 129-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BULK WASTES — Large items of refuse, including but not limited to
appliances, furniture, large auto parts, trees, branches and stumps and
construction and remodeling waste which cannot be handled by normal
municipal waste processing, collection or disposal methods.
CONTAINER — A portable device in which solid waste is held for storage or
transportation.
DISPOSAL — The deposition, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing
of solid waste into or on the land or water in a manner that the solid waste
or a constituent of the solid waste enters the environment, is emitted into
the air or is discharged to the waters.
GARBAGE — Waste resulting from animal, grain, fruit or vegetable matter.
NONRESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES — Any property which is not a residential
unit within the meaning of "residential units” as defined in this § 129-1.
Such properties include, but are not limited to, multifamily dwellings,
commercial and industrial properties, strip malls and/or "mini-mart" plazas,
institutional establishments or any combination of the aforementioned uses.
Such properties shall also include vacant land.
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, plastics and other materials which would otherwise be
disposed of or processed as municipal waste.
REFUSE — All materials which are discarded as useless. Such materials
may include but are not limited to shrub cuttings, grass clippings, leaves,
cardboard, paper, bottles, cans, clothing, plastic containers, gutter and
down spouting, lumber scraps, paint cans, screens and storm windows, rug
scraps, tires, Christmas trees, newspapers, telephone books and magazines
which can be handled by normal municipal waste processing, collection or
disposal methods.
RESIDENTIAL UNITS — Single-family detached, single-family
semidetached and single-family attached residential housing units and
apartments with three or fewer units.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials, including
but not limited to solid, semisolid, liquid and contained gaseous materials
§ 122-10 SYKESVILLE CODE § 129-1
129:138
resulting from municipal, industrial, commercial, agriculture and
residential activities.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials that are
separated from municipal waste at the point of origin for the purpose of
recycling.
STORAGE — The containment of waste on a temporary basis which does not
constitute disposal of the waste.
TOWN — The Town of Sykesville, Maryland.
WASTE — A material whose original purpose has been completed and which
is directed to a disposal or processing facility or is otherwise disposed. The
term does not include source-separated recyclable materials.
§ 129-2. Administration of chapter; penalty.
This chapter shall be administered by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning
Administrator, subject to approval of the Mayor and Town Council, may
establish regulations regarding the collection or disposal of solid waste,
including recyclables. Upon approval by ordinance of the Mayor and Town
Council, any such regulation shall have the force and effect of law. These
regulations may include, among other subjects, the days and hours and
routes for collection of solid waste, including recyclables; the specifications
for recyclables bins, and the times and manner in which they shall be set
out for pickup of the contents thereof by the collectors and removal of
such containers after they have been emptied; preventing the mixture of
certain types of solid waste in any one container; limiting the amount of
solid waste or the number of containers that may be set out for any one
premises at any one time; the imposition of reasonable fees to cover the
costs of the administration of the chapter, including the cost of licensing and
inspection; and such other matters as may be deemed appropriate. Copies
of any such regulations shall be maintained in the office of the Zoning
Administrator at Town Hall and are available for inspection during regular
hours of business. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall
constitute a Class A municipal infraction as provided by Chapter 1, Article
I, municipal infractions. Each day in which a violation occurs or continues
shall constitute a separate offense and a Class A municipal infraction.
§ 129-3. Permit required to collect or dispose of solid waste; fee;
penalty.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
collecting or disposing of solid waste within the confines of the Town
unless such person shall have obtained a permit from the Zoning
Administrator for collection and any other permits required by federal,
state and county law.
A.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate as a collector or hauler
of solid waste within the Town except as provided in this chapter. This
subsection shall not be construed to prevent a person from disposing of
B.
§ 129-1 SOLID WASTE § 129-3
129:139
§ 129-4. Residential collection.
§ 129-5. Collection from nonresidential property.
The collection and disposal of solid waste from nonresidential properties
shall be at the cost and expense of the owner of the property. All
nonresidential properties shall have on-site containers as required by this
chapter and by regulation of the Zoning Administrator. Additionally, the
owner of a nonresidential property shall cause solid waste to be removed
from the premises at regular intervals as determined by regulation of the
Zoning Administrator.
§ 129-6. Bulk pickup.
his own solid waste at a municipal waste disposal or processing facility,
provided that it is transported in a manner to prevent spillage.
The Zoning Administrator is authorized to issue permits under this
section upon the filing of an application for a permit. Such application
shall be filed on forms furnished by the Zoning Administrator and
contain such information as he shall prescribe. The application shall be
accompanied by a permit fee in the amount of $100. An initial permit
shall be valid for a period of one year. Thereafter, the permit shall
be renewed annually upon submission of a renewal application and
payment of $50.
C.
Any violation of the provisions of any subsection of this section shall
constitute a Class D municipal infraction as provided by Chapter 1,
Article I, Municipal Infractions. Each day in which a violation occurs or
continues shall constitute a separate offense and a Class D municipal
infraction.
D.
The Town shall provide for the collection and disposal of solid waste,
including recyclables, for residential units within the Town. However,
nothing in this chapter shall prohibit any person or entity from entering
into a private contract for the removal of solid waste from their
property, provided that the other carrier complies with all applicable
requirements of this chapter.
A.
Regular collection service shall not include removal of bulk waste
items such as those described in § 129-1. Owners or occupants of any
premises shall have these items removed as provided in § 129-6.
B.
Owners and occupants of any premises who are provided solid waste
disposal services by the Town shall separate recyclables from their
other solid waste and shall place such recyclables in a recyclables
bin or as otherwise provided by the Zoning Administrator pursuant to
regulations promulgated under § 129-2 of this chapter.
C.
§ 129-3 SYKESVILLE CODE § 129-6
129:140
§ 129-7. Maintenance of premises; penalty.
§ 129-8. Notice to remedy offending condition; performance of work
by Town.
The Mayor and Town Council are authorized by ordinance to institute a
service charge by the Town for bulk pickup of bulk waste, including but
not limited to those items described in § 129-1.
A.
Upon request by the owner or occupant of any premises served by
the Town's garbage and trash collection service and subject to the
availability of vehicles and personnel, the Zoning Administrator may
authorize removal of solid waste from such premises when the amount
to be removed is greater than that which is normally collected or at
a time other than the regular collection day for such premises, upon
such terms and conditions and upon the payment of such fee as may be
provided by resolution of the Mayor and Town Council.
B.
Owners and occupants of occupied premises and owners and persons in
charge of unoccupied premises, including vacant lots, within the Town
are hereby charged with the duty of maintaining such premises at all
times in a sanitary, clean and tidy condition and so as to prevent the
accumulation thereof of solid waste which constitutes a nuisance or a
fire hazard.
A.
Any violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a Class
B municipal infraction as provided by Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal
Infractions. Each day in which a violation occurs or continues shall
constitute a separate offense and a Class B municipal infraction.
B.
If, at anytime, the maintenance of any premises within the Town is
found by the Zoning Administrator or other official designated by the
Mayor and Town Council to be in violation of § 129-7 or 129-9, he shall
give notice, in writing, to the owner, occupant or person in charge
of such premises, stating therein the condition which constitutes such
violation and directing the addressee to remedy such condition within
seven days for a first offense and within three days for any subsequent
offense, and it shall be unlawful for any such owner, occupant or person
in charge to fail to comply with the terms of such written notice.
A.
Upon the failure of any person to whom notice has been given pursuant
to Subsection A of this section to comply with the terms of such notice,
the Zoning Administrator or other designated official shall forthwith
direct the appropriate Town officer to remedy the condition which is
the subject of such notice, and the expenses incurred by the Town in so
doing shall be charged to the addressee of such notice, to be collectible
as Town taxes; and such expenses shall constitute a lien upon the
premises upon which such condition occurred, to be collected as Town
taxes are collected, if not otherwise first paid to the Town.
B.
§ 129-6 SOLID WASTE § 129-8
129:141
§ 129-9. Sufficient containers required; penalty.
Abatement by the Town of conditions in violation of this chapter and
reimbursement to the Town of expenses incurred thereby shall not bar
the issuance of a municipal infraction and the prosecution for such
violation.
C.
Residential units. It shall be the joint and several responsibility of the
owner and occupant of residential units to provide a sufficient number
of approved containers for storage of solid waste to prevent overflow
between times of collection in residential units and to maintain the
premises in accordance with the standards of this chapter. It shall be
unlawful for the owner or occupant of such private property to fail to
provide such containers.
A.
Nonresidential properties.
Multifamily dwellings. It shall be the responsibility of the owner
and not the occupants of multifamily units to provide a sufficient
number of approved containers for the storage of solid waste to
prevent overflow between times of collection and to maintain the
premises in accordance with the standards of this chapter. It shall
be unlawful for the owner of such multifamily unit property to fail
to provide such containers.
(1)
Institutional establishments. It shall be the responsibility of the
owner and not the occupant of institutional establishments to
provide a sufficient number of approved containers for the storage
of solid waste to prevent overflow between times of collection and
to maintain the premises in accordance with the standards of this
chapter. It shall be unlawful for the owner of such institutional
establishment to fail to provide such containers.
(2)
Commercial and industrial land or buildings. It shall be the joint
and severable responsibility of the owner and occupant of
commercial and industrial land or buildings to provide a sufficient
number of approved containers for the storage of solid waste to
prevent overflow between times of collection and to maintain the
premises in accordance with the standards of this chapter. It shall
be unlawful for the owner and occupant of such commercial and
industrial land or buildings to fail to provide such containers.
(3)
Shopping centers, strip malls and "mini-mart" plazas. In addition
to the responsibilities provided in Subsection D hereof, the owner
and occupants of all shopping centers, strip malls and "mini-mart"
plazas within the limits of the Town are hereby required to install
and maintain trash receptacles on the edge of the pedestrian
walkway areas within such shopping centers. They shall be of a
type and size and placed at such location as may be required and
approved by the Zoning Administrator and clearly designated as
receptacles for solid waste.
(4)
B.
§ 129-8 SYKESVILLE CODE § 129-9
129:142
§ 129-10. Container specifications; storage of containers.
Vacant land. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of all vacant
land to keep his property free of solid and bulk waste.
(5)
Deficiencies observed in violation of the standards of this chapter shall
constitute prima facie evidence that the required maintenance is not
adequate. The Zoning Administrator may proceed to rectify such
deficiencies as provided in § 129-8.
C.
Any violation of the provisions of any subsection of this section shall
constitute a Class B municipal infraction as provided by Chapter 1,
Article I, Municipal Infractions. Each day in which a violation occurs or
continues shall constitute a separate offense and a Class B municipal
infraction.
D.
All containers for the storage of solid waste, except bins for the storage
of bulk waste and recyclables, shall be vermin-proof and waterproof, of
noncorrodible material or similar material, and shall be equipped with
tight-fitting lids at all times.
A.
All solid waste shall be placed in containers as provided herein and
shall be placed at convenient outdoor pickup locations on the premises
as may be designated by the Zoning Administrator.
B.
Receptacles used for storage of solid waste with respect to residential
units shall meet one of the following specifications:
Trash cans of a durable grade of galvanized metal or other suitable
material approved by the Zoning Administrator, from 20 to 32
gallons' capacity. They should be provided with two lifting handles
on opposite sides and a tightly fitting cover with a lifting handle.
The can should be without inside protrusions, and the solid waste
should be loosely packed so that the contents shall discharge freely
when the receptacle is inverted.
(1)
Refuse bags made of heavy, multiply paper or polyethylene or
ethylene copolymer resin and designed for outdoor storage of
refuse. Bags must be securely tied or sealed to prevent emission
of odors, be of a material so liquids and greases will not be able
to penetrate through the material and be of sufficient thickness
and strength to contain the solid waste enclosed without tearing or
ripping under normal handling.
(2)
Recyclables bins made of durable plastic approximately 18 gallons
in size and provided by the Town or its designee.
(3)
C.
Neither residential nor nonresidential solid waste and/or recycling
containers shall be stored in public rights-of-way.
D.
Nonresidential solid waster containers shall not be placed in the front
of the premises whenever practicable.
E.
§ 129-9 SOLID WASTE § 129-10
129:143
§ 129-11. Maintenance of containers; penalty.
§ 129-12. Interference with containers; penalty.
§ 129-13. Matter not to be placed in containers; penalty.
Residential solid waste and recycling containers shall be placed at
curbside for collection.
F.
Residential solid waste and recycling containers shall not be placed
out for collection earlier than 4:00 p.m. the day prior to scheduled
collection and shall be removed from the curbside no later than the end
of the day of collection.
G.
All solid waste and recycling containers shall be kept in good condition
and shall be replaced by the owner when necessary to comply with this
requirement.
H.
It shall be the responsibility of the persons providing containers
pursuant to § 129-10 to ensure that containers are properly maintained.
A.
The presence of solid waste in places other than inside proper
containers, the presence of sour odors or the presence of insects,
rodents or other vermin or evidence of their presence shall constitute
improper maintenance or lack of maintenance. Any violation of the
provisions of this section shall constitute a Class B municipal infraction
as provided by Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal Infractions. Each day in
which a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense
and a Class B municipal infraction.
B.
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to remove the cover
from any container that has been set out for collection of the contents
thereof or to upset, remove or in any way tamper with any such
container.
A.
Any violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a Class
D municipal infraction as provided by Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal
Infractions. Each day in which a violation occurs or continues shall
constitute a separate offense and a Class D municipal infraction.
B.
The following matter shall not be placed in receptacles used for regular
solid waste collection service:
(1) Dead animals.
Feces, except disposable diapers and pet feces which have been
placed in a sealed, plastic bag. However, bulk disposal of pet feces
is prohibited.
(2)
(3) Materials impregnated with urine, except disposable diapers.
(4) Poisons.
A.
§ 129-10 SYKESVILLE CODE § 129-13
129:144
§ 129-14. Separation of solid waste.
The Zoning Administrator is authorized to provide by regulation for the
implementation of § 129-4C, including each class of solid waste to be
collected by the Town to be separated, and the Zoning Administrator may
require the use of separate containers for items to be recycled, including
but not limited to metal, glass, paper, cardboard and plastics.
§ 129-15. Storage and accumulation of solid waste; penalty.
(5) Explosives.
(6) Dangerous or corrosive chemicals or other hazardous materials.
(7) Clothing taken from persons with infectious diseases.
(8) Heavy metals or metal parts.
Lumber, unless is it secured in bundles measuring no more than
four feet by two feet.
(9)
(10)Dirt.
(11)Rocks.
(12)Bricks.
(13)Concrete blocks.
(14)Tires.
(15)Automobile or machine oil.
(16)Crates.
(17)Other refuse from construction or remodeling.
(18)Paint in liquid form.
Any violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a Class
D municipal infraction as provided by Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal
Infractions. Each day in which a violation occurs or continues shall
constitute a separate offense and a Class D municipal infraction.
B.
It shall be unlawful for any person to store or accumulate any solid
waste within the Town except as provided in this chapter and
regulations promulgated pursuant thereto. "Store or accumulate" shall
mean to exist outside of an approved container for a period of time
in excess of 15 days. The provisions of this section shall apply to any
land or premises where solid waste accumulates or is stored, be it
residential or nonresidential.
A.
Any violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a Class
B municipal infraction as provided by Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal
B.
§ 129-13 SOLID WASTE § 129-15
129:145
§ 129-16. Littering prohibited; penalty.
Infractions. Each day in which a violation occurs or continues shall
constitute a separate offense and a Class B municipal infraction.
Definitions. As used in this section, unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, the following words or phrases shall have the following
meanings:
LITTER — All rubbish, solid waste, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead
animals or other discarded materials of every kind and description.
PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY — The right-of-way of any road or
highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches
thereof; any park, public open space, parking facility, playground,
building, refuge or conservation or recreation area; any residential or
farm properties, timberlands or forest.
A.
Unlawful activities.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit,
throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing,
placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private
property in this Town or any waters in this Town unless:
Such property is designated by the Town or by any of its
agencies for the disposal of such litter and such person is
authorized by the proper public authority to use such property.
(a)
Such litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container
installed on such property.
(b)
Such person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such
property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant
in lawful possession or the act is done under the personal
direction of said owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent
with the public welfare.
(c)
(1)
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to throw, dump or
deposit any trash, junk or other refuse upon any highway or to
perform any act which constitutes a violation of the vehicle laws of
the Town or the State of Maryland relative to putting trash, glass
and other prohibited substances on highways.
(2)
B.
Presumption of responsibility for violation; suspension of licenses.
Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any
motor vehicle, boat, airplane or other conveyance in violation of
Subsection B of this section and if the vehicle, boat, airplane or other
conveyance has two or more occupants and it cannot be determined
which occupant is the violator, the owner of the vehicle, boat, airplane
or other conveyance, if present, shall be presumed to be responsible for
the violation; in the absence of the owner of the vehicle, boat, airplane
C.
§ 129-15 SYKESVILLE CODE § 129-16
129:146
§ 129-17. Dumping on land or into container of another or on
public highway; penalty.
§ 129-18. Burial and burning prohibited; penalty.
§ 129-19. Pollution of watercourses prohibited; penalty.
or other conveyance, the operator shall be presumed to be responsible
for the violation.
Receptacles to be provided; notice of provisions or section. The Zoning
Administrator is authorized and empowered to establish and maintain
receptacles for the deposit of litter at appropriate locations where such
property is frequented by the public and to post signs directing persons
to such receptacles and serving notice of the provisions of this section
and to otherwise publicize the availability of litter receptacles and
requirements of this section.
D.
Any violation of the provisions of any subsection of this section shall
constitute a Class C municipal infraction as provided by Chapter 1,
Article I, Municipal Infractions. Each day in which a violation occurs or
continues shall constitute a separate offense and a Class C municipal
infraction.
E.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, dump or deposit any solid
waste or bulk waste upon the land or property of another without
written consent first having been obtained from the owner of the
property.
A.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, dump or deposit any
solid waste or bulk waste into a container owned or leased by another
without written consent first having been obtained from the owner or
lessee of the container.
B.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, dump or deposit any solid
waste or bulk waste onto any public road or highway.
C.
Any violation of the provisions of any subsection of this section shall
constitute a Class D municipal infraction as provided by Chapter 1,
Article I, Municipal Infractions. Each day in which a violation occurs or
continues shall constitute a separate offense and a Class D municipal
infraction.
D.
On-site disposal of solid waste by burial in a pit or trench or by burning
is prohibited.
A.
Any violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a Class
B municipal infraction as provided by Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal
Infractions. Each day in which a violation occurs or continues shall
constitute a separate offense and a Class B municipal infraction.
B.
§ 129-16 SOLID WASTE § 129-19
129:147
§ 129-20. Violations and penalties.
In addition to all other remedies provided by law, any violation of this
chapter, unless otherwise provided for in the applicable section, shall
constitute a Class B municipal infraction as provided by Chapter 1, Article
I, Municipal Infractions. Each day a violation occurs or continues shall
constitute a separate offense and a Class B municipal infraction. Further,
the Town may institute any appropriate actions or proceedings to prevent
any violation of this chapter.
Chapter 134
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain management — See Ch. 89.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 145.
Water resource management — See Ch. 176.
Zoning — See Ch. 180.
§ 134-1. Applicability of county regulations.
Chapter 191 of the Code of Public Local Laws and Ordinances of Carroll
County, Maryland, as amended from time to time, shall be the official
Stormwater Management Chapter for the Town, and such chapter is hereby
adopted by reference. The Board of Commissioners of Carroll County as
its appointed designee shall be responsible for review, inspection, and
enforcement of stormwater management in the Town in the same manner
and to the same extent as such activity is being carried on in Carroll County
outside of the corporate limits of the Town.
Chapter 140
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public rights-of-way — See Ch. 122. Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 145.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any solid waste in or
to knowingly pollute or contaminate any watercourse, body of water,
spring, well, storm drain or other source of water in the Town.
A.
Any violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a Class
D municipal infraction as provided by Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal
Infractions. Each day in which a violation occurs or continues shall
constitute a separate offense and a Class D municipal infraction.
B.
§ 129-19 SYKESVILLE CODE § 134-1
134:148
ARTICLE I
Snow Emergency Routes
[Adopted 11-5-1987 by Ord. No. 153]
§ 140-1. Definitions. [Amended 3-9-1998by Ord. No. 213]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SNOW TIRES — Tires that are in good condition and that:
§ 140-2. Designation of snow emergency routes. [Amended
3-9-1998by Ord. No. 213]
The Town roadways listed on the Exhibit A below are designated snow
emergency routes and shall be appropriately posted to indicate these
designations.
EXHIBIT A
Designation of Snow Emergency Routes
Second Avenue from Oklahoma Avenue to intersection at Spout Hill Road
Obrecht Road
Spout Hill Road
Third Avenue
Springfield Avenue (Route 851)
Main Street
Jennifer Way
Oklahoma Avenue
Norris Avenue
Sandosky Road
Kalorama Road
Harlan Lane
Willow Bottom Road [Added 11-14-2016 by Ord. No. 297]
Are designated by their manufacturer as snow tires or all-weather tires;
or
A.
Have been approved by the Administrator of the State of Maryland
Vehicle Administration as meeting the standards of effectiveness
required of designated snow tires or all-weather tires; or
B.
Have anti-skid patterns cut into the treaded surfaces to form bars,
buttons, or blocks specially designed to give effective traction on snowor
ice-covered highways.
C.
§ 140-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 140-2.1
134:149
§ 140-2.1. Designation of additional snow emergency routes.
[Added 8-8-2011 by Ord. No. 277]
In addition to the roads listed above in § 140-2, portions of the following
roads shall be designated as snow emergency routes. The portions of such
roads designated as snow emergency routes shall be those areas as
determined by the Director of Public Works in consultation with the Chief of
Police and signposted by signs marked "No Parking Between Signs During
Snow Emergency," or similar language, with directional arrows to the next
sign.
EXHIBIT A
Designation of Additional Snow Emergency Routes
Bunker Hill Court
Revere Court
Concord Lane
Shimmering Run Court
Windswept Court
Autumn Sky Court
Braemar Court
Dominique Court
Patterson Court
§ 140-3. Declaration of snow emergency.
A snow emergency shall exist on the Town roadways designated in § 140-2
of this article upon a declaration of a snow emergency, for either Carroll
County or Howard County, by the State Police. The snow emergency shall
continue in effect until declared to be no longer necessary.
§ 140-4. Travel on snow emergency routes. [Amended 3-9-1998by
Ord. No. 213]
A person may not drive or attempt to drive a motor vehicle, other than a
motorcycle, on any highway that is designated and appropriately signposted
as a snow emergency route and for which a snow emergency has been
declared and is in effect, unless the vehicle is equipped with chains, snow
tires, four-wheel drive, or any combination of, and including all-weather
tires.
§ 140-5. Violations and penalties.24
A person may not park a vehicle on any Town roadway that is designated
and appropriately signposted as a snow emergency route and for which
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 140-2.1 SYKESVILLE CODE § 140-5
134:150
a snow emergency has been declared and is in effect. The Town Police
Department may have any vehicle parked in violation of this subsection
towed and impounded at the violator’s expense. Any violation of the
provisions of this article shall constitute a municipal infraction. The
penalties for such municipal infraction shall be as follows:
First offense: A first violation shall constitute a Class B municipal
infraction as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal Infractions.
A.
Second offense: A second violation shall constitute a Class C municipal
infraction as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal Infractions.
B.
Third and subsequent offenses: A third and all subsequent violations
shall constitute a Class D municipal infraction as provided in Chapter
1, Article I, Municipal Infractions.
C.
§ 140-5 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 140-5
134:151

ARTICLE II
Design and Construction Specifications
[Adopted 1-11-1988 by Ord. No. 154]
§ 140-6. Applicability of state standards.25
The current standards for the construction, alteration and repair of roads,
highways and storm drains in the Town of Sykesville shall be those adopted
by the Maryland State Department of the Environment, except as provided
below:
On-street parking requirements relating to widths for new residential
subdivisions. All new subdivision streets within the Town of Sykesville
shall have a minimum paved width of 36 feet. This will provide two
parking lanes (eight-foot width for each lane) and two travel lanes (tenfoot
width for each lane).
A.
Sidewalks. For all residential subdivisions, sidewalks will be required
on both sides of the street. Sidewalks shall be four feet wide
(constructed of concrete) and separated from the street by a three-foot
grass area.
B.
Curb and gutter. For all residential subdivisions, standard eight-inch
concrete curb and concrete gutter is required (pursuant to
specifications of the Town Engineer).
C.
Phasing of construction of streets. [Amended 5-24-1990 by Ord. No.
177]
Application. The requirements of this section shall apply to use in
common driveways as well as public streets and alleys.
(1)
Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words shall
have the following meanings:
BASE COURSE — Two-and-one-half-inch bituminous concrete base
course.
FINAL COURSE — One-and-one-half-inch bituminous concrete
surface course.
STONE SUB-BASE — Eight-inch aggregate base course.
(2)
Building permit. No building permit shall be issued until the
following work is complete:
(a) Grading of the roadway.
Construction of storm drains and all underground utilities
located within the proposed dedication for the public roadways
(including but not limited to electric, telephone, cable TV,
(b)
(3)
D.
25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 140-6 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 140-6
134:153
water, sewer, gas, etc.). Construction shall be deemed to have
been completed when either (a) the utility company has
installed its facilities in the street bed or (b) the developer
has provided suitable sleeves for later installation of utility
facilities. This work must be completed before curb and gutter
and road subbase courses may be started.
Construction of street stone subbase, curb and gutter. [The
base course and final course shall not be placed until approval
to do so is granted by the Town of Sykesville. See Subsection
D(5) below.] The top surface of the stone subbase course shall
be shaped around the manhole frames and covers, water valve
tops, storm drain and inlets in a manner that will provide a fivefoot
minimum length of ramp taper from the normal surface of
the base course to the top elevation of the top of the manholes,
valves and inlet frames so as to provide a smooth surface
transition in the vicinity of utility facilities for safe driving
conditions for the traveling public until such time that the final
course is placed.
(c)
Upon completion of items in Subsection D(3)(a), (b) and (c)
above on a given street, the building permit may be issued for
houses to be built on lots served by the street.
(d)
Use and occupancy permit. Upon completion of the house
construction, a use and occupancy permit may not be issued prior
to the placement of the base course and final course.
(4)
Placement of final course.
The Town of Sykesville reserves the right to require the base
course and final course to be completed at any time should
it be deemed necessary or desirable by the Mayor and Town
Council. However, the normal procedure to be followed shall
be as set forth under the following subsections.
(a)
The base course and final course shall not be placed until
approximately 50% of the proposed houses are constructed
on a given street (or a cul-de-sac, or a section of a street as
the case may be determined to be by the Town of Sykesville)
and are ready for the issuance of a use and occupancy permit.
The placement of the base course and final course shall not
commence until written approval to do so is obtained from the
Town of Sykesville.
(b)
Prior to commencing the placement of the base course and
final course, the condition of the stone subbase, and the
concrete curb and gutter shall be inspected by the Town of
Sykesville representatives to determine what, if any, repairs
are required prior to the placement of the base course and final
course. After the repairs are made by the contractor and are
(c)
(5)
§ 140-6 SYKESVILLE CODE § 140-6
134:154
§ 140-7. Applicability of state standards.
Construction specifications for streets and related components shall be in
accordance with the state standards except for the standards described in
§ 140-6 above which shall apply and supersede the state standards. 26
§ 140-8. Pavement section details. [Added 4-14-1989by Ord. No.
160]
The pavement section details as shown on the attached drawing are hereby
required for the construction of all new streets within the Town of
Sykesville.27
§ 140-9. Costs for pavement construction. [Added 4-14-1989by Ord.
No. 160]
All costs for pavement construction shall be included in an executed public
works agreement between the developer or owner and the Mayor and Town
Council.
§ 140-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-27-2004 by Ord. No.
247]
Any violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute a municipal
infraction. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense. The penalties for such municipal infraction shall be as follows:
approved by the Town of Sykesville representatives, the base
course and final course may be placed.
Construction specifications. The construction of the streets and
utilities shall be in accordance with an approved public works
agreement and § 140-9.
(6)
First offense: A first violation shall constitute a Class C municipal
infraction as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal Infractions.
A.
Second offense: A second violation shall constitute a Class D municipal
infraction as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal Infractions.
B.
Third and subsequent offenses: A third and all subsequent violation
shall constitute a Class E municipal infraction as provided in Chapter 1,
Article I, Municipal Infractions.
C.
26.Editor's Note: Original Sections 3 and 4, which immediately followed this section, and
dealt with references in the County specifications to the County being construed to refer
to the Town and incorporation of the County specifications into the Town Subdivision
Regulations, were deleted 9-27-2004 by Ord. No. 247.
27.Editor's Note: The drawing is on file in the Town Manager's office.
§ 140-6 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 140-10
134:155

ARTICLE III
Public Utility Permit
[Adopted 4-25-1988 by Ord. No. 155; amended in its entirety
9-27-2004 by Ord. No. 247]
§ 140-11. Definitions.
In this article, the following words shall have the meanings indicated:
PERMITTEE — Any person holding a valid public utility permit hereunder.
PERSON — Includes any firm, association, organization, partnership, trust,
company, corporation or individual.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Includes any utilities installed or served by a public
service company as that term is defined in the Public Utility Companies
Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, including but not limited to
common carrier company, gas company, electric company, steam heating
company, telephone company, telegraph company, radio common carrier,
water company, sewage disposal company, and/or any combination thereof,
including cable TV companies.
§ 140-12. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to install, repair or maintain any public
utility within the paved section of any Town right-of-way or street without
first obtaining a permit as specified in § 140-13 of this article.
§ 140-13. Application.
Application for a public utility permit (the "permit") shall be made upon
the permit application form included at the end of this chapter, as may be
amended from time to time upon approval of the Council. All work shall be
performed in accordance with the permit.
§ 140-14. Fees.
Upon application for a public utility permit the Town of Sykesville shall
collect a nonrefundable fee not to exceed $50.
§ 140-15. Insurance.
Permittee or its designated contractor shall be required to have adequate
liability insurance coverage and if required, shall submit a certificate of
insurance to the Town of Sykesville.
§ 140-16. Failure to comply.
Failure to comply with the conditions of approval stated in this article or on
the permit may result in cancellation of the permit.
§ 140-11 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 140-17
134:157
§ 140-17. Surety bond.
At the time of approval of the permit, the permittee shall post a surety bond,
an irrevocable letter of credit, or post such other means of security as may
be acceptable to the Council in an amount of $1,000, or such amount as
may be determined by the Council as necessary and proper to give affect
to this article. A permittee who is subject to the Public Utility Companies
Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, as may be amended from time
to time, or any successor statute, shall be exempt from the requirements
of this § 140-17. In the event the permittee fails to meet the conditions
of this permit, the Town may use the surety to make those improvements
and to complete the project in conformance with local regulations and the
conditions of this permit.
§ 140-18. Rules and regulations.
The permittee is responsible for compliance with all laws and
regulations including but not limited to, those of the Maryland Public
Service Commission, the National Electric Safety Code, the Maryland
Occupational Safety and Health Administration, Town Planning
Commission and local zoning regulations.
A.
In the event future road improvements require the removal and/or
adjustment of the installation, the cost shall be borne by the permittee
unless prior rights are existing from a facilities easement, or right-ofway
or reimbursement is provided by statute.
B.
It is agreed and understood that significant deviation from the plans
submitted shall be reported to the Town of Sykesville and a revised plan
showing changes made shall be submitted for approval.
C.
Maintenance of traffic control.
Traffic shall be maintained in accordance with the approved Traffic
Control Plan which is a part of this permit or the appropriate SHA
Standard Sheet Md. 104.01 through 104.16 or as directed by the
Town Manager.
(1)
Lights, signs, barricades, etc., shall be maintained by the permittee
in accordance with Part VI of the U.S. Department of
Transportation/Federal Highway Administration Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices and its latest official Rulings on
Request. This manual is available at a nominal charge from the
Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
Washington, D. C. 20402. In addition, signing shall be in
accordance with the approved Traffic Control Plan or State of
Maryland Department of Transportation inclusive, as applicable to
the specific construction. The permittee shall assign an employee
to serve in the capacity of a Traffic Manager in accordance with
detail sheet furnished to the permittee.
(2)
D.
§ 140-17 SYKESVILLE CODE § 140-18
134:158
A minimum of one complete traffic lane shall be kept open to
vehicular traffic at all times.
(3)
All personnel used for flagging shall be properly dressed and
qualified to perform flagging operations as outlined in the Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
(4)
The permittee shall notify Carroll County Control Alarm and the
local Fire Department of the approved traffic control plan.
(5)
Safety.
Cuts or excavations will not normally be permitted to remain open
overnight or at any time when work is not in progress. Protective
measures, approved by the Town, will be required at any excavated
area approved to be left open as a special case.
(1)
All mud and debris tracked or spilled on the road shall be removed
promptly to eliminate potential hazards and minimize
sedimentation.
(2)
Precautions shall be taken, particularly in freezing temperatures,
to keep water off the traveled lanes.
(3)
(4) No blasting will be permitted within the Town.
E.
Construction.
Materials and construction requirements of the Standard
Specifications for Construction and Materials-Maryland
Department of Transportation, State Highway Administration,
latest edition and all addenda thereto shall be met.
(1)
No metallic tread equipment shall be driven or towed on any Town
road surface or surfaced shoulder. Materials or equipment not
provided with wheels will not be dragged or skidded across paved
surfaces.
(2)
An opening required in the macadam or bituminous roadway must
be cut by mechanical means to insure all edges of trench are
square. The pavement shall be saw-cut to provide straight vertical
faces.
(3)
Sheeting.
All trenches of five feet or more in depth, unless through
rock, must be sheeted to comply with the requirements of the
Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
(a)
All wood sheeting to be left in place shall be cut off one foot
below the finished grade. Metal sheeting may be pulled only as
tamped backfill trench progresses.
(b)
(4)
F.
§ 140-18 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 140-18
134:159
All drainage structures must function while work is in progress as well
as upon completion of work. Storm drain facilities, if damaged, shall
be replaced by the permittee. Should any disturbance be made to the
existing drainage ditches, it will be necessary to restore the drainage
ditches to their original condition. All stream beds must be left free of
debris so as to provide for a free flow of water at all times.
G.
Trenches shall be backfilled in six-inch layers and mechanically tamped
in accordance with the requirements of Section 206, Embankment
(page 138), and Section 207, Tamped Fill (page 145), of the Standard
Specifications referenced above. When the trench is located within the
paving section, the full depth of the trench shall be backfilled with
crusher run stone compacted to 95% of the maximum density (T-180).
H.
Any roadway or shoulder surfacing that is removed or damaged by the
permittee shall be replaced and/or repaired at his sole expense.
Unless otherwise specified in this permit, the pavement repair/
replacement shall be as shown on the pavement repair detail.
(1)
If a temporary patch is to be made, the crusher run material is to
continue up to four inches below the excavation of the adjacent
paving, and four inches of temporary bituminous concrete shall be
placed to the existing road grade.
(2)
Pavement repairs shall be as required to return the pavement to its
original condition or better and shall meet the approval of the Town
Manager.
(3)
Existing shoulders disturbed shall be replaced with a pavement
section equal in kind to the existing shoulder, unless otherwise
provided for under this permit.
(4)
The permanent replacement of pavement shall be completed within
45 days after the temporary pavement patch is placed.
(5)
If requested by the Town of Sykesville after review by the Mayor
and Town Council under the conditions of the permit, the permittee
shall resurface the full width and length of the disturbed roadway
with one-and-one-half-inch course of bituminous concrete surface
(Band SC) after the trench repair work has been completed and
approved by the Town Manager.
(6)
I.
Curbs and/or curb and gutter and sidewalk replacements shall be
completed in accordance with Town standards. Both Maryland and
federal laws require provisions for the handicapped on all highways
or roadway projects which include curbs or curb and sidewalk
construction at crosswalks. It is mandatory, therefore, should this work
include new and reconstructed curbs or sidewalks, that these facilities
be provided in accordance with construction details provided by the
Town Manager.
J.
§ 140-18 SYKESVILLE CODE § 140-18
134:160
§ 140-19. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute a municipal
infraction. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense. The penalties for such municipal infraction shall be as follows:
The permittee shall assume all responsibility for any damage resulting
from its negligence and will absolve the Town of Sykesville for any
liability caused thereby.
K.
The Town of Sykesville shall be notified when all work covered by this
permit has been completed so that an inspection of the work may be
arranged. The permittee shall be responsible for the work performed
under this permit for a one-year period commencing on the date that
the Town Manager approves the work in writing. This responsibility
shall include the maintenance and/or replacement and/or repair of any
portion of the work that indicates faulty workmanship or materials.
L.
Emergency work. If an emergency exists, and work is performed, the
Town must be notified within 48 hours and a permit obtained. All
temporary patching completed under emergency conditions must be
done in accordance with Subsection I.
M.
First offense: A first violation shall constitute a Class C municipal
infraction as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal Infractions.
A.
Second offense: A second violation shall constitute a Class D municipal
infraction as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal Infractions.
B.
Third and subsequent offenses: A third and all subsequent violation
shall constitute a Class E municipal infraction as provided in Chapter 1,
Article I, Municipal Infractions.
C.
§ 140-18 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 140-19
134:161

ARTICLE IV
Right of Entry on Private Property
[Adopted 5-13-2002 by Ord. No. 227]
§ 140-20. Purpose.
In order to protect the health, safety, comfort, convenience and welfare of
the Town, it has become necessary to initiate construction and repair of the
streets and sidewalks.
§ 140-21. Required work.
The required work shall consist of the construction and repair of the streets
and sidewalks, the drainage systems, the various utility systems, including
the location or relocation of water, sewer, electric, telephone and cable
transmission lines, street and sidewalk lights, landscaping, as well as
maintaining existing entrances from public and private property to the
street and sidewalks, and to do all things necessary to accomplish same.
§ 140-22. Right of entry for construction and repair purposes.
To carry out the aforesaid street and sidewalk construction and repairs as
duly authorized by the Town Charter, the Town's employees, agents and
assigns, shall have the right of entry, for the purpose of accomplishing said
work, at all reasonable hours, upon any premises in the Town which abuts a
Town street or sidewalk, and, unless the Town intends for the improvements
to permanently alter the premises, shall restore the affected property to
substantially the same condition it was in prior to the construction of the
improvements.
§ 140-20 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 140-22
134:163

ARTICLE V
Use of Town Sidewalks
[Adopted 7-11-2016 by Ord. No. 296]
§ 140-23. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the use of sidewalks by businesses
operating on property adjacent to such sidewalks.
§ 140-24. Construal of provisions.
The provisions of this section shall be construed so as to supplement, and
not to abrogate, other provisions of state and local law governing the use of
sidewalks within the Town, including, but not limited to, Chapter 93 of the
Code, relating to historic districts.
§ 140-25. Obstructions prohibited; exceptions.
§ 140-26. Permit required; application; approval; violations.
Subject to the further provisions of this section, no object shall be
placed on a sidewalk so as to interfere with the free and orderly flow of
pedestrian traffic thereon.
A.
Provided that the owner or operator of a business located on property
adjacent to a sidewalk obtains any and all other applicable permits,
such owner or operator may make application to the Town for
permission to use such adjacent sidewalk for any of the following:
An outdoor seating area for a restaurant, fast-food and carry-out
establishment, cafe, bistro, pub, tavern, microbrewery, wine bar,
coffeehouse, eatery, or similar establishment that serves food or
beverages;
(1)
(2) Sandwich boards or other signs;
(3) Planters;
(4) Benches, chairs;
(5) Racks and other displays of goods, wares, or merchandise; or
(6) Placement or display of any other items on such sidewalk.
B.
The Town may promulgate reasonable rules and procedures governing
the application and approval of permits for use of sidewalks as provided
in this article.
A.
The Zoning Administrator is authorized to issue permits for the use of
sidewalks as provided in this article upon filing of an application for a
permit on forms furnished by the Zoning Administrator.
B.
§ 140-23 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 140-26
134:165
Upon approval of an application filed pursuant to this section, the
Zoning Administrator shall issue a permit on such terms and conditions
as are deemed reasonable by the Zoning Administrator to preserve
public health, safety, and welfare.
C.
The Town shall not approve any proposed use of sidewalk unless such
use shall provide for a continuous, unobstructed sidewalk path with a
width that is set by Mayor and Town Council resolution.
D.
Any use of a sidewalk in violation of the provisions of this article shall
constitute a Class A municipal infraction as provided by Chapter 1,
Article I, Municipal Infractions. Each day in which a violation occurs or
continues shall constitute a separate offense and a Class A municipal
infraction.
E.
§ 140-26 SYKESVILLE CODE § 140-26
134:166
Chapter 145
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain management — See Ch. 89.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 134.
Zoning — See Ch. 180.
§ 145-1. Statutory authority.
Under the authority of Article 66B of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
the following regulations governing the subdivision of land are hereby
established for all areas in the incorporated limits of the Town of Sykesville,
Maryland.
§ 145-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMISSION — The Sykesville Planning and Zoning Commission.
DEVELOPER or SUBDIVIDER — An individual, partnership, firm,
corporation (or agent thereof), that undertakes or participates in the
activities covered by these regulations (the development of a subdivision).
FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT — A drawing to be made of official record in the
Office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court, and which may be all or a portion of
a Preliminary Subdivision Plan.
LOT — A portion of a subdivision or parcel of land intended for building
development, immediate or future.
PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAN — A master drawing of a subdivision
prepared for the overall planning of a property desired to be subdivided and
which is in accordance with these regulations.
STREET or ROAD — A way which provides or is proposed to provide primary
access for vehicular traffic to abutting properties.
SUBDIVISION — See § 180-122 of Chapter 180, Zoning. 28
SUBDIVISION PLAT — A drawing of the subdivision showing lots, streets,
and other information which may be required in these regulations.
§ 145-3. Making and recording of subdivision plat required.
From and after the effective date of these regulations, any developer
contemplating the subdivision of land shall, previous thereto, cause a
A.
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 140-26 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 145-3
134:167
§ 145-4. Requirements for subdivision.
plat of such subdivision to be made in accordance with the provisions
set forth in these regulations, and a copy of such plat shall be recorded
in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Carroll County after
approval of the Commission. No lot in a subdivision or any section
thereof created after the effective date of these regulations shall be
transferred nor shall a building permit be issued for a structure thereon
until such approval and recording shall be completed as specified
herein.
Notwithstanding Subsection A of this section, where a tract, parcel, or
lot of land is crossed by a publicly maintained road, and the road is not
owned in fee simple by a governmental agency or governmental entity,
it shall be deemed that the road has divided the land into separate
lots, constituting separate tax parcels. [Added 8-14-2000 by Ord. No.
219]
B.
Resulting parcels created pursuant to Subsection B of this section shall
only be buildable or eligible for further subdivision if permitted under
Chapter 180, Zoning, and this Chapter 145. [Added 8-14-2000 by
Ord. No. 219]
C.
In laying out a subdivision the developer shall comply with all
requirements of the Maryland State Department of the Environment
governing subdivision of land. 29
A.
Proposed streets shall be shown by providing a minimum right-of-way
width of 50 feet. Where it is determined by the Commission that a street
should be designed in a subdivision to carry traffic from other areas
or adjacent subdivisions (whether existing or potential), a minimum
of 60 feet shall be shown. Where a subdivision is created fronting on
an existing publicly maintained road, front lot lines of a subdivision
shall be established 30 feet from the center of the existing road, unless
specifically provided less by the Commission. Nothing contained in this
section shall be construed as prohibiting a developer from voluntarily
establishing, upon consent of the Commission, front lot lines of a
subdivision more than 30 feet from the center of the existing road.
B.
Street names shall be cleared through the Carroll County Planning
Commission prior to submitting a final plat to insure no duplications.
C.
Easements shall be shown on the final plat where a natural watercourse
(stream) exists or where natural or street drainage is located or may be
provided, such easement to be a minimum of 15 feet, except in the case
of a natural watercourse which shall contain adequate easement area
to provide for a twenty-year storm.
D.
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 145-3 SYKESVILLE CODE § 145-4
134:168
§ 145-5. Preliminary subdivision plan.
Streets shall be constructed in accordance with Chapter 140, Article II,
Design and Construction Specifications. A suitable guarantee shall be
provided to the Mayor and Town Council of Sykesville by the developer
of those streets as shown. [Amended 9-27-2004 by Ord. No. 247]
E.
Lots, including lot sizes, shall be subject to the requirements of the
Maryland State Department of the Environment. In no case, however,
shall lot sizes be less than the minimum prescribed by Chapter 180,
Zoning. [Amended 9-27-2004 by Ord. No. 247]
F.
Nonresidential subdivisions, including industrial and commercial
tracts, shall conform to the Master Plan and standard established in
Chapter 180, Zoning. The subdivider shall demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Commission that the street, parcel and block pattern
is specifically adapted to the uses anticipated and takes into account
other uses in the vicinity.
G.
Where there is a discrepancy between minimum standards or
dimensions noted herein and other official regulations, the highest
standards shall apply.
H.
Reservation and acquisition of land. Sites for schools and other public
facilities. In order to provide for the adequate and convenient
placement of sites for public schools and other public uses as
authorized by § 5.03 of Article 66B of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
all subdivisions shall conform with the designated location of sites
for public schools and other public facilities as shown on the Town
Master Plan. Where the Town Master Plan indicates a location for
school or other public facility, the location of such sites shall also be
shown, if applicable, on any subdivision plan involving land affected by
a public facility designation of the Master Plan. It shall be the duty of
the Planning and Zoning Commission to coordinate the development
of the subdivision with the plans of the appropriate Town agency for
acquisition of the site in an expeditious manner.
I.
For the purposes of the Sustainable Growth and Agriculture
Preservation Act of 2012 (Senate Bill 236), after October 1, 2012, a
minor subdivision will be defined as up to seven new lots for purposes
of the applicability of Senate Bill 236 only. The preliminary plan will
indicate how many lots have been created from the property since
October 1, 2012. All development proposals will be required to comply
with all other processing and code provisions applicable to minor
subdivisions. For purposes of the applicability of Senate Bill 236 only, a
request that results in a total of eight or more new lots will be defined
as major subdivision. [Added 12-10-2012 by Ord. No. 284]
J.
A developer may, prior to preparing and submitting a preliminary
subdivision plan, present a sketch of the proposed subdivision for any
assistance the staff of the Commission might give. In order to insure
A.
§ 145-4 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 145-5
134:169
that a proposed subdivision shall be eligible for Commission review,
the subdivider shall adhere to the Commission's established written
procedures for processing and referral of the proposed subdivision
which shall detail the steps, filing deadlines, number of copies and such
other administrative details involved to enable the proper processing
and review of the subdivision with a minimum of delay.
Information shown on the preliminary subdivision plan shall include
subdivision name, owner and developer's name and address, surveyor
or engineer, election district, county, stage, adjacent property owners,
vicinity sketch, scale, North point, date, contours, building lines,
existing and/or proposed easements, street names and classification(s),
floodplain(s), bearings and dimensions, plat or technical notes, as well
as those covenants, restrictions and/or statements proposed to be
shown on the final subdivision plat.
B.
Adequate public facilities review.
Certification of adequacy of public facilities.
Before the Commission approves a preliminary subdivision
plan, the Commission shall obtain written certification of the
adequacy of all public facilities required by or serving the
proposed subdivision (including, but not limited to, the
following: schools, public water and sewerage facilities,
emergency service and health care facilities, solid waste
disposal facilities, police protection, roads, traffic control
devices and storm drain facilities) from the following agencies:
[1] Carroll County Board of Education;
[2] Carroll County Public Works Department;
[3] Carroll County Health Department;
[4] Carroll County Transportation Department;
[5] Town of Sykesville Police Department;
[6] Town of Sykesville Public Works;
[7] Town of Sykesville Parks and Recreation Department;
[8] Local Fire Department;
[9] State Highway Administration;
Other such agencies as the Commission deems
appropriate.
[10]
(a)
The Commission shall review the certifications received from
the several agencies and shall prepare written findings and
recommendations on the adequacy of public facilities of the
proposed subdivision. In the event the Commission finds that
(b)
(1)
C.
§ 145-5 SYKESVILLE CODE § 145-5
134:170
the public facilities are inadequate, it shall state which facility
or facilities are inadequate and the basis for such finding. The
Commission shall attach to its findings and recommendations
a copy of all certifications received from the required agencies
and all other relevant information. The Commission shall
transmit its findings and recommendations to the developer
and the Clerk of the Town Council.
Within 30 days of receipt of the Commission's findings and
recommendations, the Town Council shall hold a public hearing
to review the Commission's findings and recommendations and
render a final decision on the adequacy of public facilities. In
the event the Town Council finds that the public facilities are
inadequate, the Commission shall disapprove the preliminary
subdivision plan.
(2)
In the event that the Town Council renders a decision that the
public facilities are adequate for the proposed subdivision, within
30 days thereafter, the Commission shall deliver its findings and
recommendations together with those of other agencies concerned
with subdivision of land to the Commission at such time as the
preliminary subdivision plan is submitted to the Commission for
decision. In accordance with these regulations, the Commission
shall approve or disapprove the preliminary subdivision plan or
may approve it with modifications or conditions.
(3)
In the event the Commission disapproves or approves with
modifications or conditions the preliminary subdivision plan, a
statement in writing shall be famished by the Commission to the
developer indicating the provisions with which the developer must
comply. Upon receipt of the developer's revised preliminary
subdivision plan, the Commission shall review the plan to ensure
its compliance with each of the Commission's modifications or
conditions.
(4)
Upon submission of a final subdivision plat pursuant to § 145-6
herein, the Commission shall determine whether there has been
any adverse change to the public facilities required by or serving
the proposed subdivision since the time of its approval of the
preliminary subdivision plan. If the Commission determines that
there has been an adverse change, the Commission shall prepare
a written findings and recommendations for review by the Town
Council in accordance with this Subsection C.
(5)
Expiration of preliminary subdivision plan. A preliminary subdivision
plan shall expire in two years from the date of its approval by the
Commission unless:
A final subdivision plat for the area covered by the preliminary
subdivision plan is approved by the Commission; or
(1)
D.
§ 145-5 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 145-5
134:171
§ 145-6. Final subdivision plat.
Chapter 150
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historic Districts — See Ch. 93.
The Commission extends the preliminary subdivision plan upon a
finding that good cause exists for the extension and that the public
facilities are adequate for the proposed development.
(2)
The final subdivision plat shall consist of a drawing intended for record
incorporating those changes or additions lawfully ordered by the
Commission in its approval of the preliminary subdivision plan. The
final subdivision may include all or any portion of the area concerned
by the preliminary subdivision plan.
A.
Title and graphic information to be shown on the final subdivision
plat shall be as required on the approved preliminary subdivision plan
except contour lines and shall clearly show all items required by § 3-108
of the Real Property Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, as
amended pertaining to the preparation of record plats.
B.
Space shall be provided on the final plat for the following signatures
and dates:
(1) Certificates of land surveyor and owner's certificate.
Approval of the County Health Officer (or representatives of State
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene)
(2)
(3) Approval of Sykesville Planning and Zoning Commission.
(4) Approval of the Carroll County Bureau of Utilities.
C.
The final subdivision plat shall be legibly and accurately prepared or
printed on sheets of material to a size of 18 inches by 24 inches,
including a two-inch margin on the left side of the eighteen-inch width.
The plat shall be to a scale acceptable to the Commission, generally,
one inch equals 50 feet or one inch equals 100 feet, dependent upon
the size of the subdivision. The developer shall file with the Commission
the necessary copies for recording and distribution as required by the
Commission, at least one copy of which shall be returned properly
signed to the developer.
D.
A certificate signed by the owner and by the surveyor shall be affixed to
the plat as required by the Real Property Article of the Annotated Code
of Maryland.
E.
§ 145-5 SYKESVILLE CODE § 145-6
134:172
ARTICLE I
Homestead Property Tax Credit
[Adopted 12-10-1990 by Ord. No. 180]
§ 150-1. Credit percentage established.
Pursuant to § 9-105(e) of the Tax-Property Article of the Annotated Code
of Maryland, the homestead credit percentage for the Town of Sykesville,
effective for the taxable year beginning July 1, 1991, and subsequent tax
years, shall be 110%.
§ 150-2. Notification to state. [Amended 6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 268]
The Treasurer is directed to notify the State Department of Assessments
and Taxation of Maryland by January 10, 1991, of the homestead credit
percentage established by the Town of Sykesville.
§ 150-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 150-2
134:173

ARTICLE II
Historic Tax Credits
[Adopted 4-26-1999 by Ord. No. 216]
§ 150-3. Definitions.
The following definitions shall be applicable to all provisions of this article.
In this article, the following terms have the meanings indicated:
CERTIFICATE OF ELIGIBILITY — The document issued by the Mayor and
Town Council of Sykesville (Mayor and Town Council) to the owner of
an eligible property, which authorizes the Carroll County Department of
Finance (Department of Finance) or the Department of Assessments for
Carroll County (Department of Assessments) to apply a historic tax credit to
the eligible property.
COMMISSION — The Historic District Commission created by Chapter 93,
Historic Districts.
ELIGIBLE PROPERTY — Property designated by the Commission that is:
ELIGIBLE WORK —
A principal structure located within the Historic District of the Town of
Sykesville.
A.
B. A principal structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
A principal structure that is determined by the Commission as having
historic value. (In making designations under this section the
Commission shall be guided by the standards contained in Article 66B,
§ 8.01 et seq., of the Annotated Code of Maryland and in Chapter 93,
Historic Districts. For the Town tax credit on limitation of assessment
established in § 150-4B of this article, only a property listed individually
on the National Register of Historic Places or in a National Register
Historic District or within the Historic District of the Town of Sykesville
shall be an eligible property.)
C.
An architecturally compatible new structure located in an Historic
District.
D.
Work done on an eligible property:
In compliance with the standards employed by the Commission
under § 93-9 of Chapter 93, Historic Districts;
(1)
After the owner receives initial approval of an application for a
certificate of eligibility;
(2)
In conformance with the application for which initial approval was
given.
(3)
A.
Eligible work includes:
(1) The repair or replacement of exterior features of the structure;
B.
§ 150-3 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 150-3
134:175
QUALIFIED EXPENSES — The amount of money paid by the owner of an
eligible property to a licensed contractor for eligible work, or for materials
used to do eligible work. In order to be eligible for a tax credit under this
article, qualified expenses must be $5,000 or greater.
§ 150-4. Establishment of historic tax credit programs for qualified
expenses.
§ 150-5. Procedures.
Work that is necessary to maintain the physical integrity of the
structure with regard to safety, durability, or weatherproofing;
(2)
(3) Maintenance of the exterior of the structure;
The construction of an architecturally compatible new principal
structure in an Historic District.
(4)
Eligible work does not include:
New construction, except an architecturally compatible new
structure in an Historic District;
(1)
Interior finish that is not necessary to maintain the structural
integrity of the building; or
(2)
(3) Landscape maintenance or new landscape plantings.
C.
Establishment of ten-percent and five-percent credit. In accordance
with § 9-204 of the Tax-Property Article, Annotated Code of Maryland,
there is a Town of Sykesville property tax credit in the amount of 10%
of the qualified expenses used for the restoration and preservation of
an eligible property and a Town of Sykesville property tax credit of 5%
for the construction of an architecturally compatible new structure in
an Historic District.
A.
Establishment of historic tax credit program for increase in assessed
value. In accordance with § 9-204.1 of the Tax-Property Article,
Annotated Code of Maryland, there is a Town of Sykesville property tax
credit in an amount equal to the difference between:
The Town of Sykesville real property tax that, but for the tax credit,
would be payable on the assessed value of an eligible property after
the completion of eligible work; and
(1)
The Town of Sykesville real property tax that would be payable on
the assessed value of the eligible property if the eligible work was
not done.
(2)
B.
The owner of an eligible property may apply to the Commission for a
historic tax credit for qualified expenses. The application shall be in the
form and accompanied by additional information that the Commission
requires.
A.
§ 150-3 SYKESVILLE CODE § 150-5
134:176
The Commission shall give initial approval of a certificate of eligibility:
(1) If it determines the property to be an eligible property;
(2) If it determines that the proposed work is eligible work; and
If the eligible property is within a Historic District, any required
certificate of approval under § 93-15 of Chapter 93, Historic
Districts, has been issued for the work.
(3)
B.
Upon completion of the work, the owner shall submit to the Commission
all documentation evidencing that the work was done in accordance
with the initial approval of the certificate of eligibility and shall
document (i.e., submit paid receipts signed by contractors) all qualified
expenses. The applicant shall submit any other documentation required
by the Commission within 30 days from the date requested by the
Commission.
C.
The Commission shall review the application, the initial approval, and
the documentation, and shall make a recommendation to the Mayor and
Town Council.
D.
All tax credits shall be granted by the Mayor and Town Council. Upon
review of the application and the documentation required under this
section, including the recommendation of the Commission, and in order
to determine whether to give final approval of the certificate of
eligibility, the Mayor and Town Council shall consider:
(1) What work is eligible work;
(2) The dollar amount of qualified expenses for the work;
Whether the amount is fair and reasonable, or what amount is fair
and reasonable in the judgment of the Commission.
(3)
E.
The Mayor and Town Council shall approve or disapprove the tax credit.
The dollar amount of qualified expenses and the amount of the tax
credit shall be entered on the certificate of eligibility.
F.
An owner who has completed eligible work prior to the effective date of
this article may make a single submission to the Commission describing
the eligible work accomplished and the eligible expense thereof. The
Commission may recommend, and the Mayor and Town Council may
approve, a tax credit if they determine that a tax credit would have
been approved had the ordinance been in effect. Only work completed
in fiscal year 1999 prior to the effective date of this article shall be
eligible.
G.
An owner who is denied all or part of a tax credit by the Mayor and
Town Council may appeal the denial to the Circuit Court for Carroll
County.
H.
§ 150-5 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 150-5
134:177
§ 150-6. Certificate runs with property.
A certificate of eligibility runs with the property, and change in ownership
does not result in the lapse of a tax credit.
§ 150-7. Applicability outside Historic District.
§ 150-8. Alteration or damage.
After final approval by the Mayor and Town Council, the certificate
of eligibility shall be forwarded to the Carroll County Department of
Finance, for the ten-percent or five-percent tax credit pursuant to
§ 150-4A, and to the Department of Assessments, for the limitation on
assessment established pursuant to § 150-4B.
I.
Assessments.
The Department of Finance and the Department of Assessments
shall implement the tax credits for the tax year immediately
following the year in which the certificate of eligibility is received.
(1)
If the amount of the tax credit under this article exceeds the
amount of the Town of Sykesville real property tax, any unused
portion of the ten-percent or five-percent tax credit established by
§ 150-4A of this article shall be carried forward for up to five tax
years;
(2)
The Department of Assessments shall determine what portion, if
any, of the increase in the assessment is due to the eligible work
and shall notify the Department of Finance which shall implement
a tax credit for Town taxes pursuant to § 150-4B of this article for
that portion. The credit shall remain in effect for a total of ten
years.
(3)
J.
For property not located in an official local Historic District, the
certificate of eligibility establishes tax credit eligibility.
A.
Work not done in accordance with initial approval of a certificate of
eligibility does not qualify for a historic tax credit. The lack of eligibility
for the historic tax credit does not mean that the property is otherwise
subject to the Historic District controls established by Chapter 93,
Historic Districts.
B.
Alteration. If eligible work is altered without the prior approval of the
Commission:
(1) The Commission shall notify the Department of Finance; and
The tax credit under this section shall lapse beginning with the
tax year immediately following the year in which notification is
received by the Department of Finance.
(2)
A.
B. Damage.
§ 150-5 SYKESVILLE CODE § 150-8
134:178
§ 150-9. Use of both tax credits simultaneously.
Both tax credits established by this article may be utilized at the same time.
§ 150-10. County tax credit.
Tax-Property Article § 9-308 of the Annotated Code of Maryland establishes
a mandatory tax credit against Carroll County real property taxes for
improvements made to an existing structure that is located in an Historic
District. Upon request of the owner, the Commission shall forward to the
County Commissioners of Carroll County the certificate of eligibility for use
by the county in granting a credit against county taxes.
§ 150-11. Grants for historic preservation.
A tax credit granted under this section shall lapse if any eligible
work is damaged due to fire, weather or other natural causes.
Where the damage is only partial, the Commission shall determine
the extent of the lapse.
(1)
The owner of the property may, as approved by the Commission,
repair the damage and apply for a tax credit under this article.
(2)
Establishment of grants for historic preservation purposes. In
accordance with an appropriation made for this purpose by the Mayor
and Town Council of Sykesville, the Commission may recommend
grants for eligible work on eligible properties.
A.
Persons eligible. Persons eligible to receive grants shall be owners
of owner-occupied residential property for whom the requirement to
conform with the historic preservation standards represents a
hardship, as determined by the Commission.
B.
Amount of grant. No grant for an eligible property may exceed the sum
of $1,200. [Amended 3-14-2005 by Ord. No. 259]
C.
Procedures. The procedures for application, approval and disbursement
of grants shall be determined by the Commission. All grants shall be
awarded by the Mayor and Council upon the recommendation of the
Commission.
D.
§ 150-8 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 150-11
134:179

ARTICLE III
Planned Employment Center Payments in Lieu of Taxes
[Adopted 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 293]
§ 150-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PEC — A Planned Employment Center District, as that term is defined in the
Zoning chapter.30
PILOT AGREEMENT — An agreement pursuant to which the Town of
Sykesville agrees to accept a negotiated payment in lieu of the Town of
Sykesville real property tax that would otherwise be levied against property
designated as PILOT Eligible Property.
PILOT ELIGIBLE PROPERTY — Real property located within a PEC, which
is designated by the Town of Sykesville as eligible to make payments in lieu
of the Town of Sykesville real property tax to which it is otherwise subject,
in accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 150-13. Payments in lieu of taxes.
The Mayor and Town Manager, either or both of them, are authorized to
enter into a PILOT agreement with the owner(s) of PILOT eligible property,
or with contract purchasers of such PILOT eligible property, provided that
any such PILOT agreement with a contract purchaser shall be null and void
if the PILOT eligible property is not conveyed to such contract purchaser
within one year of the designation as PILOT eligible property.
§ 150-14. PILOT eligible property.
The Mayor and Town Council, by resolution, may designate certain real
property within a PEC, which contains historic buildings undergoing
restoration or rehabilitation, or which otherwise satisfies the
requirements of this article, as eligible for negotiated payments in lieu
of the Town of Sykesville real property tax that would otherwise be
imposed on such real property, including the land and improvements
thereon, provided that the Town and the real property owner (or
contract purchaser, as provided in § 150-13 of this article) enter into a
valid and binding PILOT agreement.
A.
When designating PILOT eligible property, the Mayor and Town Council
shall consider the historical, aesthetic, architectural, and cultural
significance of the real property and improvements thereon, as well as
the potential economic impact of planned restoration and development
activities.
B.
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Zoning.
§ 150-12 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 150-14
134:181
No PILOT agreement shall provide for payments in lieu of Town of
Sykesville real property taxes for a period of time exceeding 10 years.
C.
§ 150-14 SYKESVILLE CODE § 150-14
134:182
Chapter 156
TRAILERS AND TRAILER CAMPS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 180.
§ 156-1. Definitions.
Whenever used in this chapter, unless a different meaning appears from the
context, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AUTOMOBILE TRAILER, TRAILER COACH, or TRAILER — Any vehicle
or structure so designed and constructed in such manner as will permit
occupancy thereof as sleeping quarters for one or more persons, or the
conduct of any business or profession, occupation or trade (or use as a
selling or advertising device), and so designed that it is or may be mounted
on wheels and used as a conveyance on highways or city streets, propelled
or drawn by its own or other motive power, except a device used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks.
CABIN PLOT — A section of ground not less than 30 feet by 40 feet in area,
upon which only one camp cottage or cabin is located.
PERSON — Includes persons, partnership, firm, company, corporation,
tenant, owner, lessee, or licensee, their agents, heirs or assigns.
TOURIST CAMP — Any park, tourist park, tourist court, camp, court, lot,
parcel, or tract of land upon which one or more camp cottages or cabins
are located and maintained for the accommodation of transients by the day,
week, or month, whether a charge is made or not.
TRAILER CAMP — Any park, trailer park, trailer court, court, camp, site,
lot, parcel, or tract of land designed, maintained or intended for the purpose
of supplying a location or accommodations for any trailer coach or trailer
coaches and upon which any trailer coach or trailer coaches are parked and
shall include all buildings used or intended for use as part of the equipment
thereof whether a charge is made for the use of the trailer camp and its
facilities or not. "Trailer camp" shall not include automobile or trailer sales
lots on which unoccupied trailers are parked for purposes of inspection and
sale.
UNIT — A section of ground in a trailer camp of not less than 800 square
feet of unoccupied space in an area designated as the location for only one
automobile and one trailer.
§ 156-2. Enforcement by Board of Investigators.
A Board of Investigators consisting of the Town Council is hereby
created, with the President of the Council as Chairman. The Chairman
A.
§ 150-14 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 156-2
134:183
§ 156-3. (Reserved)31
§ 156-4. Permanent occupancy.
Automobile trailers shall not be used as a permanent place of abode or as a
permanent dwelling or for indefinite periods of time, provided that any such
trailer properly connected with an approved water supply and approved
sanitary sewer system, and constructed and located in compliance with all
requirements of the building, plumbing, sanitary and health ordinances of
the Town of Sykesville and not inhabited by a greater number of occupants
than that for which it was designed may be permitted on any premises
under permits property secured as provided for in said building, plumbing,
sanitary and health ordinances.
§ 156-5. Licensing of trailer or tourist camps.
shall, with the approval of the members of said Board, appoint a
secretary for the Board from among the present employees of the Town.
It is hereby made the duty of said Board to enforce all provisions of this
chapter as prescribed herein or such provisions as may hereafter be
enacted, and for the purpose of securing such enforcement, any of the
above members of the Board, or their duly authorized representatives,
shall have the right and are hereby empowered to enter upon any
premises on which any automobile trailers or camp cottages or cabins
are located, or are about to be located, and inspect the same and
all accommodations connected therewith at any reasonable time. The
Board is further empowered to issue orders granting, renewing, and
revoking such permits and licenses as are provided for in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
B.
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate or maintain,
or permit to be established, operated or maintained upon any property
owned or controlled by him, a trailer camp or tourist camp or
combination of the two within the Town of Sykesville, without having
first secured a license therefor and for each of them from the Council,
granted and existing in compliance with the terms of this chapter. Such
license shall expire one year from the date of issuance but may be
renewed under the provisions of this chapter for additional periods of
one year.
A.
The application for such license or the renewal thereof shall be filed
with the President of the Council and shall be accompanied by a fee of
$25 for each unit and cabin plot in the existing or proposed camp and
a license bond in the sum of $2,000 to guarantee compliance with the
terms of this chapter. The application for a license or a renewal thereof
shall be made on printed forms furnished by the Board of Investigators
and shall include the name and address of the owner in fee of the
B.
31.Editor’s Note: Former § 156-3, Location of trailers outside camps, was repealed 3-14-2011
by Ord. No. 274.
§ 156-2 SYKESVILLE CODE § 156-5
134:184
§ 156-6. Location of trailer and tourist camps.
§ 156-7. Camp plan.
tract (if the fee is vested in some person other than the applicant, a
duly verified statement by that person that the applicant is authorized
by him to construct or maintain the trailer or tourist camp and make
the application), and such a legal description of the premises upon
which the trailer or tourist camp is or will be located as will readily
identify and definitely locate the premises. The application shall be
accompanied by four copies of the camp plan showing the following,
either existing or as proposed:
(1) The extent and area used for camp purposes,
(2) Roadways and driveways.
(3) Location of sites or units for trailer coaches or cabins.
Location and number of sanitary conveniences, including toilets,
washrooms, laundries and utility rooms to be used by occupants of
units or cabins (in cases where cabins do not have all such facilities
in proper conformance with Town building, plumbing and other
ordinances).
(4)
(5) Method and plan of sewage disposal.
(6) Method and plan a garbage removal.
(7) Plan for water supply.
(8) Plan for electrical lighting of units and cabins.
Before such license may be issued, the premises must be inspected
and approved by each of the members of the Board of Investigators or
his duly authorized representative, as complying with all the provisions
of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances of the Town of
Sykesville.
C.
Licenses issued under the terms of this chapter convey no right to erect
any building, to do any plumbing work or to do any electrical work.
D.
No trailer or tourist camp shall be located within the Town limits of the
Town of Sykesville unless Town water and sewer connections and fire
protection facilities are available.
A.
No occupied trailer or camp cottage or cabin cottage or cabin or
other building shall be located within the Town limits of the Town of
Sykesville, within 40 feet of a road in which such trailer or cabin is
located nor less than 25 feet from any other building or vehicle or the
boundary line of the tract on which located.
B.
§ 156-5 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 156-7
134:185
§ 156-8. Water supply.
§ 156-9. Service building and accommodations.
Every trailer or tourist camp shall be located on a well-drained area,
and the premises shall be properly graded so as to prevent the
accumulation of storm- or other waters.
A.
Units and cabin plots shall be clearly designated and the camp so
arranged that all units and cabin plots shall face or abut on a driveway
of not less than 16 feet in width, giving easy access from all units to
a public street. Such driveway shall be paved and maintained in good
condition, having natural drainage into a Town street catch basin, be
well lighted at night, and shall not be obstructed.
B.
No camp cottage or cabin shall be less than 280 square feet nor less
than 14 feet wide at its narrowest point, and not less than eight feet
high from floor to ceiling and shall not have less than 27 square feet
of ventilating openings, and all windows must be fully screened. If the
floor be of wood, it shall be raised not less than 12 inches above the
ground level.
C.
The camp shall be so laid out that no unit or cabin shall be located
farther than 200 feet from the toilets and service buildings provided for
herein, and walkways to such buildings shall be paved and well lighted
at night.
D.
Every trailer unit shall be furnished with an electric service outlet. Such
outlet shall be equipped with an externally operated switch or fuse of
not less than 30 amperes capacity, and a heavy-duty outlet receptacle.
E.
An adequate supply of pure water, furnished through a pipe distribution
system connected directly with the Town water main, with supply
faucets located not more than 200 feet from any trailer or cabin shall
be furnished for drinking and domestic purposes.
A.
No common drinking vessels shall be permitted, nor shall any drinking
water faucets be placed in any toilet room or water closet compartment.
B.
An abundant supply of hot water shall be provided at all times for
bathing, washing, and laundry facilities.
C.
Every trailer or tourist camp shall have erected thereon, at a distance
not greater than 200 feet from any unit or cabin it is designed to serve,
a suitable building for housing toilets, showers, and laundry facilities
as required by this chapter, such building to be known as the "service
building."
A.
There shall be provided separate toilet rooms for each sex. Flush toilets
provided with an adequate water supply shall be enclosed in separate
compartments having a minimum width of five feet, eight inches, and
shall be provided for each sex in the ratio of one toilet for each six
B.
§ 156-7 SYKESVILLE CODE § 156-9
134:186
§ 156-10. Waste and garbage disposal.
§ 156-11. Limitation on length of stay and number of occupants.
units or cabins or fraction thereof. Every male toilet room shall have
one urinal for each 14 units or cabins, but in no case shall any male
toilet be without one urinal. Toilet rooms shall contain lavatories with
hot and cold water in the ratio of one lavatory to every two or fewer
water closets.
Separate bathing facilities for each sex shall be provided with one
shower enclosed in a compartment at least four feet square, for each
six units or cabins or fraction thereof. Each shower compartment shall
be supplemented by an individual dressing compartment of at least 14
square feet.
C.
Laundry facilities shall be provided in the ratio of one double tray and
one ironing board for each eight units or cabins.
D.
The above accommodations shall be based on the total camp capacity
according to accepted plans.
E.
Floors or toilets, showers, and the laundry shall be of concrete, tile or
similar material impervious to water and easily cleaned and pitched to
a floor drain.
F.
All waste from showers, toilets, laundries, faucets and lavatories shall
be wasted into a sewer system extended from and connected with the
Town sewer system.
A.
All sanitary facilities in any trailer which are not connected with the
Town sewer system by means of rigid pipe connections shall be sealed
and their use is hereby declared unlawful.
B.
Each faucet site shall be equipped with facilities for drainage of waste
and excess water into the sewer. In no case shall any wastewater be
thrown or discharged upon the surface of the ground or disposed of my
means other than as herein provided.
C.
Every unit shall be provided with a substantial fly-tight metal garbage
depository from which the contents shall be removed by the Town
garbage collection service.
D.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remain or live in any trailer
or tourist camp for more than 30 days in each twelve-month period,
subject to the provisions of § 156-4 of this chapter, except that upon
a showing and proof that one or more occupants of a trailer or cabin
are engaged in vital national defense work and that there exists in the
community a shortage of adequate housing facilities, additional stays of
30 days may be granted by the Board of Investigators, such additional
stays being renewable at the end of each thirty-day period upon a
further and similar showing, provided that this time limitation shall
A.
§ 156-9 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 156-11
134:187
§ 156-12. Management.
not apply to the licensee of a trailer or tourist camp or his bona fide
employees so as to prevent their remaining on the camp premises at all
times.
No trailer or cabin may be inhabited by a greater number of occupants
than that for which it was designed.
B.
In every trailer or tourist camp there shall be an office building in which
shall be located the office of the person in charge of said camp. A copy
of the camp license and of this chapter shall be posted therein and the
camp register shall at all times be kept in said office.
A.
It is hereby made the duty of the attendant or person in charge,
together with the licensee to:
Keep at all times a register of all guests (which shall be open at all
times to inspection by state and federal officers and officers of the
Town of Sykesville) showing for all guests:
(a) Names and addresses.
(b) Dates of entrance and departure.
License numbers of all trailers and towing or other
automobiles.
(c)
(d) States issuing such licenses.
(e) Place of last location and length of stay.
(1)
Maintain the camp in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all
times.
(2)
See that the provisions of this chapter are complied with and
enforced and report promptly to the proper authorities any
violations of this chapter or any other violations of law which may
come to his attention.
(3)
Report to the President of the Town Council all cases of persons
or animals affected or suspected of being affected with any
communicable disease.
(4)
(5) Prevent the running loose of dogs, cats, or other animals or pets.
Maintain in convenient places hand fire extinguishers, approved by
the Fire Marshal for Carroll County, in the ratio of one to each six
units or cabins.
(6)
Collect the service charge provided for in § 156-13 of this chapter,
from the occupants of each unit in the camp and pay over the
money so collected to the Treasurer of the Town of Sykesville. A
book shall be kept showing the names of the persons paying said
(7)
B.
§ 156-11 SYKESVILLE CODE § 156-12
134:188
§ 156-13. Service and inspection charges. [Amended 6-11-2007 by
Ord. No. 268]
There is hereby imposed a service and inspection charge of $0.75 per day
per unit on the occupant or occupants of each unit or trailer camps licensed
hereunder. The licensee of the trailer camp shall collect this service charge
for the Town of Sykesville and pay it over to the Treasurer in accordance
with such reasonable regulations as the Treasurer may promulgate
governing such payments.
§ 156-14. Applicability of plumbing, electrical and building
ordinances.
All plumbing, electrical, building and other work on or at any camp licensed
under this chapter shall be in accordance with the ordinances of the Town
of Sykesville regulating such work unless said ordinances are specifically
made inapplicable under the terms of this chapter.
§ 156-15. Revocation and suspension of license.
The Board of Investigators is hereby authorized to revoke any license issued
pursuant to the terms of this chapter if after due investigation it determines
that the holder thereof has violated any of the provisions of this chapter
or that any trailer, trailer camp, or tourist camp is being maintained in an
unsanitary or unsafe manner or is a nuisance.
§ 156-16. Hearing on granting, denial, renewal, or revocation of
license.
Any person aggrieved by an order of the Board of Investigators granting,
denying, renewing, or revoking a license for a trailer camp or tourist camp,
under this chapter, may file a written request for a hearing before the Board
within 10 days after issuance of such order. The Board shall give notice of a
public hearing upon this request to be held in not less than five days after
service of the notice on the person requesting the hearing. The Board may
also give notice of the hearing to other persons directly interested in the
order in question. At such hearing, the Board shall determine whether the
granting, denial, renewal, or revocation of the license was in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter and shall issue a written findings of fact,
conclusions of law and an order to carry out its findings and conclusions.
These findings of fact, conclusions of law, and order shall be filed with the
Secretary of the Board and served by the Board upon all parties appearing
or represented at said hearing.
service charges and the amount paid. [Amended 6-11-2007 by
Ord. No. 268]
(8) Prohibit the lighting of open fires on the premises.
Prohibit the use of any trailer or cabin by a greater number of
occupants than that which it is designed to accommodate.
(9)
§ 156-12 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 156-17
134:189
§ 156-17. Court review.
Any order either granting, denying, renewing, or revoking any license under
the provisions of this chapter may be appealed to the Circuit Court in
the same manner as appeals from any order under the building or zoning
ordinances of the Town of Sykesville. Appeals from such orders must be
taken within 10 days after the order is issued. Upon any such appeal the
findings of fact of the Board of Investigators, if supported by substantial
evidence, shall be conclusive.
§ 156-18. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 165
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Trailers — See Ch. 156. Junk vehicles — See Ch. 169.
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than
$5 and not more than $100, and every day such violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense and be punishable as such hereunder.
A.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with or contrary
hereto are hereby repealed, except, nothing in this chapter shall be
interpreted so as to conflict with the State Housing Laws, state
legislation regulating trailers, trailer camps or tourist camps or any
of the requirements of any ordinances of the Town of Sykesville not
mentioned or made inapplicable by the express terms of this chapter.
B.
§ 156-17 SYKESVILLE CODE § 156-18
134:190
ARTICLE I
Heavy Truck Traffic
[Adopted 11-14-1988 by Ord. No. 162]
§ 165-1. Findings.
The Mayor and Town Council find that the streets and highways under their
jurisdiction are in danger of serious damage from deterioration caused by
the operation of heavy truck traffic. Therefore, the following restrictions
shall apply on all Town streets and highways.
§ 165-2. Gross weight restriction.
With the exception of vehicles listed in § 165-3 of this article, vehicles with
a registered maximum gross weight limit in excess of two-ton capacity shall
be prohibited from traveling on, along or through the Town's streets and
highways.
§ 165-3. Exceptions.
The restrictions set forth in § 165-2 shall not apply to:
§ 165-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-27-2004 by Ord. No.
247]
Any violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute a municipal
infraction. The penalties for such municipal infraction shall be as follows:
A. Emergency vehicles.
B. School buses.
C. Governmental vehicles.
Public utility vehicles or other service vehicles engaged in repairs or
construction activities.
D.
Any vehicle making a delivery or loading of merchandise or other
property to or from any premises located on any street or highway,
provided that the vehicle shall enter and leave any such street or
highway by the nearest accessible street or highway to the place where
such delivery or loading is made, and provided such vehicle shall
remain on such street or highway only for such period of time as is
actually necessary and reasonable to make such delivery or loading.
E.
First offense: A first violation shall constitute a Class B municipal
infraction as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal Infractions.
A.
Second offense: A second violation shall constitute a Class C municipal
infraction as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal Infractions.
B.
§ 165-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 165-4
134:191
Third and subsequent offenses: A third and all subsequent violations
shall constitute a Class E municipal infraction as provided in Chapter 1,
Article I, Municipal Infractions.
C.
§ 165-4 SYKESVILLE CODE § 165-4
134:192
ARTICLE II
Parking Restrictions
[Adopted 3-13-1989 by Ord. No. 166]
§ 165-5. Definitions.
Whenever in this article the following terms are used, they shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Police vehicles, vehicles of the
Fire Department, ambulances, vehicles carrying a state, county or
municipal officer or employee in response to an emergency call, and
emergency vehicles of public service corporations on an emergency call.
PARK — To stand a vehicle, whether occupied or not, for a period of time
greater than is reasonably necessary for the actual loading and unloading.
PARKING SPACE — A permanently surfaced area for the parking of a
vehicle.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street between the curbline or roadway and
the adjacent property line designated for pedestrian use.
TRAILER — Shall have the same definition as set forth in § 156-1 of the
Code.[Amended 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 274]
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway except devices moving by
human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 165-6. Prohibited parking areas.
At any time it shall be unlawful to permit any trailer or vehicle, other than
authorized emergency vehicles, to stand in any of the following places,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device:
A. In any intersection.
B. In a crosswalk.
At any place where the vehicle would block another vehicle or the use
of a driveway.
C.
D. On any sidewalk.
In parking spaces designated for the exclusive use by mobilityhandicapped
persons, except by those persons with a mobility handicap
and duly authorized to park in such parking spaces.
E.
In any area which the Town Council has designated as a fire lane and
which has been so marked by an official sign or yellow curb.
F.
G. Within 15 feet from any fire hydrant.
§ 165-5 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 165-6
134:193
§ 165-7. Parking at curbs.
No trailer or vehicle shall be parked with the left side of such vehicle next
to the curb, except on one-way streets, and it shall be unlawful to stand or
park any trailer or vehicle in a street other than substantially parallel with
the curb and with the right wheels of the trailer or vehicle within 12 inches
of the regularly established curbline, except that upon those streets that
have been marked for angle parking, trailers or vehicles shall be parked at
the angle to the curb indicated by such marks.
§ 165-8. Loading zone.
In any area designated as a "loading zone" and which is so marked, it shall
be unlawful for the driver of a trailer or vehicle to stand a trailer or vehicle
for a period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of
merchandise and passengers, and in no case to exceed 15 minutes.
§ 165-9. Time limit parking.
Except on Sundays or holidays, it shall be unlawful to park any trailer
or vehicle for a longer consecutive period of time than that designated
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Mondays, Tuesdays,
Wednesdays and Thursdays and between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m. on Fridays and Saturdays in any area which the Town Council has
designated as a limited parking area and which is marked by an official sign
stating the day(s) and/or time(s) of such parking limits.
§ 165-10. (Reserved)32
§ 165-11. Trailer parking prohibited. [Amended 3-14-2011 by Ord.
No. 274]
It shall be unlawful to park any trailer in any public street or public road in
any residential zone for more than 48 continuous hours.
§ 165-11.1. Trailer parking restrictions. [Added 3-14-2011 by Ord.
No. 274]
No person shall park or occupy any trailer on any lot, residence or other
private property within the Town except as otherwise permitted in
accordance with Chapter 156 of the Code; as permitted in § 165-11; or
parking on paved or gravel private driveways in the front of a lot, on paved
or gravel private driveways on the side of the lot, in a garage or other
structure for which a building permit and certificate of use has been issued,
or in the rear yard of a lot.
At any area which the Town Council has designated as a "No Parking"
area and which has been so marked by an official sign.
H.
32.Editor's Note: Former § 165-10, Continuous parking, was repealed 10-24-2011 by Ord. No.
278.
§ 165-6 SYKESVILLE CODE § 165-12
134:194
§ 165-12. Parking within line designations.
Wherever lines or markings have been designated by the Town Council on
any street or parking lot of said Town, it shall be unlawful to park any
trailer or vehicle across any such line or marking or to park a trailer or
vehicle in such position that the same shall not be entirely within the area
so designated by such lines or markings.
§ 165-13. Towing illegally parked cars.
§ 165-14. Exemption from ordinance. [Amended 9-27-2004 by Ord.
No. 247]
A trailer or vehicle owned or leased by a public utility company which is
subject to the Public Utility Companies Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland shall be exempt from the requirements of this article, provided
that such trailer or vehicle is then being used in an official business capacity
and operated by an agent or employee of said public utility company.
§ 165-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-27-2004 by Ord. No.
247
The violation of any of the provisions of this article shall constitute a
municipal infraction. The penalties for such municipal infraction shall be
imposed by a separate fine schedule to be adopted by the Town Council.
The Town of Sykesville or its duly authorized agents, may remove
or cause to be removed, any trailer or vehicle parked in violation of
§§ 165-6, 165-8, 165-9, and 165-11 of this article, which prohibits the
parking of a trailer or vehicle in a designated area or restricts the
length of time a trailer or vehicle may be there parked.
A.
Owners of trailers or vehicles so removed shall be responsible for
ascertaining from the Police Department of the Town of Sykesville the
location of said trailer or vehicle; and such owner shall further pay all
towing and storage charges to the owner and/or operator of the storage
area or garage where such removed trailer or vehicle has been stored
before its owner shall be permitted to recover possession of such trailer
or vehicle, provided that any such payments required by the said owner
of the storage area or garage shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of,
any fines otherwise imposed.
B.
§ 165-12 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 165-15
134:195

ARTICLE III
School Zones
[Adopted 2-25-2010 by Ord. No. 271]
§ 165-16. School zones; maximum speed limits in school zones.
Subject to compliance with all applicable provisions of § 21-803.1 of the
Transportation Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Town
Council hereby establishes the following roads as school zones:
Sykesville Middle School Zones: all public roads located within a
half-mile radius of Sykesville Middle School.
(1)
Ava Wanas Montessori School Zones: all public roads located within
a half-mile radius of Ava Wanas Montessori School.
(2)
Springfield Presbyterian (Stepping Stones Preschool) School
Zones: all public roads located within a half-mile radius of
Springfield Presbyterian Church/School.
(3)
A.
The maximum speed limit on municipal roads in any school zone shall
be 25 miles per hour.
B.
§ 165-16 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 165-16
134:197

ARTICLE IV
Speed Monitoring Systems
[Adopted 2-25-2010 by Ord. No. 271]
§ 165-17. Speed monitoring systems.
In this section, "speed monitoring system" means a device with one
or more motor vehicle sensors producing recorded images of motor
vehicles traveling at least 12 miles per hour above the posted speed
limit.
A.
Speed camera enforcement, using speed monitoring systems, is
authorized at locations within school Zones in the Town.
B.
For 30 days after the first speed monitoring system is activated in the
Town, a violation recorded by such system may only be enforced by the
issuance of a warning.
C.
Subject to compliance with all applicable provisions of § 21-809 of the
Transportation Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Town
may:
Acquire and use speed monitoring systems provided by a vendor
for speed camera enforcement within the Town's jurisdiction; and
(1)
Enter into appropriate agreements with the vendor for the
furnishing of speed monitoring system services associated with the
speed monitoring system enforcement program.
(2)
D.
The speed monitoring system enforcement program in the Town shall
be conducted in compliance with all applicable provisions of § 21-809 of
the Transportation Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
E.
§ 165-17 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 165-17
134:199

ARTICLE V
Speed Limits
[Adopted 2-27-2017 by Ord. No. 299]
§ 165-18. Establishment of Town speed limits.
The maximum vehicle speed on all roads within the Town shall be 25
miles per hour ("mph"), except for the following roads:
Cedar Avenue, Centre Avenue, Village Road, and Walnut Avenue,
which shall be 20 mph;
(1)
(2) Springfield Avenue, which shall be 30 mph; and
(3) Raincliffe Road, which shall be 35 mph.
A.
The Mayor and Town Council by resolution may increase or decrease
the vehicle speed limit applicable to any road within the Town, provided
that any such increase or decrease:
Is based on the findings of an engineering and traffic investigation;
and
(1)
Is otherwise consistent with applicable provisions and restrictions
of state law.
(2)
B.
§ 165-18 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 165-18
134:201
Chapter 169
VEHICLES, JUNK
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking restrictions — See Ch. 165, Art. II.
§ 169-1. Definitions.
Terms defined. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
JUNK VEHICLE —
Any registered or unregistered motor vehicle which is not in
running condition, or which is in such state of disintegration or
disrepair as to have no value as a motor vehicle. A vehicle will be
deemed to be not in running condition and a junk vehicle if any of
the following conditions apply:
(a) The windshield is broken or has been removed.
(b) The vehicle is being stripped or used for parts.
(c) The engine will not start.
The transmission will not operate sufficiently to propel the
vehicle at roadway speeds.
(d)
(e) Any of the doors are removed.
More than 30% of the window glass other than the windshield
is broken or removed.
(f)
The hood or trunk lid has been removed or is detached and
inoperable.
(g)
The driver's seat has been removed or is present in the vehicle
but not firmly attached to it.
(h)
(i) Any of the wheels or tires have been removed.
(j) The steering wheel has been removed or does not operate.
(k) Both headlights are inoperable.
The vehicle does not have firmly affixed to it registration tags
for the vehicle (license plates) valid for the year in question.
This provision shall not be applied within 60 days of the
expiration date of previously valid tags for the vehicle which
are firmly affixed to it.
(l)
(1)
A.
§ 165-18 SYKESVILLE CODE § 169-1
134:202
§ 169-2. Junk vehicle to be totally enclosed.
It shall be unlawful to maintain or keep or permit any person to maintain
or keep any junk vehicle on property within the Town limits of the Town
of Sykesville, unless the vehicle is totally enclosed within a substantial
structure, consisting of four sides and a roof. It shall not be sufficient for the
purposes of this section to cover a junk vehicle with a canvas or tarpaulin.
§ 169-3. Vehicles under repair.
LICENSED MOTOR VEHICLE — A motor vehicle which has firmly
affixed to it, in accordance with the laws of the State of Maryland, valid
and current registration tags for that vehicle.
VEHICLE UNDER REPAIR — A motor vehicle which although not in
running condition is actually under repair, or in the process of being
restored, which repairs or restoration are for the purpose of rendering
the vehicle operable and useful as a motor vehicle, and usable on the
public highways.
Any vehicle not operated on a public highway within the
preceding three months shall be deemed a junk vehicle for the
purposes of this chapter unless said vehicle is a vehicle under
repair for which a permit has been obtained from the Town.
(m)
Junk vehicle shall not include any farm equipment or vehicle in
operating condition actually used in farming operations.
(2)
Junk vehicle shall not include any vehicle actually undergoing
repairs, for the purpose of making the vehicle operable, and for
which a permit to keep such vehicle has been obtained from the
Town.
(3)
Junk vehicle shall not include any properly licensed motor vehicle
temporarily disabled because of a breakdown, which is repaired
and placed back into service within 21 days of the date of the
breakdown.
(4)
Other terms used herein not specifically defined shall have the
meanings used in the Transportation Article of the Maryland Annotated
Code.
B.
Permit required; emergency repairs on streets.
It shall be unlawful to maintain or keep or permit any person
to maintain or keep any unlicensed motor vehicle, or any motor
vehicle which though validly licensed is not operable or in running
condition on property within the Town limits of the Town of
Sykesville, unless same is totally enclosed within a substantial
structure, consisting of four sides and a roof, or unless a permit
for same has been obtained from the Town, and is prominently
(1)
A.
§ 169-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 169-3
134:203
§ 169-4. Permit procedure. [Amended 11-14-1988 by Ord. No. 163;
6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 268]
displayed on the vehicle. It shall not be sufficient for the purposes
of this section to cover such vehicle with a canvas or tarpaulin.
No vehicle shall be repaired in any street or public property, except
in case of emergency, and then only so as not to block or obstruct
any street or sidewalk, nor shall the motor of any such vehicle be
tested while it is parked or standing on any street except when
unavoidable. For purposes of this section, "repair" shall be defined
as including but not limited to replacement of any part thereof,
any change or work done to any part of the vehicle, changing
tires, draining or changing oil, inserting or draining any form of
lubricant, coolant, fluid or other such item into the vehicle or any
other such item in any manner related to vehicle repairs. [Added
4-12-1983 by Ord. No. 131]
(2)
Grace periods for certain vehicles.
No permit shall be required for any licensed motor vehicle
temporarily disabled because of breakdown, which is repaired and
placed back into service within 21 days of the date of breakdown.
(1)
No permit shall be required until 45 days from the date of purchase
of the motor vehicle.
(2)
B.
Separate permits for each vehicle; fee.
Permits for vehicles under repair shall be obtained from the Zoning
Administrator.
(1)
Permit fee. The fee for permits shall be that set by the Council from
time to time. The fee shall not be less than $25 nor more than $50,
to be collected by the Zoning Administrator.
(2)
More than one vehicle. A separate permit, and fee, for each vehicle
under repair shall be required.
(3)
A.
Title and inspection required. An owner of a vehicle under repair may
make application for a permit for a vehicle under repair by applying
in person to the Zoning Administrator, and presenting the original title
certificate for the vehicle in the name of the owner and permitting same
to be inspected by the Zoning Administrator. It shall not be sufficient,
and a permit may not be issued to the owner upon a bill of sale, or upon
a title certificate in the name of a previous owner, even though duly
assigned and transferred to the applicant.
B.
Application information required. An applicant shall complete any
forms or documents requested by the Zoning Administrator, and shall
supply the following information:
C.
§ 169-3 SYKESVILLE CODE § 169-4
134:204
§ 169-5. Vehicles parked on public roadways.
§ 169-6. Enforcement.
The make, model, color, serial number, and certificate of title
number of the vehicle.
(1)
The name and present address, and driver's license soundex
number of owner.
(2)
The location where the vehicle is stored, and the location, if
different, at which repairs will be made.
(3)
(4) If the vehicle has registration tags affixed, the tag numbers.
(5) The date when vehicle was purchased by owner.
(6) The nature of repairs to be made to the vehicle.
(7) The date when repairs are expected to be completed.
The expected cost of parts and the number of hours of labor
required to complete the repairs.
(8)
Affidavit. An applicant for a permit shall be required to make an
affidavit under oath and under penalty of perjury that the information
supplied in the application for permit is true and correct, that the
owner's purpose in keeping the vehicle is for repairs, that it is the
intention of owner to repair and restore the vehicle to operating
condition.
D.
Display of permit on vehicle. The permit for a vehicle under repair shall
be conspicuously displayed on the vehicle by taping the permit to the
inside of either the windshield on the driver's side or the driver's door
window, such that the face of the permit faces outward.
E.
A permit for a vehicle under repair shall be valid for 90 days from the
date of issue.33
F.
It shall be unlawful to park any junk vehicle or vehicle under repair or
unlicensed vehicle upon any public road or public property.
A.
A recently purchased vehicle for which application to the State Motor
Vehicle Administration for valid registration tags has been made may be
parked on a public road where otherwise lawful, if the owner does not
have available off-street parking, and the owner notifies the Town Police
Department of the need to park such vehicle on the public roadway in
advance.
B.
Maximum time. In no event shall an unlicensed vehicle be parked upon
a public roadway for more than 30 days.
C.
33.Editor's Note: Original Section 3.8, Renewal Permits, and Section 3.9, Same - Denial by
Clerk, were repealed 11-14-1988 by Ord. No. 163.
§ 169-4 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 169-6
134:205
Notification of violation. When it is believed that a motor vehicle is
being kept on property within the Town of Sykesville in violation of
this chapter, notice shall be given by posting same on the vehicle in
question, or by delivery to any dwelling home or occupied building on
the property in question, which notice shall be effective on the date
posted or delivered.
A.
Correction of violation. [Amended 6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 268]
The owner of the vehicle in question, or the property owner, shall
have 10 days from the effective date of notice to remove the vehicle
in question, or to apply to the Zoning Administrator for a vehicleunder-
repair permit.
(1)
In the event that the vehicle in question is not a junk vehicle, or
does not require a permit for a vehicle under repair, as provided
in this chapter, the owner shall, within the ten-day period, provide
satisfactory evidence of same to the Zoning Administrator.
(2)
If the notice of violation is received within the twenty-one-day
grace period for temporarily disabled vehicles, or the forty-five-day
grace period for newly purchased vehicles, satisfactory proof of
same must be made to the Zoning Administrator within 10 days of
the notice of violation. In that event, the notice shall serve as notice
that the vehicle must be licensed and operational by the end of the
grace period, or removed within 10 days of the expiration of the
grace period. Failure to notify the Zoning Administrator within the
ten-day period shall operate as a waiver of the grace period and
shall subject the vehicle and property owner to the penalties which
would apply had the grace period not been provided.
(3)
B.
Vehicles to be removed from the Town of Sykesville. It shall not be
a defense to a charge of violation of this section that the vehicle is
removed from the property on which it was kept at the time of notice of
violation, if the vehicle is merely moved to another location within the
Town limits.
C.
Owner of property presumed responsible. For the purposes of
enforcement of this chapter, it is presumed, in the absence of clear
convincing evidence to the contrary, that the owner of property upon
which a motor vehicle is kept has knowledge of the presence of the
vehicle on said property. Where the owner of property is aware of
the presence of the motor vehicle upon his property, it is conclusively
presumed that the vehicle is being kept on said property with the
permission and acquiescence of the property owner. Both the owner of
property and the owner of the vehicle are responsible for violations of
this chapter.
D.
Notice of violation not a waiver. Notwithstanding any of the provisions
of this section, the delivery of notice of a violation of this chapter and
the ten-day period provided for removal of the vehicle or correction of
E.
§ 169-6 SYKESVILLE CODE § 169-6
134:206
§ 169-7. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 174
the violation shall not be construed as a waiver of any violation of this
chapter existing on, prior to or subsequent to the date of the notice.
Removal of vehicles by Town.
Any time after the expiration of 10 days after notice of violation
of this chapter, the Town may take possession of and remove any
vehicle in violation of this chapter. Such vehicle is forfeit, and
becomes the property of the Town of Sykesville which may dispose
of same in any manner deemed reasonable.
(1)
Proceeds of disposition. If the disposition of the vehicle results in
monetary proceeds, said proceeds shall be applied first to the cost
of removal and disposal of the vehicle. Disposition of any proceeds
in excess of the costs of removal and disposal of the vehicle shall
be determined by the Town Council, which may return such excess
proceeds to the owner or retain same in the Town treasury.
(2)
F.
Violation of § 169-2, 169-3, 169-4 or 169-5 of this chapter shall be a
misdemeanor and shall be punishable of a fine of not more than $100.
A.
In addition to the fine provided in Subsection A, violation of § 169-6
of this chapter by failure to remove any vehicle unlawfully maintained
or kept on property within the Town of Sykesville, or to correct such
violation within 10 days after written notice as provided for herein,
shall be a misdemeanor. Each day that the violation continues shall be a
separate offense, and shall be punishable by a fine of $25 for each day
after the 10 days that the vehicle remains on property within the Town
of Sykesville.
B.
All fines levied hereunder and all charges and expenses which may
be assessed for violation of this chapter shall constitute a lien on real
property of the violator within the Town of Sykesville, and may be
collected and enforced in the same manner as delinquent property or
other taxes.
C.
Subordination to state law. In the event that the laws of the State
of Maryland require a lesser penalty, or prohibit imposition of the
penalties herein provided for violation of a municipal ordinance, then
the penalties for violation of this chapter shall be the maximum
permitted by state law.
D.
Independent provisions. In the event that it be determined in any court
of law or otherwise that any individual provision or subsection of this
chapter is invalid or unenforceable, this shall not be deemed to affect
any other provisions of this chapter, which shall remain in full force and
effect.
E.
§ 169-6 WATER AND SEWER § 169-7
174:207
WATER AND SEWER
§ 169-7 SYKESVILLE CODE § 169-7
174:208
ARTICLE I
Private Systems
[Derived from Section 18-82 of the Charter; readopted at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 174-1. Rules and regulations authorized.
The Town may by ordinance provide that no water supply, sewerage, or
stormwater drainage system, and no water mains, sewers, drains, or
connections therewith, shall be constructed or operated by any person or
persons, firm, corporation, institution, or community, whether upon private
premises or otherwise, and may provide that cesspools or other private
methods of sewage disposal shall be operated and maintained in such a
manner that they do not and will not be likely to affect adversely the public
comfort and health, and any cesspool or other private method of sewage
disposal affecting or likely to affect adversely the public comfort and health
may be deemed a nuisance and may be abated by the Town.
§ 174-2. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of an ordinance passed under the provisions of this chapter
may be made a misdemeanor.
§ 174-1 WATER AND SEWER § 174-2
174:209

ARTICLE II
Water Pollution
[Derived from Section 18-85 of the Charter; readopted at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 174-3. Pollution of Town water supply prohibited.
No person shall do anything which will discolor, pollute, or tend to pollute
any water used or to be used in the Town water supply system.
§ 174-4. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of provisions of this article shall be a misdemeanor.
§ 174-3 WATER AND SEWER § 174-4
174:211
Chapter 176
WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain management — See Ch. 89.
Grading and sediment control — See Ch. 91.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 134.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 145.
Water and sewer — See Ch. 174.
Zoning — See Ch. 180.
§ 176-1. Applicability of county regulations.
Chapter 218, Water Resource Management, of the Code of Public Local
Laws and Ordinances of Carroll County, Maryland ("Chapter 218"), as
amended from time to time, shall be the applicable law in the Town for all
matters governed by Chapter 218. Any other provision of any chapter of the
Code of the Town that is contradictory or inconsistent with Chapter 218 is
hereby repealed and deleted.
Chapter 180
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning and Zoning Commission — See Ch.
24.
Development impact fees — See Ch. 80, Art. I.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 89.
Historic Districts — See Ch. 93.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 134.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 145.
Tourist and trailer camps — See Ch. 156.
§ 174-4 SYKESVILLE CODE § 176-1
176:212
ARTICLE I
Purpose
§ 180-1. Purposes enumerated.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety, morals, and
the general welfare of the community, by regulating and restricting the
height, number of stories, and size of buildings and other structures, the
percentage of lot that may be occupied, the density of population, the size
of lots, yards, courts, and other open spaces, and the location and use
of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residence, and other
purposes; to provide for adequate light and air; to prevent congestion and
undue crowding of land; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other danger;
and to conserve the value of property.
§ 180-1 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-1
176:213

ARTICLE II
Application
§ 180-2. Effective date; territorial applicability.
This chapter shall take effect on the 8th day of August 1976 and shall apply
to all lands, buildings, properties and their uses within the territorial limits
of the Town of Sykesville.
§ 180-2 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-2
176:215

ARTICLE III
Districts Established; District Maps; District Boundaries
§ 180-3. Districts established.
For the purpose of these regulations, the Town of Sykesville is hereby
divided into districts as follows: [Amended 12-8-2014 by Ord. No.
288]
C Conservation District
R-20,000 Residence District
R-10,000 Suburban Residence District
R-7,500 Urban Residence District
B-L Local Business District
B-G General Business District
I-R Restricted Industrial District
PEC Planned Employment Center District
H Historic District
A.
There is hereby established a Cluster Subdivision Overlay District
classification which shall include and be applicable to all of the Zoning
Maps of The Town of Sykesville as may exist at the time of the adoption
of this chapter or as may hereinafter be adopted as a Zoning Map of
the Town. The cluster subdivision regulations as provided in § 180-90
of this chapter shall apply to the Cluster Subdivision Overlay District.
[Added 5-28-1996 by Ord. No. 196]
B.
There is hereby established a Downtown Business District classification
consisting of one district which shall overlay a portion of the Historic
District Zoning Map of the Town of Sykesville as may exist at the
time of the adoption of this chapter or as may hereinafter be adopted
as a Zoning Map of the Town. The limits of the Downtown Business
District shall be set forth in the Downtown Business District Map
in conformance with § 180-4 of this chapter and shall not alter any
existing or future zoning districts established in this chapter. The
parking impact fee in lieu of on-site parking regulations as provided in
§ 180-88A of this chapter shall apply to the Downtown Business District.
[Added 12-11-2000 by Ord. No. 221]
C.
There is hereby established an Employment Campus District
classification which may overlay a portion of the Local Business District
Zoning Map of the Town of Sykesville as may exist at the time of
the adoption of this subsection or as may hereinafter be adopted as
a Zoning Map of the Town. The regulations provided in §§ 180-124
through 180-133 of the Sykesville Code shall apply to the Employment
Campus District. [Added 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 266]
D.
§ 180-3 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-4
176:217
§ 180-4. District maps.
The districts shall be of the number, size and shape as shown on the Zoning
Maps of the Town of Sykesville, and said maps with the necessary symbols,
legends, and explanatory matter thereon, are hereby made and declared to
be a part of this chapter.34 As evidence of the authenticity of said maps, they
shall be signed by the Mayor and Council of Sykesville upon the adoption of
these regulations.
§ 180-5. Rules for interpretation of district boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the
official Zoning Maps, the following rules shall apply:
Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such center
lines;
A.
Boundaries indicated as approximately following property lines or
platted lot lines, shall be construed as following such lines;
B.
Boundaries indicated as approximately following Town limits shall be
construed as following Town limits;
C.
Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to
be midway between the main tracks;
D.
Boundaries which are drawn parallel to road lines and which do not
coincide with property lines or lot lines, and where not designated by
dimensions, shall be determined by use of the map scale as shown
thereon;
E.
Boundaries which are in unsubdivided property or where district
boundary divides a lot shall be determined by the use of the map scale
as shown thereon;
F.
Where a district boundary line as shown on the Zoning Map or maps
divides a lot which was in single ownership and of record at the time
of enactment of this chapter the use authorized thereon and the other
district requirements applying to the least restricted portion of such lot
under this chapter shall be considered as extending to the entire lot,
provided the more restricted portion of such lot is entirely within 50
feet of said dividing district boundary line. The use so extended shall be
deemed to be conforming.
G.
34.Editor's Note: The Zoning Maps are on file in the Clerk's office.
§ 180-4 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-5
176:218
ARTICLE IV
General Provisions
§ 180-6. Minimum regulations; uniformity of application.
The regulations set by this chapter within each district shall be minimum
regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or
land except as hereinafter provided.
§ 180-7. Compliance required.
Except as hereinafter specified, no land, building, structure or premises
shall hereafter be used, and no building or part thereof or other structure
shall be located, erected, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted or
altered except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the
district in which it is located.
§ 180-8. Nonconforming uses.
Any building, structure or premises lawfully existing at the time of the
adoption of this chapter, or lawfully existing at the time this chapter is
subsequently amended, may continue to be used even though such building,
structure or premises does not conform to use or dimensional regulations of
the zoning district in which it is located; subject, however, to the following
provisions:
Structural alterations of a building or structure, or the use of a parcel,
lot or tract of land which does not conform to the provisions of this
chapter shall be allowed only if the building or structure to be altered or
the parcel, lot or tract of land to be used shall be made to conform with
the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located; however,
upon application, the Board may approve the structural alteration of a
building or structure, or the use of a parcel, lot or tract of land which
is not in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, subject to the
provisions of Article XVII, § 180-109; provided however, that where the
structural alteration or addition itself and the use therein conforms to
the provisions of this chapter, the Zoning Administrator may authorize
the necessary zoning certificate therefor, and same shall not require
Board approval.
A.
If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use of a
building, structure or premises may, with approval of the Board, be
changed to another nonconforming use which in the opinion of the
Board is of the same or a more appropriate use or classification. In
the case of a nonconforming junkyard operation, the Board may, based
on specific findings of fact, decide upon an application filed by the
landowner as to whether a relocation of a nonconforming junkyard
operation, either in whole or in part, to another location on the
immediate property or to a location on an adjoining property
constitutes a suitable substitution of use which has substantially less
adverse impact to the general public and adjoining or confronting
B.
§ 180-6 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-8
176:219
§ 180-9. Uses prohibited under other Town, county or state laws.
Any existing or proposed use which is determined to be in conflict with any
existing ordinance or laws of the Town of Sykesville, Carroll County, or law
or regulation of the State of Maryland or other governmental agency shall
property. In granting any such relocation as herein provided, the Board
shall attach such conditions or requirements as it may deem necessary
to protect the public interest, the adjoining and confronting property
owners, and the intent and purpose of this chapter.
Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a more
appropriate use in the opinion of the Board, such use shall not
thereafter be changed to a less appropriate use or classification.
C.
No building, structure or premises where a nonconforming use has
ceased for six months or more shall thereafter be used except in
conformance with this chapter.
D.
The owner or operator of any existing nonconforming use involving
used car lots, service garages or junkyards shall, not later than 12
months from the effective date of this chapter, certify in writing, on a
prescribed form, to the office of the Zoning Administrator, that such
nonconforming use did exist on the effective date of this chapter. In
order that the exact nature and extent of such nonconforming use may
be determined, a survey plat prepared by a professional engineer or
registered surveyor shall accompany any prescribed form. The survey
shall include the following:
(1) North arrow.
(2) Scale: one inch equal to 100 feet.
(3) Election district.
Outline of parcel or parcels upon which the nonconforming use is
located.
(4)
Bearings, distances and acreage of that portion of the parcel or
parcels expressly used for the nonconforming use on the effective
date of this chapter.
(5)
(6) Use, dimensions and location of all existing buildings.
Certification and seal of professional engineer or registered
surveyor.
(7)
E.
Nothing in these regulations shall prevent the restoration of a
nonconforming building or structure destroyed by fire, windstorm,
flood, and explosion or act of public enemy or accident, or prevent
the continuance of the use thereof as it existed at the time of such
destruction, provided that a zoning certificate is obtained and
restoration begun within one year of such destruction.
F.
§ 180-8 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-9
176:220
be prohibited, even though such use may be allowed under the terms of this
chapter.
§ 180-10. Use of land for agricultural purposes.
Except for compliance with yard requirements and distance requirements
set forth in § 180-16, nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the use of
land for agricultural purposes or the construction or use of buildings or
structures incident to the use for agricultural purposes of the land on which
such buildings or structures are located, unless specifically prohibited by
ordinance of the Town of Sykesville.
§ 180-11. Construction or use under prior zoning certificate.35
Where a zoning certificate and/or a building permit has been validly issued
prior to the adoption of this chapter, the construction or use so authorized
may be completed or continued in accordance with any conditions required
therefor; provided, however, that such construction or use shall have been
started within one year of the date of issuance of such zoning certificate and
completion thereof carried on in a normal manner and not discontinued for
reasons other than those beyond the builders' or users' control. 36
§ 180-12. Buildable lots.
Any lot which was a buildable lot under the terms or regulations in effect
at the time of the adoption of this chapter and which was established or
recorded at that time shall be deemed a buildable lot for the erection only
of a single-family dwelling, subject to the provisions of § 180-97.
§ 180-13. Use of same yard space for more than one building
prohibited.
No part of a minimum required yard or other open space provided about
any building or structure for the purpose of complying with the provisions of
this chapter shall be included as part of a minimum required yard or other
open space required under this chapter for another building or structure.
§ 180-14. Major Road Plans.
In an area where a Major Road Plan has been duly adopted in accordance
with Article 66B, Annotated Code of Maryland, as amended, showing a
proposed new highway or street or a proposed relocation or widening of
an existing highway or street, no building or part of a building shall be
permitted to be erected within the lines of such proposed highway or street
except as provided hereinafter:
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
36.Editor's Note: Original Section 4.7, Uses approved under Interim Zoning Ordinances,
which immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 180-9 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-14
176:221
§ 180-15. Essential services or essential utility equipment.
Essential services or essential utility equipment, as defined and enumerated
§ 180-122, shall be permitted in any district, as authorized and regulated
by law and ordinances of Sykesville, it being the intention hereof to exempt
such essential services or essential utility equipment from the application of
this chapter.
§ 180-16. Distance requirements. [Amended 5-23-2011 by Ord. No.
276; 12-8-2014 by Ord. No. 288]
Any uses or buildings subject to compliance of this section shall be located
at least 200 feet from any lot in an R District or any lot which is part of
a duly recorded residential subdivision, or any lot occupied by a dwelling,
school, church, or institution for human care not located on the same lot
as the said use or buildings, except as provided in § 180-23 or as may be
approved by the Commission in a Planned Employment Center District.
§ 180-17. Ponds, lakes and stabilization lagoons. [Amended
12-8-2014 by Ord. No. 288]
Except as may otherwise be approved by the Commission in a Planned
Employment Center District, unless approved by the Board, all ponds, lakes
and stabilization lagoons shall be located a minimum of 200 feet from the
center line of any public road; except roads having a legally established
right-of-way width in excess of 60 feet (in the vicinity of said proposed pond)
in which case the two-hundred-foot minimum shall be measured from the
public road right-of-way.
The Zoning Administrator shall issue a zoning certificate for such
construction as applied for, provided the Maryland State Highway
Administration, the Carroll County Roads Department, the Mayor and
Council of Sykesville, or appropriate authority, upon and within 30 days
of written notice thereof does not reaffirm and substantiate its plans to
provide such construction in accordance with the Major Road Plan.
A.
The owner of the property so affected shall, following the expiration
time of such written notice, have the right to appeal to the Board the
refusal of a zoning certificate, and the Board may give approval to
build if it should find, after public hearing, and upon the evidence and
arguments presented to it upon such appeal, that:
The entire property of the appellant of which the area affected by
the Major Road Plan forms a part cannot yield a reasonable return
to the owner unless such appeal is granted; and
(1)
Balancing the interest of the general public in preserving the
integrity of the plan and the interest of the owner of the property
in the use and benefits of his property, the granting of such permit
is required by consideration of reasonable justice and equity.
(2)
B.
§ 180-14 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-18
176:222
§ 180-18. Traffic visibility across corner lots.
In any C, R, or H District on any corner lot, no fence, structure or planting
that would interfere with traffic visibility across the corner shall be erected
or maintained within 20 feet of the intersection of the road right-of-way
lines.
§ 180-19. Planned major subdivision for residential purposes.
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a minor subdivision of land as herein
defined (Article XX) in any district; provided, however, that a major
subdivision of land, as herein defined, for residential purposes in those
districts where permitted, shall, following any required technical review
and prior to any approval, be subject to a final determination by the
Commission to insure compliance with the following requirements:
§ 180-20. Measurement of front yard depth.
That such proposed major subdivision for residential development has
been adequately demonstrated as being in accord and not in conflict
with or running contrary to any element of the Town's Master Plan.
A.
That any one or combination of essential community facilities and
services determined necessary by the Commission, in accordance with
§ 180-94 are either available or adequately insured to be made
available for such proposed residential development in major
subdivisions which would be adequate and which could reasonably be
expected and required.
B.
That the tract or area proposed for major residential subdivision
development is determined by the Commission as being suitable for
such proposed residential development in accordance with § 180-94.
C.
Each front yard (setback) shall be measured at right angles or radially
from the nearest street right-of-way line (front property line) where
the right-of-way of any existing street is 50 feet in width in the case
of a local or minor type street or 60 feet in width in the case of any
designated Town Collector or major street. Where the respective rightof-
way widths of the above streets are less or where there may be doubt
as to the width of the right-of-way, then the minimum front yard depth
or setback line shall be determined by adding the distances specified
below to the minimum front yard requirement, and measuring from the
center line of the type of road involved:
(1) All local or minor streets: add 25 feet.
(2) Town collector or major streets: add 30 feet.
A.
In any district where a lot abuts a state highway, the minimum front
yard otherwise required for any building where less than 100 feet shall
be increased by an amount specified by the Maryland State Highway
Administration, as would reflect and allow for future official widening
B.
§ 180-18 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-20
176:223
§ 180-21. Accessory buildings.
No accessory building shall be located in any required court or in any
yard other than a rear yard, and except as provided hereinafter. Accessory
buildings shall be distant at least six feet from any alley lines and from
any other building on the same lot, and at least five feet from lot lines of
adjoining lots which are in any R District, unless greater requirements are
imposed by the State Fire Marshal.
§ 180-22. Temporary offices and storage trailers.
A trailer may be located as a temporary office or storage use in any district
as an accessory use in connection with public works or other similar
nonpublic construction projects, including public utility projects, all of
which are of a temporary nature, provided a definite completion date is
furnished and on condition that such trailer shall be removed upon
completion or discontinuance of construction.
§ 180-22.1. Accredited educational facilities permitted to raise
chickens. [Added 5-23-2011 by Ord. No. 276]
and right-of-way lines, if applicable, and which are either shown on
official plans or detailed in writing by the Administration.
Raising chickens on properties operated as accredited educational
facilities. Notwithstanding anything within the Code to the contrary,
chickens may be raised on properties operated as accredited
educational facilities with a minimum of 25 students. For the purpose
of this section, "accredited educational facilities" shall mean any school
which holds a certificate of approval by the State Board of Education
as required by the COMAR 13A.09.09, "Educational Programs in
Nonpublic Schools."
A.
Acceptable standards for raising chickens at accredited educational
facilities. The following standards shall apply for raising chickens at
accredited educational facilities:
No accredited educational facilities may own, keep, or harbor any
chickens without registering with the Maryland State Department
of Agriculture, Domestic Poultry and Exotic Bird Registration
Division.
(1)
(2) No more than six chickens over the age of one month may be kept.
(3) No roosters may be kept.
All chickens must be confined at all times to a movable structure,
coop, or pen (all such being hereinafter "pen" or "pens").
No pen may be closer than 50 feet to the lot line of any
residential lot.
(a)
(4)
B.
§ 180-20 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-22.1
176:224
The pen shall incorporate a well-constructed shelter to provide
shade and suitable protection from inclement weather.
(b)
Pens shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition,
devoid of all rodents and vermin, and free from objectionable
odors. The enclosed area of all such pens shall be constructed
in such a way as to be dry at all times on the inside. The Town
may at any time inspect any such structure or premises and
issue any such order as may be necessary to carry out the
provisions of this section.
(c)
Each pen shall be provided with a watertight and fly-tight
receptacle for manure, of such dimension as to contain all
accumulations thereof, which receptacle shall be securely
covered at all times except when open during the deposit or
removal of manure or refuse therefrom. No manure shall be
allowed to accumulate except in such receptacle.
(d)
Each pen shall be moved frequently to minimize turf
destruction and the buildup of manure-borne pathogens.
(e)
Potable water and proper feed must be made available to the
chickens.
(f)
Pens with feed boxes and nest boxes must allow not less than
two square feet per hen.
(g)
All chickens must be afforded veterinary care if they are known
or suspected to be sick or injured.
(h)
As to the keeping and harboring of chickens or other domestic fowl,
for whatever purpose maintained, the Town shall have authority to
promulgate regulations to provide that they will be kept in such a
manner as to prevent a nuisance or health hazard.
(5)
This section shall apply only to the raising of chickens at accredited
educational facilities.
(6)
§ 180-22.1 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-22.1
176:225

ARTICLE V
C Conservation District
§ 180-23. Purpose.
The purpose of the C Conservation District is to prescribe a zoning category
for those areas where, because of natural geographic factors and existing
land uses it is considered feasible and desirable to conserve open spaces,
water supply sources, woodland areas, wildlife and other natural resources.
This district may include extensive or steep-sloped areas, stream valleys,
water supply sources, and wooded areas adjacent thereto.
§ 180-24. Applicability
The following regulations and the applicable regulations contained in other
articles shall apply in the C Conservation District.
§ 180-25. Principal permitted uses.
The principal permitted uses in this district shall be as follows:
§ 180-26. Conditional uses.
The conditional uses requiring Board authorization in this district shall be
as follows:
Agriculture, as defined in § 180-122, except that woodland intended to
be cleared for cultivation or pasturing shall be subject to review by the
Commission; and provided, that any greenhouse heating plant or any
building or feeding pens in which farm animals are kept shall comply
with the distance requirements specified in § 180-16.
A.
B. Forests, forestation and wildlife preserves.
Publicly owned or private parks of a nonprofit nature, including
campgrounds, golf courses, riding trails, summer or winter resort
areas, hunting, fishing or country clubs, game preserves and similar
uses for the purpose of preserving and enjoying the natural resources
of the property.
C.
Water supply works, flood control or watershed protection works, and
fish and game hatcheries.
D.
Dwellings (detached), single family, provided that the minimum lot size
shall be maintained at three acres, and subject to §§ 180-19 and 180-94.
E.
Public buildings, structures and properties of the recreational, cultural,
administrative or public service type. [Added 12-11-2000 by Ord. No.
121; amended 9-27-2004 by Ord. No. 247]
F.
Public utility structures other than essential utility equipment as
enumerated in § 180-122.
A.
§ 180-23 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-26
176:227
§ 180-27. Accessory uses.
The accessory uses allowed in this district shall be as follows:
Trap, skeet, rifle or archery range, including gun clubs, provided that
such use shall be five times the distance requirement specified in
§ 180-16.
B.
Veterinary clinics, animal hospitals or kennels with or without runways,
provided that the minimum area is 10 acres for any of the aforesaid
uses, and provided that any structure or area used for such purposes
shall be subject to twice the distance requirement as specified in
§ 180-16; and in any event such structure or use shall not be located
closer than 400 feet from any property line of the subject property.
C.
Only communication towers, freestanding towers, guyed towers for
amateur radio communications licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission as defined in this chapter and as
regulated as provided hereinafter. [Added 5-28-1996 by Ord. No.
207; amended 7-9-2001 by Ord. No. 223b]
D.
Nursing homes, continuing care retirement communities and assistedliving
facilities, provided that the Planning and Zoning Commission has
first reviewed and approved the concept site development plan, traffic
study, density, exterior design, and site layout. [Added 5-9-2011 by
Ord. No. 275]
E.
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any principal
permitted use or authorized conditional use.
A.
One private stable as defined in § 180-122 in a rear yard on a lot or tract
of three acres or more and as hereinafter regulated:
No less than 1/2 the distance requirements of § 180-16 provided
200 feet from a dwelling on an adjoining lot or tract of land, and/or
200 feet from any dwelling on a lot or tract of land across the road
from the lot or tract in question.
(1)
No less than 1/2 the distance requirements of § 180-16 provided
adjoining or across the road from unimproved but buildable lots or
tracts of land.
(2)
No less than 1/4 the distance requirements of § 180-16 provided
300 feet from a dwelling on an adjoining lot and/or 300 feet from a
dwelling on a lot across the road from the lot in question.
(3)
An in-fee strip or portion of a panhandle or flag lot abutting, or next
adjacent to the lot or tract in question shall not be considered the
adjoining lot or tract of land in determining space requirements.
(4)
B.
A private parking area, not including commercial parking lots, on the
same premises of any permitted, conditional or nonconforming use,
provided that said permitted, conditional or nonconforming use as the
C.
§ 180-26 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-27
176:228
§ 180-28. Height regulations.
Except on farms and except as provided in § 180-10, no building or
structure shall exceed 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
§ 180-29. Lot area, lot width and yard requirements.
The following minimum requirements shall apply except as hereinafter
modified in Articles XIV and XV.37
case may be, and the private parking area accessory thereto on the
premises, are both completely located within the district; and private
parking areas off-premises subject to § 180-88A(10).
Incidental home and farm occupations, provided that antique shops,
whether in the home or within a detached building on the same
premises, shall be subject to Board approval after public hearing.
D.
Decks may be permitted in the conservation zone as an accessory use
to allow for the observational viewing of scenic vistas and other areas
within the conservation area as long as the intent of the conservation
is preserved. Decks shall be constructed in such a method that a
minimal amount of existing vegetation, plantings and/or other natural
geographic features are disturbed. The deck shall be attached either
directly to a building or to a wooden walkway not more than 10 feet
in length connecting the deck to the building. The size of the deck
shall have a maximum size limitation of 1/2 the square footage of the
footprint of the building. Plans for the deck shall be submitted to the
Planning and Zoning Commission and may be permitted upon its review
and approval. [Added 9-13-1999 by Ord. No. 216b]
E.
37.Editor's Note: These requirements may be found in the C Conservation District table at
the end of this chapter.
§ 180-27 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-29
176:229

ARTICLE VI
H Historic District
§ 180-30. Purpose.
The purpose of the H Historic District is to clearly identify, protect and
preserve to the greatest extent possible the public interest in the
community's heritage for its cultural, educational, economic value and
general welfare.
§ 180-31. Applicability.
The following regulations and the applicable regulations contained in other
articles shall apply in the H Historic District.
§ 180-32. Principal permitted uses.
The principal permitted uses in this district shall be as follows:
§ 180-33. Conditional uses.
The conditional uses requiring Board authorization in this district shall be
as follows:
Agriculture, as defined in § 180-122, provided that any building or
feeding pens in which farm animals are kept shall comply with distance
requirements specified in § 180-16.
A.
B. Churches.
C. Dwellings, single family.
Buildings and properties of a cultural, civic, educational or social
nature.
D.
Conversion and alteration of a building existing at the time of the
enactment of this chapter to accommodate two families, provided that
the requirements of § 180-88A, as well as the requirements of the
Health Department, are complied with.
E.
A. Antique and gift shops.
Reestablishment of BL District uses which locations have been vacant
for more than one year.
B.
New agricultural uses where the concentration of animals, such as
hogs, cattle, poultry, animals for experimental or other purposes, such
as rats, rabbits, mice and the like is considered by the Zoning
Administrator to be objectionable to adjacent properties because of
feeding pens, loading areas, and other requirements causing extensive
concentrations.
C.
§ 180-30 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-33
176:231
§ 180-34. Actions requiring approval of Historic District
Commission.
Prior to the issuance of a zoning certificate for the construction, alteration,
repair, moving or demolition of any structure within this district, and where
such changes would solely affect the exterior appearance of a structure
visible or intended to be visible from an adjacent public way, approval shall
be granted by the Historic District Commission in accordance with the
requirements of Article 66B and such other requirements as the Historic
Commission may legally require in granting such approval.
§ 180-35. Accessory uses.
Accessory uses shall be those accessory uses as enumerated in § 180-42.
§ 180-36. Height regulations.
Height regulations shall be as enumerated in § 180-43.
§ 180-37. Lot area, lot width and yard requirements.
The following minimum requirements shall apply except as hereinafter
modified in Articles XIV and XV.38
Conversion of existing buildings to accommodate more than two
families.
D.
Only communication towers, freestanding towers, guyed towers for
amateur radio communications licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission as defined in this chapter and as
regulated as provided hereinafter. [Added 5-28-1996 by Ord. No.
207]
E.
38.Editor's Note: These requirements may be found in the H Historic District table at the end
of this chapter.
§ 180-33 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-37
176:232
ARTICLE VII
R-20,000 Residence District
§ 180-38. Purpose.
The purpose of the R-20,000 Residence District is to provide a location for
single-family residential development, the individual lots of which contain a
minimum of 20,000 square feet or approximately two families per acre. The
larger lot size in relation to other residential districts of the Town affords a
lower overall density, and as a result, individual open space is obtained and
more noticeable in this Residence District than others.
§ 180-39. Applicability.
The following regulations and the applicable regulations contained in other
articles shall apply in the R-20,000 Residence District.
§ 180-40. Principal permitted uses.
The principal permitted uses in this district shall be as follows:
§ 180-41. Conditional uses.
The conditional uses requiring Board authorization in this district shall be
as follows:
Agriculture, as defined in § 180-122, provided that any building or
feeding pens in which farm animals are kept shall comply with distance
requirements specified in § 180-16.
A.
B. Churches, schools and colleges.
C. Dwellings, single-family, subject to §§ 180-14 and 180-19.
Buildings and properties of a cultural, civic, educational, social or
community service type such as libraries, ponds and playgrounds,
community centers, fire, ambulance and rescue centers, but not storage
yards, warehouses or service garages.
D.
Conversion and alteration of a building existing at the time of the
enactment of this chapter to accommodate two families, provided that
the requirements of § 180-88A, as well as the requirements of the
Health Department, are complied with.
E.
F. Cluster subdivision, subject to § 180-90.
Antique shops, beauty parlors or barbershops within a building on the
same premises of a principal permitted use, or detached building on the
same premises.
A.
Nursing and/or retirement homes, hospitals (Class A), medical and
dental clinics subject to prior approval of the site development plan and
exterior design of the structure by the Commission.
B.
§ 180-38 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-41
176:233
§ 180-42. Accessory uses.
The accessory uses allowed in this district shall be as follows:
C. Funeral establishments.
Golf courses, country clubs, private clubs of a nonprofit nature and
similar recreational uses privately owned and/or operated.
D.
E. Nursery schools or child-care centers.
Public utility buildings, structures or uses not considered essential
utility equipment as enumerated in 180-122.
F.
The professional office of a resident physician, subject to site plan
approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission and provision for
any landscaping, screening, off-street parking or other facilities or
improvements as may be deemed necessary by the Commission.
G.
Only communication towers, freestanding towers, guyed towers for
amateur radio communications licensed by the federal communications
commission as defined in this chapter and as regulated as provided
hereinafter. [Added 5-28-1996 by Ord. No. 207]
H.
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any principal
permitted use or authorized conditional use.
A.
Accessory dwellings for a domestic employee or relative, on the same
lot with the principal dwelling.
B.
C. Incidental home or farm occupations.
D. Existing cemeteries, when accessory to a church.
E. Guesthouse in an accessory building.
Swimming pools, tennis and other similar courts when accessory to a
residence.
F.
The keeping of not more than four roomers or boarders by a resident
family.
G.
H. One private stable as regulated in § 180-27B.
A private parking area, not including commercial parking lots, on the
same premises of any permitted, conditional or nonconforming use,
provided that said permitted, conditional or nonconforming use, as the
case may be, and the private parking area accessory thereto on the
premises are both completely located within the district; and private
parking areas off-premises subject to § 180-88A(10).
I.
A satellite television antenna, defined as any device used or designed
to receive television signals from one or more orbitally based satellites,
J.
§ 180-41 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-42
176:234
§ 180-43. Height regulations.
No principal structure shall exceed 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet in height, and no
accessory structure shall exceed two stories or 20 feet in height, except as
provided in § 180-100.
§ 180-44. Lot area, lot width and yard requirements.
The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to the
modified requirements in Articles XIV and XV.40
§ 180-44.1. Prohibited uses. [Added 1-24-2005 by Ord. No. 256]
The prohibited uses in this district shall be as
may be allowed, in this district, provided the following requirements
are met: [Added 1-28-1991 by Ord. No. 18239]
The television satellite antenna shall be located in the rear or side
yard only;
(1)
The television satellite antenna shall be set back at least 10 feet
from the property line or public right-of-way line or any other
easements of record;
(2)
The television satellite antenna shall be screened to minimize
visual impact on surrounding properties and public rights-of-way
and public property. Such screening may include architectural or
landscape treatments along the antennas nonreception window
axis and low level landscape treatment along the reception window
axis providing minimum opaqueness without interfering with signal
reception, or any other similar type of screening approved by the
Zoning Administrator;
(3)
A zoning permit shall be obtained from the Town Zoning
Administrator prior to the installation of the satellite television
antenna in accordance with the requirements of this Zoning
ordinance; and
(4)
The installation and use of the satellite television antenna shall
meet all other applicable local, state and federal laws.
(5)
39.Section 1 of this ordinance provided as follows: “This ordinance is intended to comply
with any and all applicable federal and state laws and regulations to the extent that any
such federal and state laws and regulations validly pre-empt local zoning regulations with
respect to satellite television receiving antenna, including but not necessarily limited to,
the Report and Order of the Federal Communications Commission dated January 14, 1986
(FCC 86-28) and the Federal Communications Rules and Regulations found in 47 Code of
Federal Regulations (CFR) Section 25.104. This ordinance shall further be construed and
administered so as not to unduly hamper reasonable reception of television signals by
satellite television receiving antenna while taking into account that the bulk and visual
impact of such antennas make it appropriate to place some limitations as such antennas.”
40.Editor's Note: These requirements may be found in the R-20,000 District table at the end
of this chapter.
§ 180-42 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-44.1
176:235
A. Tattoo parlors;
B. Psychic reading establishments;
C. Adult video stores; and
D. Car wreck and automobile body repair yards.
§ 180-44.1 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-44.1
176:236
ARTICLE VIII
R-10,000 Suburban Residence District
§ 180-45. Purpose.
The purpose of the R-10,000 District is to provide for relatively smaller
lot sizes (minimum 10,000 square feet) for residential dwellings, based on
availability of public water and sewerage facilities. This would essentially
permit more dwellings per acre and less open area than the R-20,000
Residence District. The district likewise provides for, where determined
suitable, planned unit development wherein multifamily units may be
provided as part of a housing mix.
§ 180-46. Applicability.
The following regulations and applicable regulations contained in other
articles shall apply in the R-10,000 Residence District.
§ 180-47. Principal permitted uses.
The principal permitted uses in this district shall be as follows:
§ 180-48. Conditional uses.
The conditional uses requiring Board authorization in this district shall be
as follows:
Any use or structure permitted and as regulated as a principal
permitted use in the R-20,000 District, except as hereinafter modified.
A.
Conversion or alteration of a building existing at the time of the
enactment of this chapter to accommodate no more than three families,
provided that the requirements of § 180-88 and the requirements of the
Health Department are complied with.
B.
Planned unit development, subject to the provisions of § 180-93 and
cluster subdivision subject to § 180-90.
C.
Any conditional use permitted and as regulated in the R-20,000 District,
except as hereinafter modified.
A.
B. Boarding or rooming houses or tourist homes.
Clubs, fraternities, lodges, or similar organizations not conducted as a
gainful business, provided that any buildings or structures are located
subject to the distance requirements specified in § 180-16.
C.
D. Community centers and swimming pools associated therewith.
E. Dwellings, two-family.
Only communication towers, freestanding towers, guyed towers for
amateur radio communications licensed by the Federal
F.
§ 180-45 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-48
176:237
§ 180-49. Accessory uses.
The accessory uses allowed in this district shall be as follows:
§ 180-50. Height regulations.
The height regulations shall be the same as specified in the R-20,000
District.
§ 180-51. Lot area, lot width, and yard requirements.
The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to the
modified requirements in Articles XIV and XV: 41
Communications Commission as defined in this chapter and as
regulated as provided hereinafter. [Added 5-28-1996 by Ord. No.
207]
Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to any principal
permitted use or authorized conditional use.
A.
B. Keeping of roomers or tourists by a resident family.
A satellite television antenna, defined as any device used or designed
to receive television signals from one or more orbitally based satellites,
may be allowed, in this District, provided the following requirements
are met: [Added 1-28-1999 by Ord. No. 182]
C.
The television satellite antenna shall be located in the rear or side yard
only;
D.
The television satellite antenna shall be set back at least 10 feet from
the property line or public right-of-way line or any other easements of
record;
E.
The television satellite antenna shall be screened to minimize visual
impact on surrounding properties and public rights-of-way and public
property. Such screening may include architectural or landscape
treatments along the antennas nonreception window axis and low level
landscape treatment along the reception window axis providing
minimum opaqueness without interfering with signal reception, or any
other similar type of screening approved by the Zoning Administrator;
F.
A zoning permit shall be obtained from the Town Zoning Administrator
prior to the installation of the satellite television antenna in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter; and
G.
The installation and use of the satellite television antenna shall meet all
other applicable local, state and federal laws.
H.
41.Editor's Note: These requirements may be found in the R-10,000 District table at the end
of this chapter.
§ 180-48 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-51
176:238
ARTICLE IX
R-7,500 Urban Residence District
§ 180-52. Purpose.
The purpose of the R-7,500 Urban Residence District is to enable in the
urban areas of the Town, where both public water and sewerage facilities
are available, a greater number of dwellings per acre. The minimum lot size
for a single-family dwelling is 7,500 square feet. This district also enables
the use of multifamily structures where determined suitable through
planned unit development provisions of this chapter.
§ 180-53. Applicability.
The following regulations and the applicable regulations contained in other
articles shall apply in the R-7,500 Residence District.
§ 180-54. Principal permitted uses.
The principal permitted uses in this district shall be as follows:
§ 180-55. Conditional uses.
The conditional uses requiring Board authorization in this district shall be
as follows:
§ 180-56. Accessory uses.
The accessory uses allowed in this district shall be as follows:
A. Dwellings, single- and two-family.
Dwellings, multifamily, subject to the provisions of planned unit
development as enumerated in § 180-93.
B.
C. (Reserved)42
Any use or structure permitted and as regulated as a principal
permitted use in the R-10,000 District, except as hereinafter modified,
and except cluster subdivision.
D.
A. Any conditional use permitted and as regulated in the R-10,000 District.
Only communication towers, freestanding towers, guyed towers for
amateur radio communications licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission as defined in this chapter and as
regulated as provided hereinafter. [Added 5-28-1996 by Ord. No.
207]
B.
42.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, allowing boardinghouses and lodging houses as
principal permitted uses, was repealed 9-25-2006 by Ord. No. 267.
§ 180-52 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-56
176:239
§ 180-57. Height regulations.
No principal structure shall exceed three stories or 40 feet in height, and no
accessory structure shall exceed 1 1/2 stories or 25 feet, except as provided
in §§ 180-93 and 180-100.
§ 180-58. Lot area, lot width and yard requirements.
The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to the
modified requirements in Articles XIV and XV: 43
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any principal
use or authorized conditional use.
A.
A satellite television antenna, defined as any device used or designed
to receive television signals from one or more orbitally based satellites,
may be allowed, in this district, provided the following requirements
are met: [Added 1-28-1991 by Ord. No. 182]
The television satellite antenna shall be located in the rear or side
yard only;
(1)
The television satellite antenna shall be set back at least 10 feet
from the property line or public right-of-way line or any other
easements of record;
(2)
The television satellite antenna shall be screened to minimize
visual impact on surrounding properties and public rights-of-way
and public property. Such screening may include architectural or
landscape treatments along the antennas nonreception window
axis and low-level landscape treatment along the reception window
axis providing minimum opaqueness without interfering with signal
reception, or any other similar type of screening approved by the
Zoning Administrator;
(3)
A zoning permit shall be obtained from the Town Zoning
Administrator prior to the installation of the satellite television
antenna in accordance with the requirements of this chapter; and
(4)
The installation and use of the satellite television antenna shall
meet all other applicable local, state and federal laws.
(5)
B.
43.Editor's Note: These requirements may be found in the R-7,500 Urban Residence District
table at the end of this chapter.
§ 180-56 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-58
176:240
ARTICLE X
B-L Local Business District
§ 180-59. Purpose.
The purpose of the B-L Local Business District is to provide for logical
locations where the retail services needed by the Town population can
be made available. The areas are centrally located near the locations of
existing and expected population concentrations and would include portions
of the "downtown business area" as well as other neighborhood business
locations.
§ 180-60. Applicability.
The following regulations and applicable regulations contained in other
articles shall apply in the B-L Local Business District.
§ 180-61. Principal permitted uses. [Amended 2-11-1985 by Ord.
No. 141; 11-14-1986 by Ord. No. 147; 10-10-2005 by Ord. No. 263]
The principal permitted uses in this district shall be as follows:
Local retail business or service shops, including: [Amended
7-11-2016 by Ord. No. 296]
Antique shops
Appliance stores
Bakery shops
Banks, savings and loan institutions
Beauty and barber shops
Candy stores
Clothing stores
Dairy products stores
Dress or millinery shops
Drugstores
Dry goods or variety shops
Florist or garden shops
Food and grocery stores
Furniture and upholstering stores
Gift or jewelry shops
Hardware stores
Hotels
Laundromats
Lunchrooms
A.
§ 180-59 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-61
176:241
Meat markets
Motels
Movie theaters, except that adult movie theaters and adult bookstores
shall be permitted as conditional uses only in the Business General
and Industrial Restricted Zoning Districts
Newspaper publishing establishments
Pet shops
Photographic studios
Produce stands
Radio and television studios or repair shops
Restaurants (without liquor licenses or with liquor licenses, providing
that the average monthly receipts from the sale of food constitute at
least 41% of the average monthly receipts from the combined sale of
food and alcoholic beverages as measured over a period of one year
immediately preceding the date of an application for license issuance,
renewal, upgrade, transfer or other modification)
Shoe repair shops
Specialty shops
Sporting goods or hobby shops
Stationery stores
Tailor establishments
Taxi stands
Telephone central office or service center
B. Funeral establishments.
Offices and clinics, professional and business, including veterinary
clinics or animal hospitals, but not including any outdoor exercise
runway.
C.
D. Planned business centers, subject to the provisions of § 180-91.
E. Retirement, nursing or boarding homes.
F. Schools, art, trade, business or nursery.
G. Social clubs, fraternal organizations, community meeting halls.
Any other retail business or service establishment which is determined
by the Board to be the same general character as the above permitted
retail business or service use, but not including any use which is
first permitted in the B-G District and which, in the judgment of the
Board, would likely be objectionable in the B-L District. (Note: This
determination is a ministerial act and is made by the Board meeting in
public session, but does not require a public hearing or notice therefor.)
H.
§ 180-61 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-61
176:242
§ 180-62. Conditional uses.
The conditional uses requiring Board authorization in this district shall be
as follows:
Any use or structure permitted and as regulated as principal permitted
use in an R-7,500 District or except as may hereinafter be modified.
I.
Conversion or alteration of a building existing at the time of the
enactment of this chapter to accommodate apartments, provided the
following conditions are met:
No more than 50% of the total usable floor space on first floor shall
be devoted to apartments.
(1)
The parking requirements set forth in § 180-88 of this chapter must
be met.
(2)
(3) All Health Department requirements must be met.
All renovations, alterations and additions must be in compliance
with the 1984 BOCA (Basic National Building Code) and the 1985
BOCA Supplement adopted in Ordinance No. 52 by the
Commissioners of Carroll County.
(4)
Any additions, supplements and amendments to Carroll County
Ordinance No. 52 will be applicable to all renovations, alterations
and additions.
(5)
Apartment units must have a minimum square footage as follows:
(a) One-bedroom: 600 square feet.
(b) Two-bedroom: 800 square feet.
(c) Three-bedroom: 1,000 square feet.
(6)
J.
Establishments licensed to keep for sale and to sell beer and light wines
at retail for consumption on the premises or elsewhere (including pubs,
taverns, microbreweries, and wine bars) that were in existence on or
before May 9, 2016. [Added 7-11-2016 by Ord. No. 296]
K.
Food processing and packing plants; provided, such use shall be located
three times the distance requirements specified in § 180-16.
A.
Kennels or animal hospitals with runways, provided that such use shall
be subject to the distance requirements as determined reasonable and
necessary by the Board.
B.
Public utility buildings, structures or uses, including radio, television,
and other communication facilities not considered essential utility
equipment as enumerated in § 180-122; communication towers,
freestanding towers, guyed towers, communication tower complexes,
poles and transmission lines including amateur radio facilities as
C.
§ 180-61 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-62
176:243
§ 180-63. Accessory uses.
The accessory uses allowed in this district shall be as follows:
§ 180-64. Required conditions.
defined pursuant to this chapter and as regulated as provided
hereinafter. [Amended 5-28-1996 by Ord. No. 207]
Commercial swimming pools, parks, and recreational areas, provided
that such use shall be subject to any distance requirements determined
reasonable and necessary by the Board.
D.
E. Alcoholic package good stores.
Carpentry or woodworking shops. [Added 4-16-1984 by Ord. No.
136]
F.
G. Sheet metal shops. [Added 4-16-1984 by Ord. No. 136]
Trade shops, including artists, silversmiths and other unique crafts
shops. [Added 12-9-2003 by Ord. No. 233]
H.
Computer and electronics repair shops. [Added 12-9-2003 by Ord.
No. 233]
I.
Wholesale business, warehousing or service establishments. [Added
12-9-2003 by Ord. No. 233]
J.
K. Sign painting shops. [Added 12-9-2003 by Ord. No. 233]
L. Automobile accessory. [Added 10-20-2005 by Ord. No. 263]
Laundry or dry-cleaning establishments and pickup stations. [Added
10-20-2005 by Ord. No. 263]
M.
N. Service stations. [Added 10-20-2005 by Ord. No. 263]
O. Commercial parking lot. [Added 10-20-2005 by Ord. No. 263]
P. Microdistilleries. [Added 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 291]
Establishments licensed to keep for sale and to sell beer and light wines
at retail for consumption on the premises or elsewhere (including pubs,
taverns, microbreweries, and wine bars), and where at least 50% of the
business is comprised of selling alcohol. [Added 7-11-2016 by Ord.
No. 296]
Q.
Uses and structures customarily accessory and incidental to any
permitted principal use or authorized conditional use.
A.
All business, services or processing, including the storage of any
manufacturing waste or by-product of the aforesaid business, services,
or processing, shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed
A.
§ 180-62 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-64
176:244
§ 180-65. Height regulations.
No structures shall exceed 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet, except as provided in
§ 180-100.
§ 180-66. Lot area, lot width and yard requirements.
The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to the
modified requirements in Articles XIV and XV.44
§ 180-66.1. Prohibited uses. [Added 1-24-2005 by Ord. No. 256]
The prohibited uses in this district shall be as follows:
building, except for sale of automotive fuel, lubricants and fluids at
service stations, off-street automobile parking and loading areas, public
utility uses, taxi stands, garden shops, produce stands and, as
determined by the Zoning Administrator, outdoor seating areas (in,
for example, restaurants, fast-food and carry-out establishments, cafes,
bistros, pubs, taverns, microbreweries, wine bars, coffeehouses,
eateries, or similar establishments that serve food or beverages).
[Amended 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 291; 7-11-2016 by Ord. No.
296]
Goods shall consist primarily of new or reconditioned merchandise or
antiques.
B.
Processes and equipment employed and goods processed or sold shall
be limited to those which are not objectionable by reason of odor, dust,
smoke, cinders, gas, fumes, noise, vibration, refuse matter or watercarried
waste.
C.
All business, services or processing shall be conducted such that
deliveries and pickups shall not unduly burden any public way or
unreasonably inhibit the regular flow of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic. [Amended 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 291]
D.
A. Tattoo parlors;
B. Psychic reading establishments;
C. Adult video stores; and
Car wreck, automobile body repair yards, new and/or used car
dealerships. [Amended 10-20-2005 by Ord. No. 263]
D.
44.Editor's Note: These requirements may be found in the B-L Local Business District table
at the end of this chapter.
§ 180-64 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-66.1
176:245

ARTICLE XI
B-G General Business District
§ 180-67. Purpose.
The purpose of the B-G General Business District is to provide logical
locations for businesses of a more general nature than hereinbefore
provided in the B-L Local Business District. Businesses proposed include
retail, wholesale, and some light processing operations.
§ 180-68. Applicability.
The following regulations and applicable regulations contained in other
articles shall apply in the B-G General Business District.
§ 180-69. Principal permitted uses.
The principal permitted uses in this district shall be as follows:
Retail trades, businesses and services of a general commercial nature,
including the following:
Amusement parks
Automobile, trailer, or implement sales, service and repair
establishments, including motorcycle shops.
Bottling of soft drink or milk or distribution stations therefor
Bowling alley
Carpentry or woodworking shops
Department stores
Drive-in eating and drinking establishments of a nonalcoholic nature
Golf driving ranges
Printing shops
Schools of a business, dancing, music, trade or other commercial
nature
Sheet metal shop
Sign painting shop
Signs, outdoor advertising, subject to the provisions of § 180-89
Skating rink
Swimming pools
Tourist homes
Wholesale business, warehousing or service establishments, except as
first allowed in an I-R District
A.
Any use or structure permitted and as regulated as a principal
permitted use in an R-7,500 or B-L District.
B.
§ 180-67 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-70
176:247
§ 180-70. Conditional uses.
The conditional uses requiring Board authorization in this district shall be
as follows:
§ 180-71. Accessory uses.
The accessory uses allowed in this district shall be as follows:
§ 180-72. Height regulations.
No structure shall exceed 50 feet in height except as provided in § 180-100.
§ 180-73. Lot area, lot width and yard requirements.
The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to the
modified requirements in Article XV: 45
A. Amusement arcade. [Added 5-30-1982 by Ord. No. 125]
B. Building material sales and storage yards.
C. Feed and grain sales, milling and/or storage.
Any conditional use permitted and as regulated in the B-L District,
except as modified in § 180-69.
D.
E. Adult bookstore. [Added 3-11-1985 by Ord. No. 141]
F. Adult movie theater. [Added 3-11-1985 by Ord. No. 141]
Only communication towers, freestanding towers, guyed towers for
amateur radio communications licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission as defined in this chapter and as
regulated as provided hereinafter. [Added 7-9-2001 by Ord. No.
223b]
G.
Uses and structures customarily accessory and incidental to any
principal permitted use or authorized conditional use, including
business signs pertaining to "use on the premises," provided that such
signs are located as regulated in § 180-89C.
A.
45.Editor's Note: These requirements may be found in the B-G General Business District
table at the end of this chapter.
§ 180-70 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-73
176:248
ARTICLE XII
I-R Restricted Industrial District
§ 180-74. Purpose.
The purpose of the I-R Restricted Industrial District is to provide locations
for the lighter manufacturing processes; however, the district is not
exclusive to most of the B-G District uses. For the most part, the
manufacturing is composed of processing or assembly of previously
processed materials.
§ 180-75. Applicability.
The following regulations and applicable regulations contained in other
articles shall be permitted in the I-R Restricted Industrial District.
§ 180-76. Principal permitted uses.
The principal permitted uses in this district shall be as follows:
A. Truck or motor freight terminals or warehouses.
Uses of a light industrial nature including, but not limited to, the
following, provided that such uses shall be subject to the distance
requirements specified in § 180-16:
Manufacture and assembly of electrical appliances, electronics and
communication equipment, professional, scientific and controlling
instruments, and photographic or optical products.
(1)
Manufacturing, compounding, assembling, or treatment of articles
or merchandise from previously prepared materials such as bone,
cloth, fur, cork, fibre, canvas, leather, cellophane, paper, glass,
plastics, horn, stone, shells, tobacco, wax, textiles, yarns, wood and
metals, including light steel or other light metal, light metal mesh,
pipe, rods, shapes, strips, wire or similar component parts.
(2)
Manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment
of cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, and food products, except fish and
meat products, sauerkraut, vinegar, yeast, and the rendering or
refining of fats and oils.
(3)
Manufacture of musical instruments, novelties, and molded rubber
products, including tire manufacture, recapping and treading.
(4)
Manufacture of pottery or other similar ceramic products using
only previously pulverized clay and kilns fired only by electricity or
gas.
(5)
(6) Laboratories, chemical, physical and biological.
(7) Clothing and shoe manufacture.
B.
§ 180-74 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-76
176:249
§ 180-77. Conditional uses.
The conditional uses requiring Board authorization in this district shall be
as follows:
(8) Carpet and rug cleaning plants.
(9) Petroleum products storage underground.
(10)Blacksmith, welding, machine or similar shops.
(11)Heliports.
C. Agriculture for interim use.
Any use permitted and as regulated as a principal permitted use and a
conditional use in the B-L and B-G Districts, except dwellings, alcoholic
package goods stores, amusement arcades and except as may be
modified in this section or as may be hereinafter modified. [Amended
5-30-1982 by Ord. No. 125; 3-24-1997 by Ord. No. 208]
D.
Any other use that is determined by the Board to be of the same
general character as the above permitted uses, and which would not
be detrimental to the public health, safety, or general welfare of the
community, but not including any use which is prohibited in the I-R
District.
E.
F. Industrial parks, subject to § 180-92.
A. Alcoholic package goods stores as regulated in the B-G District.
The following uses when the location of such use shall have been
authorized by the Board, provided that such use shall be subject to two
times the distance requirements specified in § 180-16:
(1) Bituminous concrete mixing plants.
Concrete and ceramic products manufacture, including readymixed
concrete plants.
(2)
(3) Contractors' equipment and storage yards.
Petroleum products storage tanks above ground, any one of which
has the capacity in excess of 1,000 gallons, provided that all state
and federal laws, as well as National Fire Underwriters Codes, are
complied with.
(4)
(5) Sawmills, commercial.
Manufacture and assembly of aircraft, automobiles, or other
vehicles.
(6)
(7) Manufacture and bottling of alcoholic beverages.
(8) Machine shops, structural steel fabricating.
B.
§ 180-76 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-77
176:250
§ 180-78. Accessory uses.
The accessory uses allowed in this district shall be as follows:
§ 180-79. Height regulations.
No structure shall exceed 50 feet in height, except as provided in § 180-100.
§ 180-80. Yard requirements.
The following requirements shall be observed, subject to the provisions of
Article XV:
(9) Coalyards.
(10)Copperage works.
(11)Manufacture or processing of meat or food products.
(12)Manufacture of rayon or similar products.
(13)Manufacture of rubber or rubber products.
(14)Manufacture of starch, glucose, dextrin, or spice.
(15)Manufacture of wire or wire products.
(16)Fertilizer, potash, insecticide manufacture.
C. Adult bookstores. [Added 2-11-1985 by Ord. No. 141]
D. Adult theaters. [Added 2-11-1985 by Ord. No. 141]
Communication towers, freestanding towers, guyed towers,
communication tower complexes, poles and transmission lines
including amateur radio facilities as defined pursuant to this chapter
and as regulated as provided hereinafter. [Added 5-28-1996 by Ord.
No. 207; amended 7-9-2001 by Ord. No. 223b]
E.
Uses customarily accessory and incidental to any principal permitted
use or authorized conditional use, including a temporary office or
dwelling associated with an industrial use.
A.
A. Front yard: for industrial buildings or structures, 30 feet.
Side yard: 10 feet, except adjoining an R District in which case not less
than 30 feet.
B.
C. Rear yard: 30 feet.
§ 180-77 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-80
176:251

ARTICLE XIII
I-G General Industrial District
[Added 11-14-1988 by Ord. No. 164]
§ 180-81. Applicability.
The following regulations and applicable regulations contained in other
articles shall apply in the I-G General Industrial District.
§ 180-82. Principal permitted uses.
The principal permitted uses in this district shall be as follows:
Uses of a heavy industrial nature, but not limited to the following,
provided such uses shall be located two times the distance
requirements specified in § 180-16:
Manufacture and assembly of aircraft, automobiles, house trailers
or other vehicles.
(1)
(2) Manufacture of brick, clay products.
(3) Machine shops, structural steel fabricating.
(4) Coal yards.
(5) Copperage works.
(6) Contractor's equipment storage yard.
(7) Crematories.
Manufacture or processing of chemicals, except sulfuric, nitric or
hydraulic or other corrosive or offensive acids.
(8)
(9) Manufacture of dye or dyestuff and printing ink.
(10)Electric generating or steam power plants.
(11)Flour mill, grain milling or drying.
Manufacture of felt, shoddy, hair products, feathers, emery cloth,
sandpaper or sand blasting and/or products therefrom.
(12)
(13)Enameling, japanning, lacquering, galvanizing and plating.
Manufacture or processing of meat or food products, except
slaughterhouses.
(14)
(15)Manufacture of paper, pulp, or cloth.
(16)Manufacture of perfume.
Manufacture of pickle, sauerkraut, vinegar, yeast, soda or soda
compounds.
(17)
A.
§ 180-81 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-82
176:253
§ 180-83. Conditional uses.
The conditional uses requiring Board authorization in this district shall be
as follows:
(18)Manufacture of rayon or similar products.
(19)Manufacture of, rubber or rubber products.
(20)Manufacture of starch, glucose, dextrin or spice.
(21)Manufacture of soap, oil, paints, turpentine.
(22)Manufacture of wire or wire products.
Agriculture for interim use, provided that any buildings or feeding
pens in which farm animals are kept shall comply with the distance
requirements of § 180-16.
B.
Any use permitted or as regulated as a principal permitted use in the
I-R District, except as hereinafter modified.
C.
Any use permitted and as regulated as a principal permitted use and a
conditional use in the B-L and B-G Districts except dwellings.
D.
Any other use that is determined by the Board to be of the same
general character as the above permitted uses and which would not
be detrimental to the public health, safety, or general welfare of the
community.
E.
The following uses, when the location of such use shall have been
authorized by the Board, provided that such use shall not be less than
1,000 feet from any R District, except an I-R District, and four times the
distance requirements as specified in § 180-16:
(1) Acid or heavy chemical manufacture, processing or storage.
(2) Blast furnace or boiler works.
(3) Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of paris manufacturing.
Distillation of bones, fat rendering, grease, lard or tallow
manufacturing or processing.
(4)
(5) Explosive manufacture or storage.
(6) Extractive type industry, subject to the provisions of § 180-100.
(7) Fertilizer, potash, insecticide, glue, size or gelatin manufacture.
(8) Foundries.
(9) Gas manufacture or storage for heat or illumination.
A.
§ 180-82 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-83
176:254
§ 180-84. Accessory uses.
The accessory uses allowed in this district shall be as follows:
§ 180-85. Height regulations.
No structure shall exceed three stories or 50 feet in height except as
provided in § 180-100.
§ 180-86. Yard requirements.
Yard requirements shall be the same as in the I-R District.
§ 180-87. Required conditions.
All applications for permitted or conditional uses shall be subject to a
site plan review by those agencies determined appropriate by the Zoning
Administrator, who, following any referral to such agencies, shall cause
the plan to be presented to the Council which shall have the authority to
approve the plan as presented, or approve the plan with modifications or
conditions. In approving site development plans, the Council or its duly
authorized representative shall have the authority to:
Petroleum products refining or storage above ground in tanks in
excess of 1,000 gallons, provided that all state and federal laws, as
well as National Fire Underwriters Codes, are complied with.
(10)
Bituminous concrete (blacktop) mixing plants as regulated in the I-R
District.
B.
C. Any conditional use set forth and as regulated in the I-R District.
Uses customarily accessory and incidental to any principal permitted
use or authorized conditional use, including a mobile home or dwelling
associated with an industrial use.
A.
Limit the number and approve the location and design of entrances in
the interest of public safety and minimizing traffic congestion to the
greatest extent possible.
A.
Require, where appropriate, a landscaping and signing plan to promote
an attractive and pleasing appearance.
B.
Approve lighting arrangements where appropriate to insure no visual
interference to the traveling public on adjacent roadways, or glare or
reflections on adjacent buildings.
C.
Require binding agreement, backed by bond or other surety, and
provided to the Council where an occupancy permit is requested prior
to the completion of the site development plan and/or the fulfillment of
any conditions attached thereto.
D.
§ 180-83 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-87
176:255
Insure conformance to all duly adopted elements of the Town Master
Plan.
E.
§ 180-87 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-87
176:256
ARTICLE XIV
Special Provisions
§ 180-88. Parking space requirements.
Off-street parking spaces. For the following uses of buildings hereafter
erected, or increased in size by as much as 20% of the size existing
at the time of the adoption of these regulations, or uses hereafter
established, off-street parking facilities which are outside the public
right-of-way shall be required as follows:
All single-family detached dwellings shall provide facilities for offstreet
parking for not less than three motor vehicles per dwelling
and all multifamily dwellings shall provide facilities for off-street
parking for not less than two motor vehicles per dwelling unit or
apartment. [Amended 4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 244]
(1)
All, B-L, B-G, I-R and Planned Employment Center District uses
shall provide off-street parking facilities which are not more than
300 feet distant from an entrance to said establishment, and which
shall accommodate normal parking requirements as determined by
the Zoning Administrator at the time of application for a zoning
certificate, but in any case, not less than the following: [Amended
5-30-1982 by Ord. No. 125; 12-8-2014 by Ord. No. 288;
9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 291; 7-11-2016 by Ord. No. 296]
Amusement arcade 1 parking space for every two
game machines or amusement
devices
Automobile sales and service
garages
50% of floor area
Banks, business offices, and
professional offices (other than
a doctor's office)
50% of floor area
Bowling alleys 5 spaces for each alley
Churches and schools 1 space for each 4 seats in a
principal auditorium or 1 space
for each 10 classroom seats,
whichever is greater
Dance halls, assembly halls 200% of floor area used for
dancing or assembly
Doctor's office 8 parking spaces per doctor
Funeral homes, mortuaries 4 spaces for each parlor or 1
space for each 50 square feet of
floor area, whichever is greater
(2)
A.
§ 180-88 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-88
176:257
Furniture and appliance stores,
household equipment or
furniture repair shops, over
1,000 square feet of floor area
100% of floor area
Hospitals 1 space for each 2 beds
Hotels, motels, lodging houses 1 1/2 spaces for each bedroom
Manufacturing plants 1 space for each 2 employees on
the maximum working shift or
25% of floor area, whichever is
the greater
Microdistillery 1 space per every 200 square
feet of floor area.
Nursing home 1 space for each 4 beds
Pubs, taverns, microbreweries,
wine bars
100% of floor area
Restaurants, and nightclubs 200% of the floor area
Retail stores, supermarkets,
etc., over 2,000 square feet
floor area
200% of floor area
Sports arenas, auditoriums,
other than in schools
1 space for each 3 seats
Theaters, assembly halls with
fixed seats
1 space for each 3 seats
Commercial or club swimming
pools
1 space for each 3 members or
each 3 persons of estimated
maximum capacity
Wholesale establishments or
warehouses
1 space for each 2 employees or
10% of floor area, whichever is
greater
In the case of any building, structure or premises, the use of which
is not specifically mentioned herein, the provisions for a use which
is so mentioned and to which said use is most nearly similar shall
apply.
(3)
Notwithstanding Subsection A(2) above, the Commission may, upon
application in B-L and Planned Employment Center Districts only,
authorize modification, reduction or waiver should the Commission
find that adequate parking is existing or planned in the applicable
B-L or Planned Employment Center District. [Amended
12-8-2014 by Ord. No. 288]
(4)
The Board of Appeals may authorize, subject to provisions of
§ 180-110, a modification, reduction or waiver of the foregoing
requirements, if it should find that, in a particular case appealed,
the peculiar nature of the residential, business, trade, industrial or
(5)
§ 180-88 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-88
176:258
other use, or the exceptional shape or size of the property or other
exceptional situation or condition would justify such modification,
reduction or waiver. [Amended 12-8-2014 by Ord. No. 288]
Every off-street parking area for more than five vehicles shall be
located at least 10 feet from every street line, and five feet from
every residential lot line. The edges of the parking area shall be
curbed or buffered, and the space between parking area and street
or lot line shall be landscaped and maintained in sightly condition.
Where adjoining a street, such landscaping shall consist of grass
and low shrubs or ornamental trees; where adjoining a residential
lot, it shall include a hedge of sufficient type and height (not less
than 30 inches) to protect and screen the adjoining property. If an
ornamental wall or fence is installed in lieu of such hedge, and
accomplishing the same purpose, then the five-foot strip may be
omitted.
(6)
Any off-street parking area, including any commercial parking lot
for more than five vehicles, shall be surfaced or kept treated in
such manner as may be necessary to prevent any dust nuisance to
the neighboring property or the general public, shall be so graded
and drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulation within
the area and shall be so arranged and marked as to provide for
orderly and safe loading or unloading and parking and storage of
self propelled vehicles.
(7)
Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area,
including any commercial parking lot, shall be so arranged as to
direct the light away from adjoining residential premises and from
public streets.
(8)
In providing required parking facilities, the minimum standards
shall be:
Access lane width: 25 feet for ninety-degree (perpendicular)
parking; 20 feet for angular parking.
(a)
Parking stall depth: 20 feet, except for parallel parking stalls
which shall be 25 feet, provided that the end stalls may be
reduced to 20 feet.
(b)
Parking stall width: a minimum of nine feet measured
perpendicular to stall depth, except for parallel parking stalls
which may be reduced to seven feet in width when the door
on each side of the vehicle can be opened without being
obstructed.
(c)
Maneuverability and setback. In all cases, with the exception
of single- and two-family residences, parking facilities shall be
designed, constructed and delineated so as to facilitate onemaneuver
parking exclusive of road or street right-of-way, and
(d)
(9)
§ 180-88 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-88
176:259
a minimum setback requirement of 10 feet from any public
street right-of-way shall be provided.
Continued maintenance. Parking stalls shall be periodically
repainted in order to maintain continuous and clear
identification.
(e)
Off premises restricted parking. Except as may be otherwise
provided by this chapter, the Board of Appeals may authorize,
following public hearing, an off-street restricted parking area
which is accessory to, but not on the same premises of any
permitted, conditional or nonconforming use, subject to the
following conditions and limitations:
No charge shall be made for the parking of vehicles, and the
accessory use shall be clearly for the benefit of employees or
patrons.
(a)
The application shall be accompanied by the names and
addresses of all confronting and adjoining property owners
within 200 feet of the premises in question, who shall be given
the opportunity to be heard at public hearing.
(b)
The Board shall find the premises in question to be within
reasonable proximity to the principal, conditional or
nonconforming use to which it is accessory.
(c)
Compliance with Subsections A(7) and (9) above and any other
requirements the Board may prescribe or deem necessary or
desirable with respect to lighting, enclosures, marking,
surfacing, or planting for the protection of adjacent property.
(d)
That a zoning certificate issued for an accessory parking area
shall be revocable subject to continued compliance with any
requirements or conditions.
(e)
(10)
Parking impact fee. The Planning and Zoning Commission may
permit fulfillment of all or part of the parking requirement in the
Downtown Business District to be satisfied through the payment
of a parking impact fee in lieu of on-site parking when on-site
parking is impractical due to site conditions. Parking Impact Fees
shall be determined by ordinance based upon a per-space cost.
Parking impact fee payments shall be used for the development of
parking facilities within the Downtown Business District as more
particularly set forth by ordinance. [Added 12-11-2000 by Ord.
No. 221]
(11)
Off-street loading facilities. All B District and I-R District uses shall
provide adequate off-street loading facilities for vehicles delivering
to, unloading or removing goods, materials, supplies, or waste in
connection with said business or use. In connection with every building
and part thereof erected, having a gross floor area of 10,000 square
B.
§ 180-88 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-88
176:260
§ 180-89. Signs.
In order to properly integrate all regulating provisions affecting signs,
as defined in § 180-122, and to regulate such devices in an orderly and
comprehensive manner, it is hereby provided that signs are subject to
regulations as set forth herein.
feet or more, and which is to be occupied by manufacturing, storage,
warehouse, goods display, retail store, wholesale store, market, hotel,
hospital or other similar use, there shall be provided and maintained on
the same lot with such building, at least one off-street loading space,
plus one additional such loading space for each 20,000 square feet or
major fraction thereof of gross floor area so used in excess of the first
20,000 square feet. Each loading space shall not be less than 10 feet
in width, 45 feet in length and 14 feet in clear height. Such space may
occupy all or any part of any required yard or court space, except a
front yard or the required side yard on the side street of the corner lot.
No such space shall be located closer than 30 feet to any lot located in
any R District, unless the loading space is wholly within a completely
enclosed building.
Signs permitted without zoning certificate. The following signs are
permitted without a zoning certificate in any district, provided that the
following conditions are adhered to:
Signs indicating the name and/or premises or accessory use of
a home for a home occupation or professional purposes, not
exceeding one square foot in area.
(1)
Signs not exceeding 30 square feet on a farm advertising farm
products primarily grown on the premises, provided that they are
located off the highway right-of-way and do not interfere with
traffic visibility.
(2)
Directional or informational signs of a public or quasi-public
nature, such as those containing the meeting date of a community
or civic club, or the advertising of an event of a public interest.
(3)
Temporary real estate signs, not exceeding 20 square feet, and
being located on and advertising subject property for sale or lease.
(4)
Temporary signs, not exceeding 100 square feet, located on and
advertising a new subdivision.
(5)
Building contractors and professional persons temporary signs on
buildings under construction, limited to a total area for all such
signs of 150 square feet.
(6)
A.
Signs requiring zoning certificate. The following signs are permitted
in accordance with zoning district regulations and require a zoning
certificate:
B.
§ 180-88 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-89
176:261
(1) Signs, business.
(2) Signs, outdoor advertising.
Use-on-the-premises signs. Business signs pertaining to use on the
premises, as enumerated in Subsection B(1) are permitted as an
accessory use in all districts.
No such sign shall project over or into any street right-of-way or
more than 12 inches above the parapet wall or roofline.
(1)
Any sign which is attached to the ground shall be located in such a
manner that traffic visibility is not impaired.
(2)
The total area for all signs shall not exceed four times each linear
foot of the building wall most nearly parallel to or confronting
the adjacent street. Only one building frontage shall be used in
computing the sign area allowance, except on a corner lot, in which
case an additional 25% of the sign area allowed may be authorized.
In no case shall the area of any one sign exceed 200 square feet on
any one side. Computations of signs shall include all sides (where
applicable) including the entire face of the sign and any wall work
incidental to its decoration and shall include the space between
letter figures and designs or the space within letter figures and
designs.
(3)
C.
Use-off-the-premises signs. Outdoor advertising signs pertaining to use
off the premises, as enumerated in Subsection B(2), shall be a principal
permitted use in all districts, except the C, H, R, B-L and Planned
Employment Center Districts and except in the following scenic areas
as may hereinafter be described: Maryland Route 32 By-Pass.
[Amended 12-8-2014 by Ord. No. 288]
D.
Approval of location and maintenance of signs requiring zoning
certificates. The following general regulations shall, without exception,
be observed with respect to the approval of location and maintenance
of signs enumerated in Subsection B of this section:
No sign shall be permitted which is an imitation of or which
resembles an official traffic control device, railroad sign or signal,
or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of
an official traffic control device or any railroad sign, signal or
traffic sight lines. Illuminated signs shall be so constructed as to
avoid glare or reflection on any portion of an adjacent highway
or residential buildings. However, no flashing or rotating flashing
illumination shall be permitted.
(1)
No sign which uses the word "stop" or "danger" or presents or
implies the need or requirement of stopping or the existence of
danger shall be permanently displayed.
(2)
E.
§ 180-89 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-89
176:262
No outdoor advertising sign shall be placed closer than 300 feet
to an intersection on a dual or proposed dual highway or within
100 feet of any other intersection; provided, however, that such
signs may be affixed to or located adjacent to a building at such
intersections in such a manner as not to materially cause any
greater obstruction of vision than caused by the building itself. No
business sign shall be so located to obstruct the vision of traffic
using entranceways, driveways, or any public road intersection.
(3)
No sign shall be closer to any public highway where permitted than
the required front yard requirement of the district in which it is
authorized, if the distance between such sign and the nearest lot
line on which a building is located is 100 feet or less.
(4)
No sign shall be permitted which contains statements, words, or
pictures of an obscene, indecent or immoral character, or such as
will offend public morals or decency.
(5)
No sign shall be placed on rocks, trees or on poles maintained by
public utilities.
(6)
No sign shall be permitted which becomes unsafe or endangers
the safety of a building, premises or person and unless maintained
in a good general condition and in a reasonable state of repair,
the Zoning Administrator shall order such sign to be made safe or
repaired and such order shall be complied with within five days of
the receipt of such order.
(7)
All outdoor advertising signs shall be spaced in such a manner
that in the B-G and I Districts, there shall be a minimum of 300
feet between signs. In the case of existing dual-lane highways,
each side of the dual highway shall be considered separately in
determining such spacing requirements. In the case of non-duallane
highways, spacing shall be determined and measured between
signs regardless of the side of the highway in which they are
located or proposed.
(8)
Where a sign structure does not include advertising information
for a period of 120 days, such sign structure shall be deemed a
violation thereafter and shall be removed.
(9)
No sign shall be permitted in any district which does not have
a fixed location, but not necessarily permanent location, on the
ground or on a building, including mobile-type signs so constructed
as to be mounted on a preassembled vehicle or other device and
designed to be movable by means of attached wheels or similar
devices.
(10)
No pennant, pinwheels or similar circus or carnival-type attractors
shall be permitted in any district.
(11)
§ 180-89 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-89
176:263
Overhanging signs. In addition to any and all conditions imposed in
this § 180-89, the following general regulations shall be observed with
respect to overhanging signs on buildings or structures located on Main
Street within the Town's corporate limits: [Added 9-24-1990 by Ord.
No. 179]
The applicant shall submit an application for a zoning certificate
authorizing such overhanging sign. The application shall be on a
form approved by the Town Zoning Administrator and shall include:
Two copies of a drawing which illustrates the building
elevation and the exact location of the sign;
(a)
Two copies of a drawing (to scale) which illustrates sign
dimensions, design, contents and other pertinent information
as determined by the Town Zoning Administrator; and
(b)
(c) A nonrefundable application fee of $10.
(1)
The following size and height restrictions shall apply to each
overhanging sign:
The sign's maximum projection from the building wall shall be
42 inches, provided that the sign shall be at least 12 inches
from or inside the curbline or sidewalk edge.
(a)
(b) The sign must have an eight-foot minimum height from grade.
(c) The sign is subject to a maximum height of 42 inches.
(d) The sign is subject to a maximum thickness of six inches.
(2)
The sign shall not contradict the historic atmosphere of Main
Street nor contradict the goals, objectives or policies of the Main
Street Master Plan.
(3)
The sign shall be designed, manufactured, assembled and installed
with professional workmanship and use high quality materials
designed for use in the sign industry.
(4)
The contents of the sign shall be limited to the legal or trade name
of the business or the actual business product or service sold at the
location. No telephone numbers, addresses or other information
shall be permitted on the sign.
(5)
The applicant shall keep the sign in a good state of repair and
ensure that it remains properly secured to the building. Any failure
of the applicant to keep such sign in a good state of repair shall
constitute a zoning violation hereunder. The Town Zoning
Administrator, or his designee, shall give 15 days' written notice
to the applicant in the event that any such sign shall constitute
a detriment to the health, welfare or safety of the public for any
reason, including, but not limited to, the failure of the applicant
(6)
F.
§ 180-89 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-89
176:264
§ 180-90. Cluster subdivision; small town planning guidelines;
overlay designation. [Amended 5-28-1996 by Ord. No. 196]
to keep the sign in a good state of repair. In the event that the
status of the sign has not been corrected within 15 days of the
date of such notice, the Town may repair the sign and insure
that it remains properly secured to the building, at the sole cost
and expense of the applicant. In the case of any emergency with
respect to any such sign, the Town may correct or repair the sign
immediately, without notice to the applicant, and at the sole cost
and expense of the applicant.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Town Zoning
Administrator may appeal such decision in accordance with Article
XVII.
(7)
In the event there is any inconsistency between § 180-89F and the
remaining provisions of § 180-89, the more restrictive provisions
shall control.
(8)
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ALLEY — A lane which provides rear access to a lot which fronts on a
public road.
CLUSTER SUBDIVISION — A subdivision of land in which the singlefamily
detached dwelling units are situated together so as to suitably
create common space that is permanently protected and perpetually
dedicated for common use.
COMMON SPACE — Land area within a cluster subdivision deeded
as a parcel or parcels separate from building lots and streets and
perpetually dedicated for conservation and/or recreational purposes
as common land. The ownership and purpose of common space shall
be specified by the Planning and Zoning Commission in approving
a subdivision, and only recreational facilities or other improvements
consistent with the approved purpose shall be permitted within the
common space.
CONVENTIONAL SUBDIVISION — A subdivision of land in which all
lots meet the minimum area for dimensional requirements of this
chapter for the underlying district in which the subdivided parcel is
located.
ZERO LOT LINE — The location of a dwelling unit on a lot in such a
manner that one or more of the dwelling's sides rest directly on the
four-foot setback line. All lots providing for zero lot lines must also
provide for a five-foot easement on the neighboring property for access
to and maintenance of the dwelling.
A.
Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide more flexible
standards in the development of residential single-family detached
B.
§ 180-89 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-90
176:265
dwelling units to permit residential lots and yards to be smaller than
otherwise required under regulations applicable to the underlying
zoning districts. It is intended that use of these flexible standards and
requirements will direct development to those land areas most suitable
for development, will create a more attractive, creative, and efficient
use of land, and will achieve the following objectives:
The creation of common space within new residential
developments;
(1)
The maintenance and/or enhancement of the appearance,
character, and natural beauty of an area;
(2)
The protection of the local ecology and the quality and quantity of
underground and surface water and the preservation of stands of
trees and the natural landscape;
(3)
The protection of scenic vistas from the Town's roadways and other
places, such as homesites, hillsides, landmarks, and parks;
(4)
The preservation of the Town's traditional character and creation
of a physical connection with the rest of the Town;
(5)
The facilitation of the construction and maintenance of streets,
utilities, and public services in a more economical and efficient
manner, resulting in a reduced cost of providing public services and
infrastructure;
(6)
(7) The encouragement of a less sprawling form of development.
Applicability.
The Cluster Subdivision Overlay District classification is designed
to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens
of the Town by regulating the appropriate use of land in all areas
of the Town and to encourage the placement and use of structures
and use of land more in keeping with neo-traditional small town
planning concepts. The regulations provided in this section
constitute overlay zoning regulations, and are in addition to and
not in lieu of all zoning regulations applicable to the underlying
zoning district of the property. In the event of any conflict between
the zoning regulations in the underlying zoning district and these
overlay zoning regulations, these overlay zoning regulations shall
control, unless such requirement is waived pursuant to the
provisions of Subsection C(4) by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
(1)
The regulations provided in this section shall apply to the proposed
development of all lands, buildings, and properties within the
territorial limits of the Town of Sykesville where the primary use
is intended to be residential single-family detached and attached
dwelling units. The Planning and Zoning Commission will require
(2)
C.
§ 180-90 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-90
176:266
that the provisions of this section be utilized in any tract or parcel
of land to achieve the purposes and objectives of Subsection B,
except: (a) when the tract or parcel of land will be developed
in accordance with § 180-93, as a planned unit development; (b)
when the tract or parcel of land is exempted from the regulations
provided in this section by the Planning and Zoning Commission
in accordance with the provisions of Subsection C(4) below; or
(c) when the tract or parcel of land is otherwise grandfathered
in accordance with the provisions of Subsection C(5) below.
Determination of the applicability of this section shall be made at
the time of sketch plan application and approval by the Planning
and Zoning Commission. [Amended 4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 244]
The overlay zoning regulations of this section shall also apply to the
redevelopment of any property within the boundaries of the Town
where the primary use is intended to be single-family detached and
attached dwelling units. "Redevelopment," as used herein, means
the process of substantially altering previously developed property
by the improvement or alteration, such as, by way of example only,
changing the lot lines, front, side, or rear yard areas, the building
envelope, increasing the total impervious surfaces on the property
by more than 25%, or otherwise altering the property in a manner
that increases the assessed value of the property by more than
50%. In the event of redevelopment, the land being redeveloped
shall be subject to these overlay zoning regulations. [Amended
4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 244]
(3)
Exemption. If the owner/applicant presents evidence satisfactory
to the Planning and Zoning Commission that the objectives of
Subsection B would be better satisfied by compliance with the
requirements of the underlying zoning, then the applicant may
be exempted by the Planning and Zoning Commission from
compliance with this section. [Amended 4-12-2004 by Ord. No.
244]
(4)
Grandfathered properties.
"Grandfathered," as used in this section, describes the status
accorded certain properties and development activities that
are exempt from the application of the overlay zoning
regulations as provided in this section.
(a)
Any lot on which development activities have legally
progressed to the point of pouring foundation footings or the
installation of structural members, prior to the effective date
of the overlay zoning regulations adopted in this section, will
be permitted to complete construction as per existing
development approvals (e.g., building permit).
(b)
Any legally buildable single lot or parcel of land of record, or
any single lot or parcel of land for which final plat approval has
(c)
(5)
§ 180-90 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-90
176:267
been granted prior to the effective date of the overlay zoning
regulations adopted in this section shall be grandfathered and
may be improved or developed in accordance with all other
provisions of this chapter, Chapter 145, Subdivision
Regulations, and other Town ordinances then in effect.
Any lot, or parcel or land, for which preliminary plan approval
has been granted and has not expired, or for which an
extension of preliminary plan approval has been granted by
the Planning and Zoning Commission prior to the effective
date of the overlay zoning regulations adopted in this section,
shall be grandfathered and may be improved or developed in
accordance with all other provisions of this chapter, Chapter
145, Subdivision Regulations, and other Town ordinances in
effect prior to the effective date of the overlay zoning
regulations adopted in this section. However, any development
activities on any such lot or parcels of land should comply
insofar as possible with the overlay zoning regulations
provided in this section if the development activity occurs after
the effective date of the overlay zoning regulations adopted
pursuant to this section.
(d)
Standards. The following standards shall apply to all cluster
subdivisions:
Number of dwelling units permitted.
The number of dwelling units shall be determined by the
following procedure:
The gross acreage of the parcel to be subdivided shall
be determined through a survey performed by a licensed
surveyor.
[1]
The interim acreage of the parcel to be subdivided shall
be determined by subtracting from the gross acreage the
total acres of wetlands and one-hundred-year floodplains
which exist on the parcel to be subdivided.
[2]
The net acreage of the parcel to be subdivided shall be
determined by reducing the interim acreage by 15% to
account for acreage which would have been dedicated to
roads and other public improvements under conventional
zoning.
[3]
To determine the total number of dwelling units permitted,
the net acreage shall be multiplied by:
0.34 when the underlying zoning is a C Conservation
District, subject to the restrictions in Subsection D(1)(b)
2 when the underlying zoning is Residence District
R-20,000
[4]
(a)
(1)
D.
§ 180-90 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-90
176:268
4 when the underlying zoning is Suburban Residence
District R-10,000
5 when the underlying zoning is Urban Residence District
R-7,500
5 when the underlying zoning is Local Business District
B-L
5 when the underlying zoning is General Business District
B-G
5 when the underlying zoning is Restricted Industrial
District I-R
The total number of dwelling units permitted shall be
rounded down to the nearest whole number.
The resulting product shall be the total number of dwelling
units permitted on the parcel. This figure shall be shown
on the drawings and plans submitted by the applicant for
preliminary plan approval.
[5]
Where the property lies in more than one zoning district, the
permitted number of dwelling units shall be calculated as
above for each district and added to give a total number of
dwelling units. The dwelling units may be clustered in one or
more districts, except that dwelling units shall not be clustered
in a C Conservation District.
(b)
Bonus provision.
The Planning and Zoning Commission may allow and approve
more than the number of dwelling units permitted under
Subsection D(1) above, upon the Planning and Zoning
Commission's determination that the proposed development,
through the quality of its site design and architecture, displays
sensitivity to the purposes of this section. The Planning and
Zoning Commission may require renderings, scale models,
topographical exhibits, description of housing types, and
material selection. The following amenities and characteristics
shall serve as guidance for determination of the bonus
percentage to be allowed:
[1] No culs-de-sac in the subdivision: bonus of 2%.
Parking facilities are provided behind all dwelling units:
bonus of 2%.
[2]
If a stormwater management pond is used, the ratio is
restricted to 6:1 maximum: bonus of 2%.
[3]
[4] No roofline ratios are less than 12:10: bonus of 2%.
[5] Detached garages are used exclusively: bonus of 2%.
(a)
(2)
§ 180-90 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-90
176:269
Copper or tin roofs are used on at least 20% of the
dwelling units: bonus of 2%.
[6]
[7] All front porches are deeper than six feet: bonus of 2%.
Horizontal wood siding is used on at least 80% of the
dwelling units: bonus of 2%.
[8]
Fifty percent more than the minimum quantity required of
specimen trees greater than three inches caliper width are
included in the subdivision design: bonus of 2%.
[9]
The aggregate density bonus over the permitted number of
dwelling units calculated in accordance with Subsection D(1)
above, shall not exceed 10% of the total permitted under
Subsection D(1) above.
(b)
Design guidelines. In evaluating the sketch plan, preliminary plan or
final plan of a cluster subdivision, the following criteria are among
the matters that must be considered by the Planning and Zoning
Commission to find that the site design meets the purposes of this
section:
Location of building envelopes and landscaping.
Building envelopes should be selected that do not include the
tops of ridgelines.
(a)
Building envelopes should be located on the edges of fields
and/or on the edges of wooded areas to minimize the visual
impact of development.
(b)
Building envelopes should not include areas with slopes in
excess of 25%.
(c)
(d) Existing stone rows and tree lines should be preserved.
(e) Trees on ridges should not be removed.
(1)
Lot lines and yards.
All dwellings and structures shall be located a minimum of
50 feet from any adjacent C Conservation District and/or any
agriculturally zoned land.
(a)
No building envelope shall be placed closer than five feet
to any lot line, except single-family attached dwelling units
may be built side by side. Zero lot line dwelling units may
be built four feet from any other lot line, however, a five-foot
easement for access to and maintenance of the dwelling must
be provided. If new dwelling units are positioned immediately
adjacent to existing dwelling units, the size of the side yard
setbacks for the new dwelling units should follow the pattern
established by the already-existing dwelling units.
(b)
(2)
E.
§ 180-90 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-90
176:270
The maximum average of all front yard setbacks should be
no greater than 20 feet. If new dwelling units are positioned
on lots to be immediately adjacent to existing dwelling units,
the size of the front yard setbacks for the new dwelling units
should follow the pattern established by the already-existing
dwelling units. The front yard setback shall be measured from
the edge of the nearest right-of-way.
(c)
(d) Flag lots are prohibited.
All sidewalks should be placed with the eventual goal of linking
the cluster subdivision to the downtown areas of the Town.
(e)
Public roads. The amount of site disruption caused by roadways
and the associated grading required for their construction should
be minimized.
All roads shall connect with other roads within the cluster
subdivision and roads must be placed to link in a grid pattern
to facilitate neighborhood blocks, unless the applicant presents
evidence satisfactory to the Planning and Zoning Commission
that it is not possible for all roads to connect or to be placed in
a grid pattern. The use of alleys to provide rear access to lots
fronting on public roads is permitted.
(a)
The use of one-way streets, with on-street parking restricted to
one side only, should be considered where feasible.
(b)
Individual road widths shall be determined by the topography,
use, and traffic pattern anticipated for each road. The
minimum roadway width for alleys connecting the rear access
of lots fronting on public roads shall be 12 feet. The minimum
roadway width for all other roads shall be:
Description
Width
(feet) Road Type
Two-way road:
No parking allowed on
road
22 Local road
Parking allowed one side
only
28 Two-way local road
Parking allowed both
sides
36 Collector road
One-way road:
No parking allowed on
road
12 One-way subdivision
road
Parking allowed one side
only
20 General subdivision
road
(c)
(3)
§ 180-90 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-90
176:271
Description
Width
(feet) Road Type
Parking allowed both
sides
28 Urban subdivision
road
The perimeter of blocks within the subdivision should not
exceed 1,300 feet. No block face should be greater than 300
feet without an alley providing through access.
(d)
Roadways should generally follow existing contours of the land
to minimize grading.
(e)
Driveways.
The number of driveways accessing collector roads should be
kept to a minimum. The use of alleys to enhance traffic flow
should be considered where feasible.
(a)
In general, the use of common driveways is discouraged.
However, where common driveways are approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission, the maximum number of
units served by a common driveway shall be two. The minimum
common driveway width shall be 12 feet.
(b)
All lots using common driveways shall provide a driveway
maintenance agreement to be reviewed and approved by the
Town Attorney.
(c)
All driveways shall be designed to provide facilities for offstreet
parking of not less than two motor vehicles per dwelling
unit.
(d)
(4)
Signage and lighting. In general, permanent on-site development
identification signs are discouraged. However, where a
development identification sign is approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission, its area shall be limited to eight square feet,
its construction shall be of natural materials (i.e., wood and stone),
and the base area shall be appropriately landscaped. Lighting, if
provided, shall be shielded and appropriately screened by natural
landscaping.
(5)
Accessory buildings and structures. Accessory buildings and
structures shall be located on the interior of the lot within all
setback lines.
(6)
Existing structures.
When a parcel to be subdivided under this section contains
existing structure(s), the owner/applicant of the parcel shall
request of the Sykesville Historical Commission an advisory
opinion to survey the parcel to determine any historic,
(a)
(7)
§ 180-90 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-90
176:272
architectural, or cultural significance of the structure(s). If
significance is established, the owner/applicant must preserve
the structure(s) or offer the structure(s) and minimum lot
size(s) compatible with the underlying zoning to the Town
of Sykesville for the preservation of the historic setting of
the structure(s). If accepted by the Town, the lot(s) shall be
included in the common space calculations, and the Planning
and Zoning Commission may recognize such dedication in
consideration of a density bonus under Subsection D(2),
considering all other factors.
Adaptive reuse of structures not deemed to be of historic,
architectural, or cultural significance by the Sykesville
Historical Commission, including the adaptive reuse of existing
agricultural structures such as barns and silos, for residential
use or permitted accessory use, is encouraged and shall be
permitted where determined to be appropriate by the Planning
and Zoning Commission, upon advice of the Town Engineer. If
adaptive reuse as described above is used in the subdivision
design, minimum lot size(s) compatible with the underlying
zoning shall be created for the adapted reused structures and
offered to the Town of Sykesville for preservation. If accepted
by the Town, the lot(s) shall be used in the common space
calculations, and the Planning and Zoning Commission may
recognize such dedication in consideration of a density bonus
under Subsection D(2), considering all other factors.
(b)
Wildlife management plan. In projects involving 25 or more acres,
a wildlife management plan shall be submitted. This plan shall
address measures taken to preserve and improve on-site wildlife
habitat. Rare and endangered species habitat protection shall be
addressed, if applicable. Where feasible, wildlife corridors should
be incorporated into development plans.
(8)
Common space.
Standards.
Parcels to be subdivided under this section shall contain
undeveloped portions of the tract dedicated to common space
equal to or greater than 40% of the gross acreage of the parcel
to be subdivided. Lot(s) associated with existing structure(s)
may be included in the land space identified as common space,
but the square footage of the structures shall not be included
in the calculation to meet the total land area required for
common space unless the lot(s) is accepted for preservation by
the Town of Sykesville in accordance with Subsection E(7)(a)
or (b). The bonus density criteria set forth in Subsection D(2)
may be used in lieu of and not in addition to a density bonus, as
a credit towards the common space requirement. The common
space credit towards the common space requirement shall be
(a)
(1)
F.
§ 180-90 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-90
176:273
no more than 10%. If the criteria in Subsection D(2) is applied
to the common space credit, no density bonus shall be allowed.
Wetlands and/or watercourses and/or land with slopes in
excess of 25% shall account for no more than 1/3 of the
common space.
(b)
Notwithstanding the above, up to 50% of the common space
may be land covered by water if, in the Planning and Zoning
Commission's judgment, such water body is deemed a site
amenity.
(c)
All dwelling units shall have reasonable access to common
space areas, and the maximum number of lots compatible with
good design should abut the common space.
(d)
If active recreational areas are included in the common space,
they shall be suitably located and adequately screened to
provide and assure privacy and quiet for the neighboring
residents.
(e)
Small areas of subdivision common space scattered throughout
the cluster subdivision shall be avoided. To the extent possible,
a contiguous system of common space shall be achieved by
linking common space areas with pedestrian pathways.
(f)
The pedestrian circulation system shall be designed to assure
that pedestrians can move safely and easily on the site and
between properties and activities within the site and
neighborhood.
(g)
Access shall be provided to each parcel of common space from
one or more streets in the development and shall be contiguous
across proposed rights-of-way.
(h)
Access to the common space shall be delineated by the use of
design elements such as stone walls, woodland paths surfaced
with bark mulch, etc.
(i)
Use of common space.
The common space shall be used for conservation, historic
preservation and education, outdoor education, recreation,
park purposes, agriculture, horticulture, forestry, or for a
combination of those uses. No other uses shall be allowed in
the common space except as provided herein.
(a)
Only 5% of the common space may be subject to or used for
paved areas, bike trails, or pathways or accessory structures
to the dedicated use of the common space. The common space
may be subject to permanent easements for the construction,
maintenance, and repair of roads and utilities servicing the
common space or the cluster subdivision, and sewer or
(b)
(2)
§ 180-90 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-90
176:274
drainage facilities serving the common space or the cluster
subdivision or adjacent land.
Ownership of common space.
The common space shall be offered in whole to the Town of
Sykesville. Acceptance in whole or in part shall be determined
by the Town Council.
(a)
If acceptance of the common space is denied by the Town
of Sykesville, then the common space shall be conveyed as
follows:
To a corporation or trust such as a condominium or
homeowners' association, the ownership or membership
of which is comprised of the owners of lots or dwelling
units within the cluster subdivision. If such a corporation
or trust is utilized, ownership thereof shall pass with
conveyances of the lots or dwelling units in perpetuity.
Maintenance of the common space and any facilities
located thereon shall be permanently guaranteed by such
corporation or trust. The corporation or trust shall provide
for mandatory assessments to each lot or residential unit
for maintenance expenses. Each such corporation or trust
shall be deemed to have assented to allow the Town to
perform maintenance of the common space and any
facilities located thereon, if the corporation or trust fails to
provide adequate maintenance, and shall grant the Town
an easement over the common space to do so. In any
instance where maintenance is required, unless the
situation is an emergency, the Town shall provide 15 days'
written notice to the corporation or trust as to the need
for maintenance and, if the corporation or trust fails to
complete said work, the Town may perform the work at
the cost and expense of the corporation or trust. The
owner of each lot or residential unit shall be deemed to
have assented to the Town filing a lien against each lot or
residential unit in the development for the full cost of such
maintenance, which liens shall be released upon payment
to the Town of same. Each individual deed, as well as
the deed of trust or articles of incorporation, shall include
provisions to carry these provisions into effect. Documents
creating such trust or corporation shall be submitted to
the Planning and Zoning Commission for approval by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the Town Attorney
and shall be recorded in accordance with all applicable
state and local laws governing such entities as a condition
of the Planning and Zoning Commission's final approval.
[1]
To an entity or governmental agency specifically
established to accept the property subject to a
[2]
(b)
(3)
§ 180-90 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-90
176:275
conservation easement or scenic easement prohibiting
further development or construction of dwelling units on
the property and maintaining the property in perpetuity
for the uses set forth in Subsection F(2).
The owner or other entity may retain the common space
for use or lease for one of the purposes specified in
Subsection F(2), provided that the owner conveys the
development rights of the common space in a conservation
or scenic restriction prohibiting further development of
the property.
[3]
Nonresidential uses.
In order to provide limited commercial services and thus facilitate
the pedestrian focus of a traditional village or neighborhood,
nonresidential uses are permitted based upon the criteria
established herein.
(1)
Areas designated for the commercial uses must be shown on the
preliminary plan and approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
(2)
Principal permitted use is limited to local retail business shops of
the following types only:
(a) Bakery shops.
(b) Dairy products stores.
(c) Food and grocery stores.
(d) Fruit or vegetable stores.
(e) Art studios or art galleries.
(f) Bookstores, not including adult bookstores.
(g) Professional offices (architects, attorneys, doctors, dentists).
(h) Bed-and-breakfast inns.
(i) Artisan, antique, or craft shops.
Home occupation. A "home occupation" shall be defined as that
term is defined in § 180-122. 46
(j)
(3)
The following uses shall be conditional uses requiring approval by
the Board of Appeals:
(a) Banks.
(4)
G.
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 180-90 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-90
176:276
§ 180-91. Planned business centers (shopping centers).
In any B-L, B-G or I-R District, the Commission may approve a Planned
Business Center (neighborhood-type shopping center), as defined in
§ 180-122.
(b) Restaurants.
(c) Bank automatic teller machines.
(d) Day-care centers.
The conduct of any business outside a completely enclosed building
as accessory to a principal permitted use shall require approval by
the Board of Appeals. Otherwise, all business operations shall be
conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building.
(5)
Drive-in windows, drive-in restaurants, and fast-food restaurants
are prohibited.
(6)
Processes and equipment employed and goods processed or sold
shall be limited to those which are not objectionable by reason
of odor, dust, smoke, cinders, gas, fumes, noise, vibration, refuse
matter, or water-carried waste.
(7)
New buildings, whether on vacant lots or sharing a lot with an
existing building, must be compatible in size, scale, general
appearance, and building materials with surrounding buildings.
(8)
Buildings for nonresidential use must reflect the character of the
residential units in the cluster subdivision, according to the
following design criteria:
Building massing (height and bulk of structures, type and
angle of roofline);
(a)
(b) Building width-to-height ratio;
(c) Location and use of yard areas;
(d) Location and design of landscaped and paved areas;
Ratio of landscaped area to areas covered by impervious
surfaces (minimum of 1:2.5);
(e)
(f) Location, size, and type of projections (porches and rooflines).
(9)
Approval by Planning and Zoning Commission.
The developer of any such planned business center, prior to any
construction, shall present to the Commission for its review, a
development plan of such proposed center. The development plan
shall show such items as the size of the project, the location and
approximate shapes of buildings, road ingress and egress patterns,
(1)
A.
§ 180-90 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-91
176:277
parking areas, storm drainage and water and sewerage facilities,
and such other information as is necessary for the Commission to
give the necessary consideration.
It shall be the duty of the Commission to ascertain whether the
location, size and other characteristics of the site, and the proposed
plan, comply with the following conditions:
A need is evident for such shopping facilities at the proposed
location, such need being demonstrated by the developer by
means of market studies or such other information as the
Commission may require.
(a)
That the proposed planned business center is adequate to
serve the needs of the people which reasonably may be
expected to be served by such shopping facilities.
(b)
That the proposed planned business center will not cause
points of traffic congestion on existing or planned future roads
in the areas of such proposed location.
(c)
That the plans provide for a planned business center consisting
of one or more groups of establishments in buildings of
integrated and harmonious design, together with adequate
and properly arranged traffic and parking facilities and
landscaping, so as to result in an attractive and efficient
shopping center.
(d)
(2)
The Commission shall, within a reasonable time after consideration
of a development plan for a planned business center, issue to the
office of the Zoning Administrator a written report of its findings.
(3)
The Commission shall approve such planned business center
project, provided that the requirements of this chapter are
complied with.
(4)
Upon receipt of written approval from the Commission, the Zoning
Administrator shall issue the necessary zoning certificate.
(5)
Permitted uses. The uses permitted in a planned business center shall
be those retail business, commercial and service uses and accessory
uses permitted in the B District in which the planned business center
is located. No residential use, heavy commercial or industrial uses shall
be permitted or any use other than such as is necessary or desirable to
supply goods and services to the surrounding area.
B.
Prohibited uses.
Amusement parks, commercial
Automobile, trailer or implement repair establishments
Bottling of soft drink or milk or bulk distribution stations
Building material, sales or storage yards
C.
§ 180-91 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-91
176:278
Carpenter or woodworking shop
Circus
Drive-in theaters
Feed and grain, sales, storage, including milling
Funeral establishments
Golf driving ranges
Hotels and apartment hotels
Kennels
Livery stables
Newspaper publishing establishments and printing shops
Riding academies
Sheet metal shops
Sign painting shops
Swimming pools
Target ranges
Truck or motor freight terminals or warehouses
Wholesale business, warehousing and service establishments
General regulations. The following regulations shall apply to a planned
business center:
Building height. No building shall exceed the permitted height of
the B District in which the planned business center is located,
except as may be modified by Article XV of this chapter.
(1)
Yards. No building shall be erected within 50 feet of a public street
right-of-way line, and no parking lot or other facilities or accessory
use, except permitted signs and plantings, shall be located within
10 feet of any public street right-of-way line.
(2)
No building shall be located within 50 feet of any other boundary
line, and any such line which adjoins an R District, if deemed
necessary by the Commission, shall be screened by a solid wall
or compact evergreen hedge at least six feet in height, or by
such other screening device as may be deemed appropriate and
adequate.
(3)
Tract coverage. Buildings shall not be permitted to cover more than
25% of the total project area.
(4)
Customer parking space. Off-street parking shall be provided as
required in § 180-88A of this chapter. Any lighting used to
illuminate any off-street parking area shall be so arranged as to
direct the light away from adjoining premises in any R District and
from any public roads.
(5)
D.
§ 180-91 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-91
176:279
§ 180-92. Industrial parks.
In any I-R District, an industrial park may be established and a zoning
certificate issued therefor, following receipt of approval by the Commission
in accordance with the procedures and provisions set forth herein.
Loading space. Off-street loading space and facilities shall be
provided as required in § 180-88B of this chapter. Such facilities
shall be in the rear of any building, unless the Commission for
good reason approves a location at the sides of any such building,
and shall not be included as part of any customer parking space
required herein.
(6)
Signs. In addition to signs permitted and as regulated in either
B District in which the shopping center project is located, one
additional sign not exceeding 200 square feet in area containing
the names of the shopping center and/or the establishments
located therein, may be placed at any location within the
boundaries of the project, but it shall not exceed 30 feet in height.
Any shopping center fronting on more than one street may be
permitted such a sign within the required yard area along each
street.
(7)
Principal permitted uses. The following principal permitted uses shall
be allowed in an industrial park:
Principal permitted uses allowed in an I-R District, except those
prohibited under Subsection B.
(1)
Office buildings for services oriented to the needs of industries
located in the park, such as offices for doctors, medical clinics
or laboratories, engineers, banks, data processing centers, post
offices, provided that such office buildings shall not be the first use
erected in the industrial park or occupy more than 5% of the total
land area.
(2)
Wholesale, warehousing establishments where no retail sales are
permitted.
(3)
(4) Truck or motor freight terminals or warehouses.
Heliport, subject to standards recommended by the Federal and/or
State Aviation Agency, and Commission approval.
(5)
A.
Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited in an industrial park:
Any use in conflict with any ordinance in Sykesville, Carroll County
or the State of Maryland.
(1)
Any new dwelling, mobile homes, mobile home parks, or
institutions for human care, and uses first allowed in a B District.
(2)
(3) Brick yards, manufacture of pottery, tile, terra cotta, clay products.
B.
§ 180-91 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-92
176:280
(4) Electric or steam generating plants.
(5) Extractive uses.
(6) Flour mill, grain or feed drying or processing.
(7) Sawmills.
(8) Signs and billboards, except as authorized herein.
(9) Conditional uses in an I-R District.
Accessory uses. Uses shall be allowed which are customarily incidental
to or are demonstrably related to permitted uses in an industrial park
including indoor and outdoor recreational facilities, cafeterias, clinics,
libraries, schools, meeting rooms, display rooms related to or primarily
restricted to the industries located in the industrial park.
C.
Required conditions. All manufacturing uses shall be conducted in an
enclosed building except for parking, loading, or storage. All buildings
shall be of fireproof construction to meet the requirements of Maryland
and/or National Fire Codes and Building, Plumbing, or other codes
for Carroll County and the Town of Sykesville, in effect or which may
hereafter be enacted or amended. Processes and equipment employed,
and material and goods used shall be limited to those not objectionable
by reason of odor, dust, smoke, cinders, fumes, noise, vibration, refuse
matter, or water-carried waste.
D.
Development and site plans.
No building permit shall be issued on any lot unless the
Commission shall have approved a development plan for the entire
industrial park and a site plan for each lot therein as it is proposed
for development. The Commission shall consider the effect of the
design and operations of the park on the environs, as well as on
future component industrial occupants.
(1)
In considering the overall development plan, the Commission shall
pass upon, among other things:
The layout of the park with respect to internal roads and the
access of such to public highways.
(a)
Preservation of natural topographic features, such as trees and
watercourses.
(b)
Grading plans, drainage structures, water and sewerage
facilities, and other utilities.
(c)
(d) Orientation with relation to other adjacent properties.
(e) Landscaping proposals.
(2)
E.
§ 180-92 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-92
176:281
In considering the site plan for a lot, the Commission shall pass
upon, among other things:
Layout of the site with respect to the arrangement and width
of its driveways and parking areas and their relationship to offsite
roadways within the industrial park and to external public
highways.
(a)
Preservation of natural topographic features, such as trees and
watercourses.
(b)
Grading plan and plans for all utilities, including water and
sewerage facilities, storm drainage, parking lots, loading
docks, lighting and screening.
(c)
(d) Lot layout, including front, side and rear yard lines.
(e) Location, height and orientation of proposed buildings.
(f) Identity of occupant and nature of operations.
(g) Employee information as to number and shifts.
(h) Location, size and lighting of signs.
Outdoor storage areas, including location, screening, and
safety features.
(i)
(3)
Approval by other agencies of jurisdiction, including Health
Department, State Highway Administration, Sanitary Commission,
and other county, state or municipal officials deemed necessary to
assure the adequacy of those aspects of the plan deemed pertinent
to the respective department, commission or office.
(4)
Standards for vehicular access, parking, loading and outdoor storage.
Vehicular access.
Vehicular access to industrial parks shall be permitted only
from a Town- , county- or state-maintained highway, or a
private way connecting with such highways, and not directly
with any residential street.
(a)
Road access to an industrial park may be at points prescribed
by the appropriate agency of jurisdiction, but in no case less
than the following:
For state roads, not less than 750 feet between points of
access.
[1]
For Town and/or county roads, not less than 200 feet
between points of access.
[2]
(b)
(1)
F.
§ 180-92 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-92
176:282
All streets within an industrial park must be built to Town
standards and shall thereafter be accepted for maintenance by
the Town.
(c)
Parking and loading facilities.
Space for off-street parking and storage of vehicles shall be as
follows: one space for each two employees on the maximum
shift, plus one space for visitors' use for each 25 employees on
the maximum shift, plus one space for each company-owned or
-leased vehicle based at the premises.
(a)
All parking areas shall be constructed to Town specifications,
be properly signed for traffic control, and/or adequate lighting
provided, if used at night, and individual spaces shall be clearly
marked.
(b)
(c) Loading areas shall be as provided under § 180-88B.
(2)
Outdoor storage:
(a) No outdoor storage shall be permitted in the front yard.
Where there is outdoor storage, such areas shall not occupy
more than 20% of the area of the lot.
(b)
Where there is outdoor storage of equipment products, and
process materials, or empty industrial containers, they shall be
stored and maintained in a neat pattern, subject to National
Fire Codes.
(c)
Outdoor storage areas on any lot adjacent to an R District must
be screened therefrom by a planting of evergreens or by an
ornamental wall not less than six feet in height.
(d)
(3)
Building location, landscaping and utilities.
Building location:
All lots adjacent to a road as shown on the Major Road Plan
shall be oriented thereto.
(a)
Architectural treatment of all building walls visible from public
roads shall be harmonious with the front elevation, in design,
quality and materials.
(b)
(1)
Landscaping.
A landscaping plan shall be submitted to the Commission as
part of the preliminary development plan.
(a)
Any part of a lot not used for buildings, parking, loading,
driveways, outside storage, or walkways shall be planted with
(b)
(2)
G.
§ 180-92 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-92
176:283
grass, or other ground cover, trees, shrubs, and/or flowers, and
shall be properly maintained at all times.
Utilities.
A utilities plan shall be submitted to the Commission as part of
the preliminary development plan.
(a)
Any overhead wires determined necessary shall be run along
the rear property lines where practical, and any control
instrument station or substations shall be screened.
(b)
(3)
Signs and lighting.
The design, lettering, lighting and location of all signs shall be
included insofar as possible, as part of the site plan submitted for
approval of the Commission.
(1)
Signs; outdoor advertising shall be limited to one such device for
each highway frontage and one such device as a directory for
occupants for each entrance to the industrial park.
(2)
Signs, business, for identifying the use or the occupant shall be a
part of the architectural design and be attached to the building.
Any signs detached from buildings shall be landscaped.
(3)
Signs prohibited shall include outdoor advertising signs (of a
billboard nature), except as indicated in Subsection H(2); flashing,
rotating lights, or changing light intensity or changing color signs;
hanging or projecting signs; signs above the roof or parapet; or
signs painted or pasted directly upon any wall shall likewise be
prohibited.
(4)
All major buildings and parking areas may be lighted with exterior
flood or spotlights, provided that lights are not directed toward
adjacent R Districts or roads or streets.
(5)
H.
Height, area, and yard requirements.
Height regulations.
No building shall exceed 50 feet in height, except as provided
in Article XV of this chapter.
(a)
(1)
Area requirements.
No industrial park considered herein shall comprise less than
five acres if it is a completely separate tract; provided that no
area limitation shall be placed on an industrial park if is is an
addition to another industrial park or has a common boundary
with an existing I-R District.
(a)
The minimum ground area for any lot for a principal building
shall be one acre and the minimum lot frontage 200 feet.
(b)
(2)
I.
§ 180-92 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-92
176:284
§ 180-93. Planned unit development; regulations.
A planned unit development may be approved by the Commission, as
permitted under §§ 180-47 and 180-54, subject to all the following
provisions:
The maximum ground area coverage of any lot by a principal
building or buildings shall not exceed 25% of the total lot area.
(c)
Yard requirements.
Front, side, and rear yards shall be determined in an industrial
park as follows:
A front yard adjacent to an expressway or primary
highway as shown on the Major Road Plan of the Town
shall be 75 feet.
[1]
Front yard on other county or municipal streets shall be 75
feet.
[2]
Front yard on interior roads within an industrial park shall
be 50 feet.
[3]
Side or rear yards shall be as follows:
[a] Adjoining an R District: 100 feet.
[b] Adjoining a B or I-R District: 50 feet.
[4]
(a)
A landscaped strip not less than 10 feet wide shall be provided
along each side yard for the length of any principal building,
except for that portion of the yard needed for loading or
parking areas.
(b)
Any portion of a lot in an industrial park not used for
driveways, walkways, parking, loading, or storage areas shall
be planted in grass or other suitable ground cover.
(c)
(3)
Purpose and objectives. Within the limit of these requirements, it is the
purpose of the planned unit development to provide suitable sites for
relatively higher density types of residential structures in areas zoned
R-10,000 and R-7,500 Districts and to permit the optimum amount of
freedom and variety in the design and management of such varying
types of residential structures, including one- and two-family units,
townhouses, and garden apartments within the areas designated. The
following objectives are sought in providing for the planned unit
development:
To provide a more attractive and varied living environment than
would be possible through the strict application of R District
requirements.
(1)
A.
§ 180-92 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-93
176:285
To encourage developers to use a more creative approach in the
development of land.
(2)
To encourage a more intimate, efficient, and aesthetic use of open
space.
(3)
To encourage variety in the physical development patterns of
residential areas.
(4)
Area. The proposed planned unit development shall normally include a
tract of land not less than 20 acres in an R-10,000 District and 10 acres
in an R-7,500 District. A planned unit development may be considered
on a parcel of land less than 10 acres if it has a common boundary with
an R-7,500 District, but in no case shall a tract of land less than five
acres be considered. Where the acreage in a planned unit development
project is 100 acres or more, the Commission may approve in the
development plan as part of the overall plan a planned business center
in which B-L Business District uses may be located in accordance
with § 180-91; provided, however, that such planned business center is
located in a manner as to be a integral part of the development itself
and not as a means of servicing adjacent areas, or as a basis by which
a business district may be extended to adjacent properties.
B.
Designation of a planned unit development.
Land zoned properly and meeting the minimum requirements may
be designated by the Commission as suitable for a planned unit
development and may be developed by the owner, if he so desires,
according to the requirements and standards herein.
(1)
No land shall be designated as a planned unit development unless
it satisfactorily meets such additional criteria as to suitability for
such a development as may have been adopted by the Commission.
Such criteria shall include, but not be limited to, those enumerated
under §§ 180-19 and 180-94.
(2)
C.
Type and use of structures. Dwelling units may include single-family,
two-family or multifamily structures, based on density requirements,
standards described, nature of adjacent development, and
compensating features of the development plan. The Commission may
also approve places of public assembly, recreational buildings, and
accessory buildings, if primarily for use by persons residing within the
planned unit development, and if located and planned in a manner not
detrimental to adjacent properties.
D.
In any R-7,500 Urban Residence District, the Board of Appeals,
following public hearing, may approve up to 100% of the units in
multifamily structures subject to the following: [Amended 3-13-1978
by Ord. No. 110]
The Planning and Zoning Commission having formally reviewed
and filed with the Board of Appeals its preliminary approval of the
(1)
E.
§ 180-93 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-93
176:286
proposed site and/or subdivision development plan for the property
to be the subject of public hearing;
Due consideration being given by the Board of Appeals to the
requirements of § 180-109 of this chapter; and
(2)
That the final site development plan and/or subdivision plat be
submitted to the Commission for its approval along with any public
works agreement prior to the issuance of any zoning certificate or
building permits.
(3)
The gross residential density of a planned unit development shall not
exceed the equivalent of six dwelling units per gross acre.
Such density shall be calculated as follows, as applicable to
multifamily structures:
Each efficiency apartment dwelling unit is equivalent to 0.50
unit.
(a)
Each one-bedroom multifamily or apartment unit is equivalent
to 0.75 unit.
(b)
Each two-bedroom multifamily or apartment dwelling unit is
equivalent to 1.00 unit
(c)
Each three-bedroom multifamily or apartment dwelling unit is
equivalent to 1.50 unit.
(d)
(1)
Calculation of gross acreage shall include all land within the PUD
tract, regardless of use, and if it abuts an external motorway to
which access is permitted, may include 1/2 of the right-of-way
thereof, but not exceeding 30 feet.
(2)
F.
Open space. Common open space shall comprise not less than 25%
of the gross area. Such space shall include land area to be developed
as recreational areas or which is designated for the common use of
all occupants of the planned unit development, but shall not include
streets, off-street parking areas, or utility easements. The Commission
must be furnished satisfactory evidence, as a condition for approval,
that such open space area will be continued and that perpetual
maintenance is provided for.
G.
Sanitary facilities. Prior to accepting for approval a development for
a planned unit development, the Commission must be furnished
satisfactory evidence that public water and sewerage systems will be
provided and approved by the Health Department, as well as by any
other agency having jurisdiction over such matters.
H.
Development plan.
Applications for approval of a planned unit development must be
accompanied by a development plan prepared by a licensed
(1)
I.
§ 180-93 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-93
176:287
architect, registered civil engineer, professional landscape
architect or other qualified land planner. The development plan
shall be to scale and contain sufficient information to establish the
identity of proposed uses, grades, and approximate dimensions and
locations of proposed structures, streets, parking areas, walkways,
easements and property lines.
After approval of the development plan by the Commission, any
material change therein shall require a resubdivision of such plan
for approval. In any case, where an approval has been given by
the Commission and construction has not started within one year
thereafter, such approval of the planned unit development shall
automatically be terminated.
(2)
Standards for location of dwelling types.
Within 100 feet of any other property in an R District, other than
an R-7,500 District, dwellings shall be of single-family types.
(1)
As a condition for approval of a planned unit development in which
multifamily dwellings are proposed, the Commission shall require
over and above other standards herein, that these uses be so
arranged and distributed, and appropriately related to public open
space, single-family dwellings and/or semidetached dwellings that
higher densities are not unreasonably and disproportionately
concentrated in these locations, or so located as to concentrate
traffic on minor residential streets.
(2)
J.
Area requirements, yards and dwelling units per building. Standards
shall be as follows:47
K.
Height regulations. Maximum heights of buildings shall not exceed the
height as specified in the R-7,500 District.
L.
Parking. At least two usable off-street parking spaces shall be provided
for each dwelling unit either on the lot it occupies or within 150 feet of
such lot or an apartment dwelling unit. For each apartment unit, space
shall be provided at the rate of two spaces per dwelling unit.
M.
Public hearing. Except as provided in Article XIX, no public hearing
need be held on any application for a planned unit development,
provided that a public hearing may be held by the Commission when it
deems such hearing to be desirable or necessary in the public interest.
N.
Financial responsibility. Prior to accepting a development plan for
review, the Commission must be satisfied that the owners of and/
or applicants for a planned unit development are financially able to
complete the proposed development, that they intend to start
construction within one year following the Commission's approval and
O.
47.Editor's Note: These requirements may be found in the Planned Unit Development table at
the end of this chapter.
§ 180-93 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-93
176:288
§ 180-94. Planned major subdivision; residential, regulations.
A major subdivision of land for residential purposes in those districts where
permitted may be approved by the Commission, as authorized in
§§ 180-25E, 180-32C and 180-40C, subject to § 180-19 of the general
provisions of this chapter, and the following provisions:
that they intend to complete it within a reasonable time as determined
by the Commission.
Purpose and intent. The Commission finds that a portion of the police
power of the State of Maryland has been delegated to each municipality
to be exercised reasonably in determining the manner and nature of
development within each municipality. The Maryland General Assembly
has given much discretion to the several municipalities in making such
determinations relying on the local jurisdiction's knowledge of local
conditions and the needs of its people and communities. The Maryland
General Assembly has further created numerous state departments
and agencies to provide consultation, advice, data and other similar
forms of assistance in the furtherance of establishing comprehensive
policies on which to base local planning decisions for the general
good and welfare. Development pressures (i.e., population shifts, sewer
moratoriums, accelerating inflation of land values, and other
phenomena), caused by a myriad of complex social and economic
factors which transcend local jurisdictional boundary lines, are
bringing increasing numbers of families into Sykesville and its environs
necessitating the provision of additional public schools; solid waste
disposal sites; water, sewerage and storm drainage facilities; roads
and associated facilities; police, fire and related emergency-servicetype
facilities; primary health care facilities; open space, floodplain
management and sediment control measures; and the increasing need
for maintaining a stable tax base. In recognition of the fundamental
difference between the diverse and unlimited "wants" of a growing
community of people, and those "needs" which are inherently basic or
limited (i.e., land, air and water resources), it is imperative that plans,
policies and decisions, insofar as it is humanly possible, be weighed
and ordered; first, in consideration of the fundamental "needs", and
secondly, in consideration of the priority of "wants" which ultimately
involve the direct or indirect expenditure of limited public funds.
A.
The following provisions, therefore, are set forth in planning for the
continued orderly development of Sykesville and its environs in the
pursuit of these objectives: In designating a tract(s) or area(s) suitable
for a major subdivision of land for residential purposes in any district
where permitted, the Commission shall, pursuant to authority granted
by Article 66B, Annotated Code of Maryland, this Chapter 180, Zoning,
and Chapter 145, Subdivision Regulations, in addition to any other
applicable ordinances or regulations, require that adequate
provision(s) be incorporated in and made a part of any conditions of
any approval to insure the integrity and orderly use of the Town's
B.
§ 180-93 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-94
176:289
§ 180-95. Site plan review by Planning and Zoning Commission.
[Added 7-20-1984 by Ord. No. 137]
natural resources as would promote the public necessity, health, safety,
convenience, general welfare, environment, and the Town's financial
ability to provide and/or receive essential community improvements,
facilities and/or services. Such conditions of approval may include, and
insure adequate provisions for such specific on- and off-site facilities
and improvements as: school sites; solid waste disposal sites; open
spaces; floodplain management and sediment control measures; water,
sewerage and storm drainage facilities; roads and associated facilities;
police, fire and related emergency-type facilities including
consideration of primary health care facilities. Whenever any one or
combination of the aforesaid facilities and/or improvements are deemed
necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of the duly adopted
official Master Plan for Sykesville and the authority conveyed by Article
66B of the Annotated Code of Maryland, this Chapter 180, Zoning,
Chapter 145, Subdivision Regulations, or any other applicable
ordinances or regulations; and where any one or combination of the
aforesaid facilities and/or improvements deemed necessary cannot be
provided or assured, then the Commission shall either disapprove or
defer designating those areas in question, in whole or in part, as
suitable for a major subdivision of land for residential purposes until
such time as those specific improvements and/or facilities deemed
necessary can be adequately provided or assured.
The provisions of § 180-94, Subsections A and B shall also apply to
the subdivision of land for residential purposes in Planned Employment
Center Districts. [Added 12-8-2014 by Ord. No. 288]
C.
All proposals or zoning applications for the hereinafter enumerated
uses shall be subject to a site plan review by the Sykesville Planning
and Zoning Commission and by such other agencies as the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall deem appropriate:
(1) Cluster subdivisions (§ 180-90 of this chapter).
(2) Planned business centers (§ 180-91 of this chapter).
(3) Industrial parks (§ 180-92 of this chapter).
(4) Planned unit developments (§ 180-93 of this chapter).
(5) Planned major subdivisions (§ 180-94 of this chapter).
All conditional uses approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals
pursuant to § 180-105A(2) of this chapter.
(6)
All structural alterations to nonconforming buildings or structures,
and uses of nonconforming parcels, lots or tracts of land approved
by the Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to § 180-8A of this
chapter.
(7)
A.
§ 180-94 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-95
176:290
All changes from one non-conforming use to another nonconforming
use approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant
to § 180-8B of this chapter.
(8)
All principal permitted uses in the B-L, B-G and Planned
Employment Center Districts (Articles X, XI, and XXII respectively,
of this chapter), where a building permit and zoning certificate are
required for improvements involving building renovation, parking
or new construction. [Added 3-9-1992 by Ord. No. 193;
amended 12-8-2014 by Ord. No. 288]
(9)
Planned Employment Center District (Article XXII of this chapter).
[Added 3-9-1992 by Ord. No. 193; amended 12-8-2014 by
Ord. No. 288]
(10)
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the authority,
following referral to such agencies, to approve or disapprove the plan
as presented or approve the plan with modifications or conditions.
B.
In approving the site plans, the Commission shall have the authority to:
Limit the number and approve the location and design of entrances
in the interest of public safety and minimizing traffic congestion to
the greatest extent possible.
(1)
Require a grading, stormwater management, landscaping, fencing
and signing plan.
(2)
Approve lighting arrangements to ensure no visual interference
with the traveling public on adjacent roadways, and to minimize
glare or reflection on adjacent buildings.
(3)
Ensure conformance to all duly adopted elements of the Town
Master Plan.
(4)
Require binding agreement, backed by bond or other surety
provided to the Mayor and Council of Sykesville, to insure the
completion of the site plan and to fulfill any conditions attached
thereto. The agreement or bond shall be provided unless
specifically waived by the Commission.
(5)
C.
No zoning certificate shall be issued for the uses enumerated in this
section until the Planning and Zoning Commission has approved a site
plan for the use.
D.
The site plan required by this section shall consist of a plan indicating
the location of existing and proposed buildings, structures, signs, paved
areas, walkways, vegetative cover, existing and proposed grades, initial
landscaping and screening within the site.
E.
Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any final
decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission, or any taxpayer, or
F.
§ 180-95 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-95
176:291
any officer, department, board or bureau of the Town of Sykesville, may
appeal same to the Circuit Court of Carroll County.
§ 180-95 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-95
176:292
ARTICLE XV
Exceptions and Modifications
§ 180-96. Applicability.
The regulations specified in this chapter shall be subject to the following
exceptions, modifications, and interpretations.
§ 180-97. Lot area modification.
§ 180-98. Setback modifications.
Where the average setback line of at least two existing buildings on lots
which are on the same side of the street or road and within 200 feet of the
lot in question is less than the minimum setback prescribed by this chapter,
the minimum setback line shall be the average setback line of all buildings
within 200 feet of the proposed building. However, in no case shall the
setback line be less than 35 feet from the center line of any abutting road
or street.
§ 180-99. Projection into yards.
Minimum lot area and lot width regulations in any zone shall not apply
to repeater, booster, transformer, or switching stations, or dial offices.
A.
In any district wherein a single-family dwelling is permitted, such
dwelling may be permitted on any lot or parcel which is of official
record by deed or a subdivision duly recorded in the plat records of
Carroll County as of the effective date of this chapter, provided:
The owner does not own sufficient land adjoining to enable
conformance with yard or area requirements.
(1)
(2) No side yard shall be less than 10% of the width of the said lot.
(3) All other regulations are complied with.
B.
In any district except the C Conservation District, where dwellings
are permitted, if neither a public water supply or sewerage system is
accessible or if an acceptable community water supply or sewerage
system is not to be provided, the minimum lot size shall be 20,000
square feet and 100 feet in width, subject, however, to the requirements
of the Maryland State Department of Health.
C.
Except in a C Conservation or R-20,000 Residence District, if a public
water supply is accessible and individual lot sewerage facilities are
approved, the minimum lot size for a dwelling shall be 15,000 square
feet, with 100 feet width at the building lines, subject, however, to the
requirements of the Maryland State Department of Health.
D.
If attached to the main building, a carport or a one-story open porch,
with or without a roof, may extend into any required yard not more than
A.
§ 180-96 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-99
176:293
§ 180-100. Height.
§ 180-101. Variance.
The Board may authorize, upon appeal, in accordance with § 180-105
variances from height, lot area, lot width, yard regulations, parking space
requirements, sign regulations, and distance requirements specified in
§ 180-16. The Board may grant such variance only in cases where the strict
compliance with the terms of this chapter would result in practical difficulty
and unreasonable hardship, and only if in strict harmony with the spirit and
intent of such regulations and only in a manner so as to grant relief without
substantial injury to public health, safety, and general welfare.
25% of the minimum required depth of a front or rear yard or of the
minimum required width of a side yard.
Projections such as bay windows, chimneys, entrances, vestibules,
balconies, eaves and leaders may extend into any required yard not
more than four feet, provided that such projections (excepting eaves)
are not over 10 feet in length.
B.
Fences and walls shall be exempt from building lines and yard
requirements unless obstructions to vision.
C.
Building height limitations shall not apply to water tanks, barns,
windmills, silos, or other accessory farm structures; or to belfries,
steeples, spires, electric or communication poles or towers, electric
generating plants, electric transforming or switching equipment, radio,
television or radar towers, chimneys or smokestacks, flagpoles, fire
or observation towers, cupolas, domes, monuments, penthouses, or
roof structures for housing stairways; or to tanks, ventilating fans, airconditioning
equipment or similar equipment required to operate and
maintain the building. No penthouse or roof structure shall have a total
area greater than 25% of a roof area, nor shall such structure be used
for any purpose than a use incidental to the main use of the building.
A.
In any R or B District, the height of a building may be extended to three
stories, but not over 40 feet, if each side yard is increased in width 1/2
foot for each additional one foot of height above the normal maximum
limit.
B.
On any lot where the average finished slope adjoining the building
exceeds 7% grade, one story in addition to the number permitted in the
zone in which such lot is situated shall be permitted on the downhill
side of any building erected, but the building height limit shall not
otherwise be increased above that specified for the zone.
C.
In any zone where public or quasi-public buildings are permitted such
buildings may be erected to a height of 120 feet, but the minimum front,
rear, and side yards shall be increased one foot for each foot of height
above the limit established for the zone in which the building is erected.
D.
§ 180-99 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-101
176:294
ARTICLE XVI
Administration
§ 180-102. Zoning Administrator.
§ 180-103. Zoning certificates.
There is hereby established the office of Zoning Administrator. The
office shall be filled by a person appointed by the Mayor and Council
of Sykesville after receipt of recommendations by the Commission. Any
person appointed to the office shall be or become, upon appointment,
a resident of Carroll County and shall be qualified by education,
experience, or training, to administer and enforce the provisions of
this chapter. Any person so appointed shall maintain no interest in
any matter which may be construed by the Mayor and Council to
be in conflict with the duties and decisions of the office of Zoning
Administrator.
A.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Zoning
Administrator. Appeal from a decision of the Zoning Administrator shall
be made to the Board of Appeals as provided in § 180-107.
B.
All departments, officials and public employees of the Town of
Sykesville which are vested with the duty or authority to issue permits
or licenses shall issue no permit or license for any use, building or
purpose, if the same would be in conflict with the provisions of this
chapter. Any permit or license issued in conflict with the provisions of
this chapter shall be null and void.
C.
It shall be unlawful for an owner to use or permit the use of any
building, structure or land or part thereof, hereafter created, erected,
changed, converted, or enlarged, wholly or partly, until a zoning
certificate shall have been issued by the Zoning Administrator. A zoning
certificate shall be revocable, subject to continued compliance with all
requirements and conditions.
A.
All applications for zoning certificates shall be accompanied by plans
drawn approximately to scale, showing the dimensions and shape of the
lot to be built upon; the size and location of existing buildings, if any;
and the location and dimensions of the proposed building or alteration.
Where no buildings are involved, the location of the present use and/
or proposed use to be made of the lot shall be shown. The application
and/or plans shall include such other information as reasonably may be
required by the Zoning Administrator to determine conformance with
and provide for the enforcement of this chapter. The plans shall be
retained in the office of the Zoning Administrator.
B.
The Zoning Administrator shall approve the issuance of a zoning
certificate only if the application complies with the requirements of this
chapter, and provided that such zoning certificate shall be conditioned
where necessary on the approval of the County Health Officer, State
C.
§ 180-102 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-103
176:295
Highway Administration and/or County Roads Department, Town
Planning and Zoning Commission, or any other agency concerned,
and provided the application is accompanied by the required fee. The
Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of all zoning certificates
and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person upon payment
of the cost thereof. If a zoning certificate is issued, such approval and
issuance thereof does not sanction variance from the terms of this
chapter.
If the Zoning Administrator shall find any of the provisions of this
chapter being violated, he shall notify in writing, by certified mail,
the owner or the person responsible for such violation, indicating the
nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct
it. He shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or
structures, removal of illegal buildings or structures, or of additions,
alterations or structural changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal
work being done; and shall, unless compliance is met within a
reasonable time, take any other action authorized by this chapter to
insure compliance with or prevent violation of its provisions.
D.
A zoning certificate shall become void one year after the date of
issuance, if the construction or use for which the certificate was issued
has not been started.
E.
§ 180-103 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-103
176:296
ARTICLE XVII
Board of Appeals
§ 180-104. Creation; membership; powers and duties.
The Board of Appeals of Sykesville is hereby created and designated the
"Board of Zoning Appeals." The number of members of said Board, their
term of office, succession, removal, filling of vacancies, alternate
membership, and their powers and duties shall be as provided in Article
66B, Annotated Code of Maryland.
§ 180-105. General powers.
§ 180-106. Organization; meetings; authority to administer oaths
and compel attendance of witnesses; technical assistance; minutes
of proceedings; records.
The Board shall be organized and its rules shall be amended, if necessary,
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Meetings of the Board
shall be held at the call of the Chairman, and at such other times as
the Board may determine. The Chairman, or in his absence, the Acting
Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
For assistance in reaching decisions relative to appeals, conditional uses,
or variances, the Board may request testimony at its hearings for purposes
The Board shall have the following powers:
To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error
in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an
administrative official in regard to the enforcement of this chapter
or of any ordinance adopted pursuant thereto.
(1)
To hear and decide conditional uses to the ordinance upon which
such Board is required to pass.
(2)
To authorize, upon appeal in special cases, such variance from
the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public
interest, where, owing to special conditions, the enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter will result in unwarranted hardship and
injustice and which will most nearly accomplish the purpose and
intent of the regulations of this chapter.
(3)
A.
In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the Board may, in
conformity with the provisions of law and this chapter, and amendments
thereto, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision, or determination appealed from, and may make
such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be
made.
B.
The Board is also empowered to adopt and promulgate such rules and
regulations as it shall deem necessary in the conduct of its hearings and
the issuance of its decisions or testimony pertaining to its hearings.
C.
§ 180-104 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-106
176:297
of securing technical aid or factual evidence from the Commission or any
county agency. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The
Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, and shall keep records of all its
official actions, all of which shall be filed in the office of the Board and shall
be a public record.
§ 180-107. Appeals to Board.
An appeal to the Board may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any
officer, department, board, commission or bureau of the county affected
by any decision of the Zoning Administrator. Such appeal shall be taken
within 30 days after the decision by filing with the Zoning Administrator
and with the Board a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The
Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken.
§ 180-108. Hearings.
Action required after filing of application. Upon the filing of an
application before the Board, the following action shall be taken
preparatory to holding a hearing thereon:
The Board shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing of the
application or appeal.
(1)
Notice of the hearing shall be advertised in two consecutive issues
of a newspaper having general circulation within Sykesville. The
first insertion shall appear in such newspaper at least 15 days prior
to such hearing.
(2)
Property upon which the application or appeal is concerned shall
be posted conspicuously by a zoning notice no less in size than 22
inches by 28 inches at least 14 days before the date of the hearing.
(3)
Notification by certified mail shall be made to the appellant or
petitioner, and to the owners of those properties and the addresses
certified on the notice of appeals by the appellant or petitioner
as being contiguous to the property with which the hearing is
concerned.
(4)
The Board, upon application in writing by any interested party filed
with the Zoning Administrator no less than 10 days prior to the
date of scheduled hearing, shall visit the specific property involved
prior to the hearing. The Board, in its discretion, may otherwise
visit the specific property prior to or after the hearing.
(5)
A.
Holding of hearing; appearance at hearing. The Board, following such
action above, shall hold such hearing. At the hearing, any party may
appear and be heard in person or by agent or attorney.
B.
C. Postponement.
§ 180-106 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-108
176:298
§ 180-109. Limitations, guides and standards.
Where in these regulations certain powers are conferred upon the Board
or the approval of the Board is required before a permit may be issued, or
the Board is called upon to decide certain issues, such Board shall study
the specific property involved, as well as the neighborhood, and consider
all testimony and data submitted, and shall hear any person desiring to
speak for or against the issuance of the permit. However, the application
for a permit shall not be approved where the Board finds the proposed
building, addition, extension of building or use, sign, use or change of use
would adversely affect the public health, safety, security, morals, or general
welfare, or would result in dangerous traffic conditions, or would jeopardize
the lives or property of people living in the neighborhood. In deciding such
matters, the Board shall give consideration, among other things, to the
following:
Requests for postponement of a scheduled hearing shall be filed in
writing with the Zoning Administrator not less than 10 days prior
to the date of hearing, and shall be accompanied by a sum of money
sufficient to pay the cost of advertising the postponement and the
rescheduled hearing. The granting of such requests shall be at the
discretion of the Chairman of the Board.
(1)
Requests for postponement filed later than 10 days prior to the
date of a scheduled hearing, shall, in addition to the other
requirements set forth in Subsection C(1) above, be supported
by an affidavit of the party making the request or some other
creditable person. The granting of such request shall be at the
discretion of the Board in cases of extreme hardship or upon good
cause shown.
(2)
The Board may, upon its own initiative, postpone a scheduled
hearing at any time.
(3)
Continuance. The Board may continue a hearing at another time and/
or date once such hearing has been started; however, the Board shall
announce the date and hour of continuance of such hearing while in
session.
D.
Decision by Board; appeal from decision by Board. The Board shall
render a decision within a reasonable time. Any party aggrieved by a
decision of the Board of Appeals may appeal to the Circuit Court of
Carroll County in a manner set forth in the applicable sections of Article
66B of the Annotated Code of Maryland, as amended. The Court may
affirm, reverse, vacate, or modify the decision complained of in the
appeal.
E.
The number of people residing or working in the immediate area
concerned.
A.
B. The orderly growth of Sykesville.
§ 180-108 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-109
176:299
§ 180-110. Disapproval of application.
If the application is disapproved by the Board, thereafter the Board shall
take no further action on another application for substantially the same
proposal, on the same premises, until after two years from the date of such
disapproval. If an appeal to the Board is perfected and the public hearing
date is set and duly advertised and properly posted and thereafter the
applicant withdraws the appeal, he shall be precluded from filing another
application for substantially the same proposal on the same premises for
one year.
§ 180-111. Fees.
A filing fee shall accompany each application for appeal to the Board, as
may be determined by the Mayor and Council of Sykesville.
C. Traffic conditions and facilities.
The effect of such use upon the peaceful enjoyment of people in their
homes.
D.
E. The conservation of property values.
The effect of odors, dust, gas, smoke, fumes, vibrations, glare and noise
upon the use of surrounding property values.
F.
G. The most appropriate use of land and structure.
H. Decisions of the courts.
I. The purpose of these regulations as set forth herein.
Type and kind of structures in the vicinity where public gatherings may
be held, such as schools, churches, and the like.
J.
§ 180-109 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-111
176:300
ARTICLE XVIII
Enforcement
§ 180-112. Violations and penalties; continuing offenses. [Amended
9-27-2004 by Ord. No. 247; 6-14-2010 by Ord. No. 272]
The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a
Class E municipal infraction as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, Municipal
Infractions. Each and every day during which such illegal location, erection,
construction, enlargement, change, maintenance or use continues may be
deemed a separate offense.
§ 180-113. Other relief.
In addition to other remedies, the Mayor and Council, the Zoning
Administrator, or any adjacent or neighboring property owner may institute
injunction, mandamus, abatement, or other appropriate action or
proceedings to compel compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 180-112 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-113
176:301

ARTICLE XIX
Amendments
§ 180-114. Petition for change; public hearing; posting of property;
annexations.
These regulations, restrictions and provisions and the boundaries of the
districts may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed,
modified or repealed by the Mayor and Council. Any person or officer,
department, board, commission or bureau of the Town may petition for
such change or amendment; however, no such change or amendment shall
become effective until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which
parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard.
At least 15 days' notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town, and if the
proposed amendment involves a change in a zoning district boundary line,
the property involved shall be posted for a period of 15 days immediately
preceding the hearing. Where an official annexation by the Town is involved,
the requirements of the Annotated Code of Maryland (Article 23 inclusive)
shall govern and be applicable, as shall applicable provisions of the Carroll
County Zoning Ordinance relating to official annexations by any
municipality of Carroll County.
§ 180-115. Referral of changes to Planning and Zoning
Commission.
The Mayor and Council shall refer all proposed changes and amendments to
these regulations or proposed changes in a zoning district to the Planning
and Zoning Commission for report and recommendations.
§ 180-116. Factors to be considered by Mayor and Council.
Before acting upon proposed changes and amendments to these regulations
or changes in the zoning district boundary lines, the Mayor and Council
shall consider the following:
A. The purpose of these regulations, as outlined in Article I.
B. The report and recommendation of the Commission.
Whether there have been any substantial changes in or near the area
covered by a proposed change in the district boundary lines.
C.
Any new phases of the Master Plan for Sykesville developed since the
adoption of these regulations.
D.
Whether it is clearly evident that there was an error or mistake in the
zoning of the subject property.
E.
Whether there has been a convincing demonstration that the proposed
rezoning would have been fully as appropriate and logical for the
subject property as was the zone in which it was placed.
F.
§ 180-114 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-117
176:303
§ 180-117. General duties of Planning and Zoning Commission.
The Commission shall study zoning, its development, application and
relation to public and private development and its relation to other phases
of the Master Plan for the development and may, from time to time, submit
amendments to these regulations or changes in the district boundaries
to the Mayor and Council. However, no such amendment or change shall
become effective until approved by the Mayor and Council as required by
this article.
§ 180-118. Vote required to effect amendment.
Unless otherwise provided by Article 66B of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, as amended, no proposed amendment, supplement or change to
this chapter shall be approved without the favorable votes of members of
the Council as required by the Town Charter.
§ 180-119. Reconsideration of defeated proposals.
If a petition for a change in a zoning district boundary is disapproved by
the Mayor and Council, thereafter the Mayor and Council shall take no
further action on another petition for the same or substantially the same
proposal on the same premises until after 12 months from the date of the
last disapproval.
§ 180-120. Scale drawing to accompany applications for map
changes.
Every application for a change in zoning of district boundaries shall be
accompanied by a scale drawing, showing the existing and proposed
boundaries and such other information as may be needed to properly locate
and plat the amendment on the official Zoning Maps.
§ 180-121. Filing fee for map change applications.
A filing fee shall be charged for processing an application for a change in
zoning, as may be determined by the Mayor and Council.
§ 180-117 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-121
176:304
ARTICLE XX
Definitions.
§ 180-122. Generally.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms used are herein defined as
follows:
ACCESSORY USE — A use of a building, lot or portion thereof, which is
incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the main building or lot.
ADULT BOOKSTORES — An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock-in-trade books, magazines, and other
periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas (as defined below), or an establishment with a
segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material.[Added
2-11-1985 by Ord. No. 141]
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a
capacity of 25 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating
to specified sexual activities, for observation by patrons therein.[Added
2-11-1985 by Ord. No. 141]
AGRICULTURE or AGRICULTURAL PURPOSES — The raising of farm
products for use or sale, including animal or poultry husbandry, and the
growing of crops such as grain, vegetables, fruit, grass for pasture or sod,
trees, shrubs, flowers, and similar products of the soil.
AMUSEMENT ARCADE — Any facility for the use of operation of more
than three amusement devices or game machines, including, but not limited
to, television games, electronic novelty gases, electro-mechanical and
electronic target games, driving games, pinball machines and other similar
devices and machines.[Added 5-30-1982 by Ord. No. 125]
APARTMENT — An area within a structure arranged or designed for
occupancy by one family.
APARTMENT HOUSE — Any building arranged, designed or used for rent or
occupancy, or is cooperatively owned by its occupants having three or more
family units, and with a yard, compound, service, or utilities in common.
BOARD — Refers to the Board of Appeals.
BUILDING LINE — The line established by law beyond which a building
shall not extend as determined by front, side, and rear yards herein.
BUILDINGS — Any structure enclosed within exterior walls for the
enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animals or chattels.
COMMISSION — Refers to the Town of Sykesville Planning and Zoning
Commission.
CONDITIONAL USES — Uses which are specified for Board of Appeals
approval prior to authorization and which uses, after public hearing, may
§ 180-122 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-122
176:305
be approved conditionally, or disapproved in accordance with § 180-105.
The term "conditional use" shall constitute the same meaning as "special
exception" specified as one of the general powers of the Board of Appeals in
accordance with Article 66B of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
CONSTRUCTION STARTED — For the purposes of this chapter,
construction will be deemed to have begun when all of the necessary
excavation and piers and/or footings of one or more buildings or structures
covered by the permit have been completed.
DWELLING — Any building arranged, designed, or used in whole or in part,
for residential purposes, but not including a tent, cabin, trailer or mobile
home, or a room in a hotel or motel.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES or ESSENTIAL UTILITY EQUIPMENT — Facilities
owned or maintained by public utility companies or public agencies, located
in public ways or in easements provided for the purpose, or on a customer's
premise and not requiring private right-of-way, and reasonably necessary
for the furnishing of adequate water, sewer, gas, electric, communication
or similar services to adjacent customers; including pumping stations and
waste water treatment plants, but not including any building, yard, station
or facility requiring a site in excess of 400 square feet, except as
hereinbefore provided, and not including any cross country pipeline,
transmission line or towers, communications towers, or any line requiring a
private right-of-way.[Amended 7-9-2001 by Ord. No. 223b]
FAMILY — One or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption
occupying a dwelling and living together as a single housekeeping unit or
a group of not more than three persons not related by blood, marriage or
adoption occupying a dwelling and living together as a single housekeeping
unit.[Amended 9-25-2006 by Ord. No. 267]
FARM — An area of land used for agricultural purposes, as defined in
section 20.02 and which provides a primary source of income for the
occupant or owner.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A detached building designed for or
used exclusively for residential purposes by one family or one
housekeeping unit.
A.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A detached building with one dwelling
unit above the other (duplex) or two semi-detached dwelling units
located on abutting lots separated by a party wall without openings,
in either case for or used exclusively for residential purposes, but not
more than a total of two families or two housekeeping units.
B.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A detached building or a group of
attached and semi-detached buildings, designed for or used exclusively
for residential purpose by more than two families or more than two
housekeeping units.
C.
§ 180-122 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-122
176:306
GARAGE —
HEALTH DEPARTMENT — The Maryland State Department of Health.
THE HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION — Refers to the Historic District
Commission authorized in accordance with Article 66B of the Annotated
Code of Maryland.
HOME OCCUPATION — Any use of a dwelling, conducted solely by a
member or members of the family residing therein, which is incidental or
subordinate to the main use of the building for dwelling purposes; which
utilizes not more than 25% of the floor area of the dwelling; which does not
generate vehicular parking or nonresidential traffic to a greater extent than
would normally result from residential occupancy; in connection with which
no inventory or stock in trade is kept for regular sale to persons coming to
the premises; and with no other evidence being visible, other than a sign
not exceeding one square foot, audible or abnormally odoriferous from the
outside of the dwelling to indicate it is being used for other than residential
purposes.
HOSPITAL, CLASS A — A hospital which does not primarily treat
communicable diseases, insane or feebleminded patients, epileptics, drug
addicts, or alcoholic patients, and is not a penal or correctional institution.
HOSPITAL, CLASS B — A hospital which does primarily treat the types of
cases note in Class A above, and which may be a penal or correctional
institution.
INDUSTRIAL PARK — The division of a tract of land which is eminently
suitable for industrial use into small tracts or parcels according to a
comprehensive plan for occupancy by a group of industries and has streets
and utilities and conforms to the requirements of section 13.5.
KENNEL — Any building or structure and/or land used, designed, or
arranged for housing, boarding, breeding or care of more than three adult
dogs kept or bred for hunting, sale, exhibition, or other use for profit.
LOT — A piece of parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
principal building and its accessory buildings and uses, including all open
spaces required by this chapter, and having frontage on a street as defined
herein.
GARAGE, RESIDENTIAL — An accessory building, portion of a main
building, or building attached thereto, used for the storage of private
motor vehicles, 50% of which may be used for the storage of a
commercial vehicle.
A.
GARAGE, SERVICE — A garage, other than a residential garage, where
motor vehicles, trailers, or other type of equipment are stored,
equipped for operation, repaired, or kept for remuneration, hire or sale.
B.
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting on two or more streets at their
intersection, where the interior angle of the intersection does not
exceed 135º.
A.
§ 180-122 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-122
176:307
MASTER PLAN — Means policies, statements, goals, and inter-related plans
for private and public land use, transportation and community facilities
documented in text and maps which constitute the guide for the Town's
future development.
MEDICAL CENTER — A medical or dental clinic building or group or
combination of such buildings occupied by medical practitioners and used
for examination and/or treatment of patients, which may include laboratory
and/or testing equipment for the purpose of providing health services to
people on an out-patient basis.
MICRODISTILLERY — An establishment for the purpose of the annual
production, storage, distillation, manufacturing, processing, distribution,
and wholesale and retail sale of no more than 27,500 gallons of liquor
made from produce grown or produced off-site, and for tours and tastings
of the products. Such establishment shall be in compliance with any and all
local, state, and federal liquor laws and licensing requirements and health
department regulations, and shall possess any and all licenses which may
be required by Carroll County, the Town of Sykesville, and/or the State of
Maryland, including, without limitation, a Class I manufacturer's license
as provided in Article 2B § 2-202 of the Maryland Code, Annotated (2014)
("liquor license").[Added 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 291]
NONCONFORMING USE — A use of a building or of land lawfully existing
at the time this chapter becomes effective and which does not conform with
the use regulations of the zone in which it is located.
NURSING HOMES — These items include rest homes, nursing homes,
convalescent homes for children, and homes providing chronic and
convalescent care. Extended care, intermediate care or personal care
facility as defined within Maryland State Health Department Regulations.
LOT FRONTAGE — The front of a lot shall be construed to be the
portion nearest the street. For the purpose of determining yard
requirements on corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent
to streets shall be considered frontage, and yards shall be provided
as required herein, except that not more than one rear yard shall be
required.
B.
LOT MEASUREMENTS —
DEPTH — The average horizontal distance between the front lot
line and the rear lot line.
(1)
WIDTH — The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured
at the mid-points of the side lot lines.
(2)
C.
LOT OF RECORD — A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in
the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Carroll County or a lot
or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has
been so recorded.
D.
An institution which admits two or more individuals for care, and who
are not related to the owner or administrator.
A.
§ 180-122 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-122
176:308
OPEN SPACE — Land provided and deemed necessary and desirable for
present and future residents and citizens of the area including such land in
stream valleys, natural woods, areas of unusual natural scenic beauty, local
play lots, recreational walkways, pathways and planting areas in residential
subdivisions.
PLANNED BUSINESS CENTER — Three or more retail stores or service
establishments designed as a unit and primarily served by common
accessories such as signs, parking lots, arcades and walkways.
PLANNED MAJOR SUBDIVISION; RESIDENTIAL — A major subdivision
of land as defined in Section 19.38 for residential use and requiring an
approved plan therefor by the Commission.
RETIREMENT HOMES — Specifically designed multi-dwelling unit
buildings to which occupancy is restricted to elderly citizens.
SEPTIC MINOR SUBDIVISION — For the purposes of the Sustainable
Growth and Agriculture Preservation Act of 2012 (Senate Bill 236), after
October 1, 2012, a minor subdivision will be defined as up to seven new
lots for purposes of the applicability of Senate Bill 236 only. All development
proposals will be required to comply with all other processing and code
provisions applicable to minor subdivisions.[Added 12-10-2012 by Ord.
No. 284]
SERVICE STATION — Any area of land, including buildings and other
structures thereon that are used to dispense motor vehicle fuels, oil and
accessories at retail, where minor repair service is incidental, and no
storage or parking space is offered for rent.
SETBACK — The required minimum horizontal distance between a building
line as defined herein, and the related front, side, or rear property line.
SIGNS — A name, identification, description, display, logo, illustration or
device (including wigway, twiller, pinwheel, pennant, and other similar
device) which is affixed, stationed, or represented directly or indirectly
upon a building, structure or land and which directs attention to a product,
place, activity, person, institution, or business.
Domiciliary care facility as further defined within Maryland State
Health Department Regulations.
B.
An institution which admits four or more aged and/or disabled non
related individuals not gainfully employed and which maintains the
necessary facilities and provides a protective institutional or home-type
environment.
C.
Treatment facility for emotionally disturbed children and for
Adolescents as Further Defined with Maryland State Health
Department Regulations.
D.
An institution for the treatment of emotionally disturbed children and/
or adolescents with overnight accommodations for two or more non
related individuals.
E.
§ 180-122 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-122
176:309
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — [Added 2-11-1985 by Ord. No. 141]
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — [Added 2-11-1985 by Ord. No. 141]
STABLE, PRIVATE (HORSE) — An accessory structure designed for the
shelter, feeding and care of no more than two horses or ponies maintained
on the property as pets or for domestic use as distinguished from
agricultural or commercial stables.
STREET; HIGHWAY; ROAD — Any street existing or which may be approved
by the Commission. The word "street" shall also mean "road", "highway",
"boulevard", "avenue", "lane", or "court".
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed, the use of which requires fixed
location on the ground or is attached to something having such location, but
not including fences, power, gas, water, sewage, or communication lines or
poles, towers or pole structures, sidewalks, driveways or curbs.
SUBDIVISION — The division of any tract or parcel of land into three
or more lots or parcels for immediate or future sale or lease or building
development. If a new street is involved, "subdivision" shall mean any
division of a tract or parcel of land. "Subdivision" shall not, however, include
division of land for agricultural purposes.
SIGN, BUSINESS — A sign which directs attention to a business or
profession or to a commodity, service, or entertainment sold or offered
upon the premises where the sign is located.
A.
SIGN, OUTDOOR ADVERTISING — A sign structure which directs
attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment not
necessarily conducted, sold, or offered upon the premises where such
sign is located.
B.
Less than completely and opaquely covered:
(1) Human genitals, pubic region,
(2) Buttock, and
Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola;
(3)
A.
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
B.
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy;
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breast.
C.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — A division of a tract or parcel of land into
4 or more lots or parcels for immediate or future sale or lease or
building development. If a new street is involved, "subdivision" shall
mean any division of a tract or parcel of land and shall be construed
A.
§ 180-122 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-122
176:310
TEMPORARY USE — Any use which has been authorized under the
provision of this chapter which is not unlimited as to the time in which such
use shall legally continue.
VARIANCE — A Variance is a relaxation of the terms of the Zoning
Ordinance where such Variance will not be contrary to the public interest
and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the results
of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would
result in unnecessary and undue hardship.
YARD — Any open space on the same lot with a principal building(s) which
lies between such building(s) and the lot line and is open and unoccupied
from the ground up.
ZONING CERTIFICATE — A written statement issued by the Zoning
Administrator, authorizing buildings, structures, or uses, in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 180-123. Singular and plural; use and used; shall and may;
hereafter; person.
Words used in the present tense include the future tense; words used in
the singular number shall include the plural number; words in the plural
number shall include the singular number; the words "use" and "used"
include the words "arranged, designed or intended for use"; the word
"shall" is always mandatory, the word "may" is permissive; "now" shall mean
at the time of the adoption of these regulations; "hereafter" shall mean
after the adoption of these regulations. The word "person" shall include a
as a major subdivision. For the purposes of the Sustainable Growth
and Agriculture Preservation Act of 2012 (Senate Bill 236) only, after
October 1, 2012, a request that results in a total of eight or more new
lots will be defined as a major subdivision. [Amended 12-10-2012 by
Ord. No. 284]
MINOR SUBDIVISION — A division of a tract or parcel of land into
no more than 3 lots or parcels for immediate or future sale or lease
or building development. Additionally, divisions or redivisions of land,
as the case may be, involving modifications in property lines, plat
corrections, or enlargement of existing properties shall generally be
construed as a minor subdivision.
B.
FRONT YARD — A yard extending across the full width of the lot and
lying between the front lot line and the nearest line of the principal
building.
A.
REAR YARD — A yard extending across the full width of the lot and
lying between the rear lot line and the nearest line of the principal
building.
B.
SIDE YARD — A yard between the side line of the lot and the nearest
line of the principal building and extending from the front yard to the
rear yard.
C.
§ 180-122 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-123
176:311
firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation
as well as an individual.
§ 180-123 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-123
176:312
ARTICLE XXI
(Reserved)48
§ 180-124. through § 180-133. (Reserved)
48.Editor’s Note: Former Article XXI, Employment Campus District, added 1-23-2006 by Ord.
No. 266, was repealed 12-8-2014 by Ord. No. 288.
§ 180-124 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-124
176:313

ARTICLE XXII
Planned Employment Center District
[Added 12-8-2014 by Ord. No. 288]
§ 180-134. Purpose.
The purpose of the PEC - Planned Employment Center District is to provide
for logical locations where high-quality mixed use developments can occur
in harmony with surrounding land uses (including site layouts and
architecture that is aesthetically pleasing and consistent with applicable
guidelines) and in support of Sykesville's goals for growing the employment
base, providing housing for existing and future residents, and offering retail
services that complement the existing businesses within the Town. The
following objectives will help fulfill this purpose:
§ 180-135. Applicability.
PEC - Planned Employment Centers are limited to properties that are
in excess of 20 acres and are within 1,320 feet from Maryland Route
32. Any portion of a proposed development application must be within
1,320 feet from Route 32; the entire development parcel does not have to
meet this requirement. The following regulations and applicable regulations
contained in other articles shall apply in the PEC - Planned Employment
Center District.
To encourage orderly, staged development of comprehensively
designed mixed-use centers.
A.
To create a mixture of office, retail, recreational, hotel, institutional,
light industrial and residential uses within a single structure or within
multiple structures where all related structures, parking, and open
spaces are designed to function as a cohesive and integrated site, while
protecting the residential character of surrounding neighborhoods.
B.
To provide for an enriched and enhanced natural environment by the
preservation of trees and the incorporation of stormwater management
techniques which maintain the hydrologic regime of the site.
C.
To assure compatibility of the proposed land uses with the internal
and surrounding uses by incorporating innovative standards of land
planning and site design.
D.
To encourage harmonious and coordinated development of sites,
considering the existing natural features, bicycle, pedestrian and
vehicular circulation and compatibility with surrounding uses.
E.
To encourage development that is of excellent design and architecture
with a mix of uses that will create a synergy of uses, efficiency of
design, and contribute to a reduction of vehicle miles traveled.
F.
§ 180-134 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-136
176:315
§ 180-136. Principal permitted uses.
The principal permitted uses in this district shall be as follows:
Nonresidential uses including:
Local retail business or service uses, including:
Alcoholic package good stores. [Amended 7-11-2016 by Ord.
No. 296]
(a)
(b) Antique shops.
(c) Arcades.
(d) Art galleries.
(e) Art and craft shops.
(f) Artisans and craft work.
(g) Automobile parts and supply stores.
(h) Bakery or donut shops.
(i) Banks.
(j) Barbershops.
(k) Bicycle, motor scooter, moped sales and service.
(l) Billiard and pool halls.
(m) Bookstores, except adult bookstores.
(n) Candy stores.
(o) Cigar stores.
(p) Clock shops for sale or repair.
(q) Clothing stores.
Computer, TV, phone, and electronic equipment sales and
service.
(r)
(s) Consignment shops, except pawn shops.
Construction or sales trailers, temporary, in an approved
development actively under construction.
(t)
(u) Convenience stores, gift shops, and newsstands.
(v) Delicatessens and snack bars.
(w) Department stores.
(x) Dry cleaning retail outlets.
(1)
A.
§ 180-136 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-136
176:316
(y) Flooring stores.
(z) Florist shops.
(aa) Furniture stores.
(bb)Grocery stores.
(cc) Hair and nail salons.
(dd)Hardware stores.
(ee) Hobby shops.
(ff) Ice cream shops.
(gg) Interior decorating establishments.
(hh)Jewelry stores.
(ii) Linens, bath, and curtain stores.
(jj) Locksmiths.
(kk) Luggage or leather goods stores.
(ll) Mailing and shipping services.
Office supply stores and business service, establishments
including signage and copying.
(mm)
(nn)Opticians or optometrical establishments.
(oo) Parks, private.
(pp)Pharmacies.
(qq)Photographic stores and studios.
(rr) Picture framing establishments.
(ss) (Reserved)49
(tt) Rental establishments (with no on-site/outside storage).
Restaurants (without liquor licenses or with liquor licenses,
providing that the average monthly receipts from the sale of
food constitute at least 41% of the average monthly receipts
from the combined sale of food and alcoholic beverages as
measured over a period of one year immediately preceding the
date of an application for license issuance, renewal, upgrade,
transfer or other modification). [Amended 7-11-2016 by
Ord. No. 296]
(uu)
49.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(1)(ss), listing pubs, taverns, microbreweries, and wine
bars as principal permitted uses, was repealed 7-11-2016 by Ord. No. 296.
§ 180-136 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-136
176:317
(vv) Sporting goods stores.
(ww)Stationery stores.
Swimming pools (private) and recreational facilities. (private)
associated with a residential development, if located at least
50 feet from each lot line and dwelling unit.
(xx)
(yy) Tanning salons.
(zz) Tattoo parlors and body piercing salons.
(aaa)Telecommuting centers.
(bbbT)oy shops.
(ccc)Travel agencies.
(dddU) pholstering shops, including sail making shops
Video sales and rental establishments, excluding adult video
sales and rental.
(eee)
(fff) Wallpaper and paint stores.
Office, research, institutional, and light industrial uses including:
(a) Advertising agencies.
(b) Business, professional, and medical offices and clinics.
(c) Computer and data processing facilities.
(d) Engineering and scientific research or development facilities.
(e) Government offices.
Television stations, radio broadcasting stations, and recording
studios.
(f)
(2)
Residential uses including:
(1) Single-family.
(2) Two-family.
(3) Multifamily residential.
B.
Any other retail business, service establishment, office, research,
institutional, light industrial, and residential use which is determined
by the Board to be the same general character as the above permitted
uses. (Note: This determination is a ministerial act and is made by the
Board meeting in public session, but does not require a public hearing
or notice thereof.)
C.
§ 180-136 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-137
176:318
§ 180-137. Conditional uses.
The conditional uses requiring Board authorization in this district shall
include:
Nonresidential uses including:
Local retail business or service uses, including:
(a) Appliance sales and service facilities.
(b) Automobile gasoline and service stations.
(c) Carwashes accessory to automobile gasoline stations.
Public and commercial recreational facilities, including
miniature golf; driving ranges; tennis, racquet, and handball
barns or courts; artificial ski slopes; indoor soccer; bowling
alleys; BMX bike, skateboard or roller blade parks; go-carting;
skating rinks, and swimming pools.
(d)
Communication towers, except that freestanding
telecommunication towers are prohibited.
(e)
Dog grooming and dog day-care facilities, without outside runs
or pens.
(f)
Entertainment complexes and theatres, including multi-screen
complexes but excluding adult movies/videos.
(g)
(h) Health clubs, spas, and gymnasiums.
(i) Home centers and building supply stores.
(j) Meat, seafood, and poultry markets.
(k) Nightclubs and comedy clubs.
(l) Pet shops.
(m) Produce markets.
Establishments licensed to keep for sale and to sell beer and
light wines at retail for consumption on the premises or
elsewhere (including pubs, taverns, microbreweries, and wine
bars), and where at least 50% of the business is comprised of
selling alcohol. [Added 7-11-2016 by Ord. No. 296]
(n)
(1)
Office, research, institutional, and light industrial uses including:
(a) Adult day care centers.
(b) Assisted living facilities.
(c) Auditoriums.
(2)
A.
§ 180-137 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-137
176:319
(d) Banquet halls.
(e) Catering establishments.
(f) Child-care centers.
(g) Civic facilities, community centers, libraries, museums.
(h) Community meeting halls.
Country clubs, private clubs, service, nonprofit, and charitable
or philanthropic organizations, social clubs, and fraternal
organizations.
(i)
(j) Funeral establishments.
(k) Golf courses.
(l) Hospice facilities.
(m) Hospitals.
(n) Hotels and motels.
(o) Nursing homes and congregate care facilities.
(p) Religious facilities.
Schools, public charter, and schools, private: academic, arts,
business, technical, or trade, public or private colleges and
universities.
(q)
(r) Staging areas for county capital projects.
Veterinary clinics, if over-night stays are limited to those
necessary for medical treatment, without outside runs or pens.
(s)
Any other retail business, service establishment, office, research,
institutional, and light industrial use which is determined by the Board
to be the same general character as the above conditional uses. Any
conditional use proposed must be reviewed by the Planning
Commission before submission to the Board. The Planning Commission
will make a recommendation to the Board. In deciding such matters,
the Board shall give consideration, among other things, to the
following:
The number of people residing or working in the immediate area
concerned.
(1)
(2) The orderly growth of Sykesville.
(3) Traffic conditions and facilities.
The effect of such use upon the peaceful enjoyment of people in
their homes.
(4)
B.
§ 180-137 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-137
176:320
§ 180-138. Accessory uses.
The accessory uses allowed in this district shall be those uses and
structures customarily accessory and incidental to any permitted principal
use or authorized conditional use. Accessory uses shall be screened from
public view by walls, fencing, landscaping, or a combination of the three.
§ 180-139. Required percentage of land uses.
(5) The conservation of property values.
The effect of odors, dust, gas, smoke, fumes, vibrations, glare and
noise upon the use of surrounding properties.
(6)
(7) The most appropriate use of land and structure.
(8) Decisions of the courts.
(9) The purpose of these regulations as set forth herein.
Type and kind of structures in the vicinity where public gatherings
may be held, such as schools, churches, and the like.
(10)
The following percentages of land uses shall be provided in a PECPlanned
Employment Center development proposal:
Office/research/institutional/hotel/light industrial: 20% to 55%
Retail/services: 10% to 20%
Residential: 10% to 35%
Open space: no less than 25%
A.
Building square footages shall be used to determine the land use
percentages within mixed-use buildings. For example, if a mixed-use
building is on a two-acre parcel within the development and 25% of
the building is devoted to nonresidential uses and 75% is devoted
to residential uses, then 25% of the parcel area (1/2 acre) shall be
considered nonresidential and 75% (one and 1/2 acre) shall be
considered residential.
For the purposes of this calculation, the percentage for each land
use shall be based on the total (or gross) development parcel size.
(1)
Any land that was previously part of the original development
parcel that was subdivided and dedicated to the Town of Sykesville
can be included in the total development parcel size for
determining both percentage of land use and open space
requirements (i.e., Warfield Park Parcel, and internal public roads).
(2)
B.
Recreational space shall be provided within, or adjacent to, any
proposed residential development. Twenty percent of the required open
space shall be devoted to recreational space. Recreational space is
defined as good buildable land with no wetlands, floodplains, forest
C.
§ 180-137 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-139
176:321
§ 180-140. Densities and floor area ratios.
§ 180-141. Maximum height.
The maximum building height shall be six stories.
§ 180-142. Bulk regulations (lot area, lot width, and yard
requirements).
The bulk regulations for a PEC - Planned Employment Center shall follow
traditional neighborhood design principles where buildings are close to
streets and necessary services such as parking areas, trash containers,
alleys, loading areas, etc., are hidden, in as much as possible, from public
view. During the concept plan phase of the development approval process,
the applicant shall provide the Commission with a list of building setback
requirements from public streets, other structures within the development,
and the property boundaries. Once approved by the Commission, these bulk
requirements shall be included in the pattern book and govern development
of the PEC - Planned Employment Center.
§ 180-143. Pattern book.
conservation, slopes in excess of 5% grade (once graded), or any other
environmental or physical encumbrances. Physical improvements
within the required recreational space (such as a community center,
play equipment, etc.) can reduce the total required area below 20% at
the Commission's discretion.
The maximum nonresidential floor area ratio shall be 0.15 based on
the total development parcel. Floor area ratio shall be measured in
square footage. The maximum residential density shall be two homes
per acre based on the total development parcel. Residential density
shall be measured in units per acre. For mixed-use buildings (i.e.,
residential over retail), the nonresidential shall be considered square
feet and deducted from the total permissible nonresidential square feet
and the residential shall be dwelling units and deducted from the total
permissible residential density.
A.
No density bonuses from any other section of the Sykesville Zoning
Code shall be permitted in the PEC - Planned Employment Center.
B.
As part of the preliminary plan phase of the development approval
process, the applicant shall provide the Commission with a pattern
book that will address site planning, architectural, landscape
architectural, and signage requirements for the proposed development.
Once approved by the Commission, the pattern book shall govern
development of the PEC - Planned Employment Center. If guidelines
exist for the proposed development, such as the "Warfield Commercial
Center: Design Guidelines and Standards for Signs and Energy
Efficiency," then the applicant will follow them, or propose changes to
account for changes in the land use, technology, or design approach.
A.
§ 180-139 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-143
176:322
The pattern book shall be prepared by a licensed professional
landscape architect, architect, or engineer.
The pattern book shall include, at a minimum, the following sections:
Introduction.
(a) Description of the overall development.
(b) Market analysis for the proposed uses.
Relationship between the proposed development and the
existing Town.
(c)
(1)
Site planning principles.
(a) Relationship of uses within the development.
Focal points of the development and how they have been
maximized.
(b)
Vehicular and pedestrian connectivity within the development
and to the Town.
(c)
Proposed recreational areas within and adjacent to residential
areas. Including proposed improvements to recreational areas
to serve the intended residential population.
(d)
(e) Building and parking setbacks.
(f) Parking ratios per use shall be in accordance with § 180-88.
(g) Proposed service and loading spaces.
(2)
Architectural design.
(a) Architectural style and overall design principles.
(b) Graphic examples of selected style.
(c) Design details and materials.
(3)
Landscape architectural design.
(a) Public spaces and art within the development.
(b) Hardscape and softscape design details and materials.
(c) Streetscape design.
(d) Site furnishing details and products.
Landscape screening (perimeter buffers, parking lots, service
and loading areas).
(e)
(f) Lighting details and materials.
(4)
B.
§ 180-143 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-143
176:323
Signage plan.
A signage plan for the Planned Employment Center shall be
included in the pattern book. The signage plan shall outline:
Size, type, and location of all signs at the entrance to the
development.
[1]
[2] Size and type of the stationary direction sign.
[3] Size and type of all flat wall signs.
[4] Size and type of service entrance signs.
(a)
Exterior signage in the Planned Employment Center shall be
for identification only and may not be treated as an advertising
device. Signage text is limited to company name and/or logo.
(b)
Sign locations shall be permitted as follows:
For each single-tenant building, one freestanding sign at a
point near the project entrance and one building-mounted
sign.
[1]
For each multi-tenant building, one freestanding sign with
only the building name at a point near the project entrance
and a building-mounted tenant identification system for
each tenant.
[2]
(c)
Sign types shall be permitted as follows:
Freestanding signs.
Maximum size shall not exceed 24 square feet on a
two-sided sign.
[a]
Maximum height shall not exceed six feet above grade
except for the sign identifying the Planned
Employment Center.
[b]
The sign shall be constructed of durable materials
consistent with and/or complementary to the
materials used in buildings within the Planned
Employment Center.
[c]
[d] The sign shall be mounted on a sturdy base.
Illumination by unobtrusive ground lighting is
permissible.
[e]
[1]
Building-mounted signs.
Sign location on the building shall be compatible with
the architectural design of the building.
[a]
[2]
(d)
(5)
§ 180-143 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-143
176:324
No signs may extend above the roof or parapet line of
the building.
[b]
Illumination may be internal through a translucent
letter face or opaque letters project slightly off the
wall and back-lit from a source concealed within the
letter.
[c]
In multi-tenant buildings, the developer or owner is
responsible for submitting a tenant identification system for
approval.
The system shall include a standardized design format
to ensure matching of size, materials, color, finish, and
typeface.
[1]
The system shall be of a scale to identify individual tenants
from parking areas rather than to provide major tenant
visibility from surrounding roads.
[2]
Tenant signage shall be building-mounted. The placement
shall relate architecturally to door and window openings
or other elements of the building.
[3]
[4] Each tenant shall be assigned a designated sign panel.
(e)
Sign color shall be limited to one color for the lettering and
one color for the background. The background color shall be
darker than the message and graphics. Where an additional
color is desired because it is part of the owner's or tenant's
logo, the Commission may modify this requirement.
(f)
Each lot is limited to one temporary sign, which may be doublesided
and shall be removed within one year.
[1] Maximum sign area shall not exceed 32 square feet.
Signs shall be mounted on two four-inch-by-four-inch wood
posts with top of sign a maximum of eight feet.
[2]
Actual mounting height permitted shall be determined by
sign proportions and location.
[3]
(g)
The following are prohibited:
[1] Flashing or moving signs.
[2] Exposed neon or other exposed light source signs.
[3] Applied wood letters.
(h)
The guidelines established above shall supersede § 180-89. In
addition, the Planning Commission can modify these guidelines
based on a superior signage plan and program.
(i)
§ 180-143 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-143
176:325
§ 180-144. Approval process.
Management and maintenance program.
(a) For privately owned property.
(b) For common areas.
(6)
Phasing of the development.
(a) The anticipated time to complete the entire development.
When various uses of the development are anticipated to be
developed. Consider balancing the development of various
uses to maximize the fiscal benefit to the development and
Town.
(b)
(7)
The pattern book shall be evaluated based on the Purpose and
Objectives of the PEC - Planned Employment Center District as outlined
in § 180-134.
C.
A PEC - Planned Employment Center shall follow a three-step approval
process, including:
(1) Concept plan;
(2) Preliminary plan; and
(3) Final plan/subdivision.
A.
Any amendment of the plan must go through the same three-step
process. If, however, the Town's Zoning Administrator believes the
amendment is not substantive, then the concept and preliminary
approval steps can be combined into one preliminary plan approval.
B.
An applicant shall submit all concept, preliminary and final plans to the
Planning Commission for consideration. The purpose is to provide the
Commission with sufficient information to determine the practicality
and suitability of the proposed development. All plans shall be prepared
by a licensed architect, registered civil engineer, professional
landscape architect or other qualified land planner. All plans shall be to
scale and contain the appropriate information for the submission (i.e.,
concept plans are more general than preliminary or final plans).
C.
Hearing.
The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing when
considering the preliminary plan (including the pattern book). The
following notice shall be given:
At least 15 days' notice of the time and place of such hearing
shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Town.
(a)
(1)
D.
§ 180-143 SYKESVILLE CODE § 180-144
176:326
§ 180-145. Other applicable regulations.
The regulations provided herein are not meant to supersede other
applicable Town, county, or state regulations such as historic district and
Maryland Historic Trust requirements, stormwater management, parking
regulation, forest conservation act requirements, and/or sediment and
erosion control provisions. These, and other regulations, shall remain in full
effect and govern the design.
Property upon which a Planned Employment Center
development is proposed shall be posted conspicuously by a
notice at least 22 inches by 28 inches in size, at least 15 days
before the date of the hearing.
(b)
Notice of the hearing shall be sent by first-class mail to the
person making application to the Commission no less than 15
days prior to the first scheduled hearing.
(c)
At least 15 days prior to the first scheduled hearing, notice of
the hearing shall be sent by first-class mail to those persons
identified by the applicant as persons owning property
contiguous to the property which is the subject of the
proceeding. Notice shall be sufficient if given to the person
shown as the owner on the tax rolls and sent to the address
where tax bills are sent.
(d)
The Commission may approve or disapprove the Preliminary Plan
(including the Pattern Book) after a public hearing.
(2)
Should the Planning Commission determine additional assistance to
review an application is required, the Town may hire licensed
professionals (such as a landscape architect, architect, and/or
engineer) to assist in the review of the application. The cost of any
outside professionals shall be paid for by the applicant. The Town shall
make every effort to minimize all costs associated with any outside
professional assistance.
E.
§ 180-144 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § 180-145
176:327
Chapter 181
MUTUAL AID AND ASSISTANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 30.
§ 181-1. Mutual aid agreements.
Upon authorization by resolution of the Mayor and Town Council, the Mayor
may enter into, on behalf of the Town, mutual aid agreements with other
jurisdictions regarding services provided by police, public works and/or
other departments of the Town.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
242
2-23-2004 Landscaping Ch. 96
Ord. No.
243
3-22-2004 Landscaping
amendment
Ch. 96
Ord. No.
244
4-12-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
Ord. No.
245
5-24-2004 Helmet safety
amendment
Ch. 92
Ord. No.
246
2004 - 2005 budget NCM
Res. No.
2004-1
8-9-2004 Charter amendment Charter
Res. No.
2004-2
8-9-2004 Charter amendment Charter
Res. No.
2004-3
8-9-2004 Charter amendment § C-6
Res. No.
2004-4
8-9-2004 Charter amendment § C-23
§ 180-145 SYKESVILLE CODE § DL-1
176:328
Enactment Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
Res. No.
2004-5
8-9-2004 Charter amendment § C-69
Ord. No.
247
9-27-2004 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. II
Ord. No.
248
11-22-2004 Animals Ch. 51
Ord. No.
249
11-22-2004 Forest conservation Ch. 90
Ord. No.
250
11-22-2004 Stormwater
management
Ch. 134
Ord. No.
251
11-22-2004 Floodplain
management
Superseded by Ord.
No. 292
Ord. No.
252
11-22-2004 Grading and
sediment control
Ch. 91
Ord. No.
253
11-22-2004 Building Code Ch. 62
Ord. No.
254
11-22-2004 Livability standards Ch. 100
Ord. No.
255
11-22-2004 Water resource
management
Ch. 176
Ord. No.
256
1-24-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
Ord. No.
257
2-28-2005 Mayor and Council:
compensation
amendment
Ch. 19, Art. I
Ord. No.
258
2-28-2005 Parking impact fees
amendment
Ch. 80, Art. II
Ord. No.
259
3-14-2005 Historic tax credits
amendment
Ch. 150, Art. II
Ord. No.
260
Infrastructure bonds NCM
Ord. No.
261
Budget NCM
Res. No.
2005-1
8-8-2005 Charter amendment Charter
Ord. No.
262
8-8-2005 Environmental
management of
storm sewer systems
Ch. 78
Ord. No.
263
10-10-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
§ DL-1 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § DL-1
176:329
Enactment Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
264
11-14-2005 Parking impact fees
amendment
Ch. 80, Art. II
Ord. No.
265
Budget NCM
Ord. No.
266
1-23-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
Ord. No.
267
9-25-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
Ord. No.
268
6-11-2007 Allocation of certain
duties and
responsibilities
performed by Clerk-
Treasurer
Chs. 1, Art. II; 12
(repealed by Ord. No.
282); 35; 48, Art. I;
60; 66; 80, Arts. I and
II; 93; 117; 140, Art.
II; 150, Art. I; 156;
169
Res. No.
2007-01
6-11-2007 Charter amendment §§ C-6, C-7, C-8, C-12,
C-13, C-14, C-22,
C-26, C-30, C-35,
C-39, C-41, C-47,
C-50, C-52, C-61,
C-62, C-63, C-76,
C-81, C-82
Ord. No.
269
5-27-2008 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
270
10-14-2008 Curfew amendment Ch. 75
Ord. No.
271
2-25-2010 Vehicles and traffic:
school zones; speed
monitoring systems
Ch. 165, Arts. III and
IV
Ord. No.
272
6-14-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
Ord. No.
273
1-24-2011 Historic Districts
amendment
Ch. 93
Ord. No.
274
3-14-2011 Trailers and trailer
camps amendment;
vehicles and traffic
amendment
Chs. 156; 165
Ord. No.
275
5-9-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
Ord. No.
276
5-23-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
§ DL-1 SYKESVILLE CODE § DL-1
176:330
Enactment Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
277
8-8-2011 Snow emergency
routes amendment
Ch. 140, Art. I
Ord. No.
278
10-24-2011 Parking restrictions
amendment
Ch. 165, Art. II
Ord. No.
279
2-27-2012 Development impact
fees amendment
Ch. 80, Art. I
Ord. No.
280
3-26-2012 Helmet safety
amendment
Ch. 92
Ord. No.
281
Not adopted
Ord. No.
282
7-9-2012 Ethics Ch. 12
Ord. No.
283
11-11-2012 Parks and recreation
areas amendment
Ch. 111
Ord. No.
284
12-10-2012 Subdivision
regulations
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 145; 180
Ord. No.
285
1-28-2013 Mutual aid and
assistance
Ch. 181
Ord. No.
286
1-28-2013 Ethics amendment Ch. 12
Ord. No.
287
5-12-2014 2014-2015 budget
and tax rates
NCM
Ord. No.
288
12-8-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
Ord. No.
289
2-23-2015 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
290
4-27-2015 2015-2016 budget
and tax rates
NCM
Ord. No.
291
9-28-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
Ord. No.
292
9-28-2015 Floodplain
management
amendment
Ch. 89
Ord. No.
293
10-26-2015 Taxation: planned
employment center
payments in lieu of
taxes
Ch. 150, Art. III
Ord. No.
294
2-22-2016 Maintenance of
vegetation
Ch. 60, Art. II
§ DL-1 WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT § DL-1
176:331
Enactment Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
295
5-9-2018 Budget NCM
Ord. No.
296
7-11-2016 Streets and
Sidewalks: Use of
Town Sidewalks;
Zoning Amendment
Ch. 140, Art. V; Ch.
180
Ord. No.
297
11-14-2016 Streets and
Sidewalks: Snow
Emergency Routes
Amendment
Ch. 140, Art. I
Ord. No.
298
2-13-2017 Mayor and Council:
Compensation
Amendment
Ch. 19, Art. I
Ord. No.
299
2-27-2017 Vehicles and Traffic:
Speed Limits; Fees:
Parking Impact Fees
Amendment
Ch. 165, Art. V; Ch.
80, Art. II
Ord. No.
300
4-24-2017 Budget NCM
Ord. No.
301
1-9-2018 Animals Amendment Ch. 51
Ord. No.
302
5-29-2018 Budget NCM
§ DL-1 SYKESVILLE CODE § DL-1
176:332