Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 11-11-2002 by Ord. No. 6891]
§ 1-1. Code adopted.
The ordinances of the City of Westminster, Maryland, of a general and
permanent nature, adopted by the Mayor and Common Council, which
were contained in the 1991 edition of the Code of the City of Westminster,
as revised, codified and consolidated into parts, chapters and sections
by General Code Publishers Corp. and consisting of Chapters 1 through
173, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code
of the City of Westminster, Maryland," dated 2002, hereinafter known and
referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City of Westminster
in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not contained in
the Code adopted hereby or recognized and continued in force by reference
therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this
ordinance, except as hereinafter provided in this ordinance.
§ 1-3. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The repeal of ordinances provided for in §1-2 of this ordinance shall not
affect the following classes of ordinances, rights and obligations, which are
hereby expressly saved from repeal:
Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the City of Westminster prior to the effective
date of this ordinance, or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability.
A.
An offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the City of
Westminster, or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result
therefrom.
B.
Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the City of Westminster.
C.
Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the City of Westminster or any ordinance adopted for
purposes which have been consummated.
D.
Any ordinance of the City of Westminster providing for the laying
out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing
E.
1. Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. I, Adoption of Code, adopted
4-8-1991 by Ord. No. 539.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:3
§ 1-4. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the City of Westminster for
adoption and inclusion as part of the Code, certain grammatical changes
and other minor changes were made in one or more of said ordinances. It
grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any
right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or other public place
within the City of Westminster or any portion thereof.
Any ordinance of the City of Westminster appropriating money or
transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of money
or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the City of
Westminster or other instruments or evidence of the City's
indebtedness.
F.
G. Any ordinance annexing territory to the City.
Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
H.
I. The annual tax levy.
J. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
K. Currently effective budget ordinances and tax ordinances.
L. The dedication of property.
M. Any legislation relating to salaries.
N. The Zoning Map of the City of Westminster and all amendments thereto.
O. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to August 12, 2002.
Any of the following ordinances or regulations or amendments thereto:
Section 1 of Ordinance No. 253, passed August 27, 1935, which
accepted the then completed sanitary sewer system and the
sewage treatment plant;
(1)
Ordinance No. 249, establishing a Plumbing Code, as amended by
Ordinance No. 252;
(2)
Rules and regulations governing plumbing and related matters,
promulgated pursuant to the provisions of Section 5 of Ordinance
No. 249;
(3)
Ordinance No. 307, establishing a Building Code, as amended by
Ordinance No. 343;
(4)
Ordinance No. 309, regulating certain buildings abutting upon
alleys; and
(5)
(6) Section 3 of Ordinance No. 5 relating to unsafe walls and buildings.
P.
§ 1-3 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 1-4
1:4
is the intention of the Mayor and Common Council that all such changes
be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed had been
previously formally amended to read as such.
§ 1-5. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in a post-bound volume has been filed in the office of
the City Clerk and shall remain there for the use of and examination by
the public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and if this ordinance
shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the City Clerk, and such
certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the City Clerk, available to
persons desiring to examine the same during all times when said Code is in
effect.
§ 1-6. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of
the Mayor and Common Council to be a part thereof, shall be understood
and intended to include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the postbound
volume containing said Code, as amendments and supplements
thereto.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the City Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing
the Code required to be filed in the office of the City Clerk for the use of the
public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted by the Mayor
and Common Council subsequent to the effective date of this recodification
which the Mayor and Common Council shall adopt specifically as part of
the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplement shall be inserted therein. Further, the
City Clerk shall deposit or cause to be deposited with the State Department
of Legislative Reference copies of the Code and amendments thereto, free
of charge, as required pursuant to Article 23A, § 17A of the Annotated Code
of Maryland.
§ 1-8. Severability.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Mayor and Common Council
that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this
ordinance and the Code hereby adopted are severable, and if any phrase,
clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this ordinance or the Code hereby
adopted shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the
valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:5
phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this ordinance or
the Code hereby adopted, since the same would have been enacted by the
Mayor and Common Council without the incorporation in this ordinance or
the Code of any such unconstitutional section, paragraph, sentence, clause
or phrase.
§ 1-9. When effective.
The Mayor and Common Council declares that an emergency exists and
that this legislation is necessary for the immediate protection of the public
health and safety. This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon
adoption, and all provisions of the Code shall be in full force and effect on
and after the effective date of this ordinance.
§ 1-10. Inclusion of provisions in Code.
The provisions of this ordinance are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1 of
the Code of the City of Westminster, Maryland, and the sections shall be
numbered § § 1-1 through 1-10.
§ 1-8 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 1-10
1:6
ARTICLE II
Provisions Applicable to Entire Code
[Adopted as Ch. 1 of the 1972 Code, as amended through 1990]
§ 1-11. How Code designated and cited.
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall
constitute and be designated as the "Code of the City of Westminster,
Maryland," and may be so cited. The Code may also be cited as
"Westminster City Code."
§ 1-12. Definitions and rules of construction.
As used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated: [Amended 4-13-1992 by Ord. No. 555; 4-26-2006 by
Ord. No. 750]
CHARTER or CITY CHARTER — The Charter of the City of Westminster,
Maryland.
THE CITY, THIS CITY or THE CITY OF WESTMINSTER — The Mayor
and Common Council of Westminster, a municipal corporation
chartered by that name by the General Assembly of Maryland.
CITY ADMINISTRATOR — The chief administrative officer of the City of
Westminster.
CODE — The Code of the City of Westminster.[Added 11-24-2008 by
Ord. No. 791]
COUNCIL or COMMON COUNCIL — The Common Council of the City
of Westminster.
COUNTY — Carroll County, Maryland.
DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING — The Department of Planning, Zoning
and Development of the City of Westminster.[Added 12-6-2007 by
Ord. No. 773]
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Department of Public Works
of the City of Westminster.[Added 12-6-2007 by Ord. No. 773]
GENERAL FEE ORDINANCE — An ordinance adopted by the Mayor
and Common Council of Westminster and amended from time to time
establishing certain fees, costs and charges, excluding those
established pursuant to Chapters 124 and 160 of the Code.2[Added
11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 791]
KEEPER and PROPRIETOR — Includes persons, firms, associations,
corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves
or a servant, agent or employee.
A.
2. Editor’s Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-12
1:7
LEGISLATIVE BODY — The Mayor and Common Council of
Westminster, Maryland.
MAYOR — The Mayor of the City of Westminster, Maryland.
MONTH — A calendar month.
OATH — Includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by
law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases
the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm"
and "affirmed."
OWNER — As applied to any property, includes any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the
whole or a part of such property.
PERSON — Includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an
individual.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Includes every species of property except
real property, as herein defined.
PLANNING DIRECTOR — The Planning Director of the City of
Westminster.[Amended 12-6-2007 by Ord. No. 773]
POLICE OFFICER — Includes but is not limited to any bailiff or special
bailiff of this City and any member of the City Police Department having
authority to make arrests.
PRECEDING and FOLLOWING — Next before and next after,
respectively
PROPERTY — Includes real and personal property.
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR — The Public Works Director of the City of
Westminster.[Amended 12-6-2007 by Ord. No. 773]
REAL PROPERTY — Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street between the curbline, or the
lateral lines of a roadway where there is no curb, and the adjacent
property line, intended for the use of pedestrians.
SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION — Includes a mark when the person
cannot write.
STATE or THIS STATE — The State of Maryland.
STREET — Includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue,
boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches
thereto within the City and shall mean the entire width thereof between
abutting property lines. It shall also be construed to include a sidewalk
or footpath, unless the contrary is expressed or unless such
construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the
legislative body.
§ 1-12 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 1-12
1:8
TENANT or OCCUPANT — As applied to a building or land, includes
any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land,
whether alone or with others.
UTILITY FEE ORDINANCE — An ordinance adopted by the Mayor
and Common Council of Westminster and amended from time to time
establishing fees, costs and charges relating to utilities provided,
pursuant to Chapters 124 and 160 of the Code.3[Added 11-24-2008
by Ord. No. 791]
WRITING and WRITTEN — Includes printing and any other mode of
representing words, letters and figures.
YEAR — A calendar year, except where fiscal year is specifically
referred to.
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following
rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent
with the manifest intent of the Mayor and Common Council.
Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done
shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last
day; and if the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, that shall be
excluded.
(1)
Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the
feminine and neuter.
(2)
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such persons or officers.
(3)
(4) May. The word "may" is permissive.
Number. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the
plural includes the singular number.
(5)
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this
Code, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time,
whichever may be in current use in the City.
(6)
Or; and. The word "or" may be read "and" may be read "or," where
the sense requires it.
(7)
(8) Shall. The word "shall" is mandatory.
Time. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
(9)
B.
3. Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. II, Utility Fees.
§ 1-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:9
§ 1-13. Catchlines of sections.
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed
or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of such sections
nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be deemed when any of such
sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
§ 1-14. Effect of repeal of ordinances.
§ 1-15. Code provisions deemed continuation of existing
ordinances.
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same in
substance as ordinances existing at the effective date of this Code, shall be
considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.
§ 1-16. Severability of Code provisions.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the legislative body that the
sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and words of this Code are
severable, and if any word, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this
Code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid
judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining words,
clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code since the same
would have been enacted by the legislative body without the incorporation
in this Code of any such unconstitutional or invalid word, clause, sentence,
paragraph or section.
§ 1-17. City Seal.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force
before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.
A.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty
incurred before the repeal took effect nor any suit, prosecution or
proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed
under the ordinance repealed.
B.
The Seal heretofore provided and used for the corporate purposes of
the Mayor and Common Council of Westminster, being a disc upon the
face of which are two concentric circles with the words "Corporation of
Westminster" and a star between them and in the center of which is a
radiant shield with the figures "1838" thereon shall be, and it is hereby
established and declared to have been and now to be, the official and
corporate Seal of the Mayor and Common Council of Westminster.
A.
The City Clerk shall be the keeper of the Seal of the corporation
of Westminster and shall affix or make an impression thereof on all
ordinances and papers requiring the corporation Seal.
B.
§ 1-13 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 1-18
1:10
§ 1-18. Violations and penalties.
Unless otherwise provided herein, any person found guilty of violating
any provision of this Code, which violation is a misdemeanor as defined
herein, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 and imprisonment
not to exceed six months, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day
such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
A.
Any person found guilty of violating a provision of this Code, which
violation is an infraction as declared herein, shall be subject to a fine
not to exceed $400. The fine shall be paid by the offender to the
City of Westminster within 20 calendar days of receipt of a citation.
Repeat offenders may be assessed a fine not to exceed $400 for each
repeat offense. Each day a violation continues shall, unless otherwise
provided, constitute a separate or repeat offense.
B.
Misdemeanors and infractions; procedures.
Misdemeanor. A "misdemeanor" is:
A criminal offense, not amounting to a felony, arising from a
violation of a law of the state, which violation is defined as a
misdemeanor; or
(a)
Unless otherwise specified, a violation of any section of the
Code of the City of Westminster. All violations of this Code shall
be treated as misdemeanors unless specifically declared to be
infractions.
(b)
(1)
Infraction. An "infraction" is any violation of this Code, which
violation has been specifically declared to be an infraction. For
purposes of this Code, an infraction is a civil offense.
(2)
Issuance of citation. Those enforcement officials authorized by the
Mayor and Common Council to enforce this Code may deliver a
citation to any person alleged to be committing an infraction. A
copy of the citation shall be retained by the City and shall contain,
at a minimum, the following information:
The enforcing official's certification attesting to the truth of the
matter set forth in the citation.
(a)
(b) The name and address of the person charged.
(c) The nature of the infraction.
(d) The location and time that the infraction occurred.
(e) The amount of the infraction fine assessed.
The manner, location and time in which the fine may be paid to
the City.
(f)
(g) The person's right to elect to stand trial for the infraction.
(3)
C.
§ 1-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:11
The effect of failing to pay the assessed fine or to demand a
trial within the prescribed time.
(h)
Payment of fine. The fine for an infraction shall be as specified in
the Code section violated. The fine is payable by the recipient of
the citation to the City of Westminster within 20 calendar days of
receipt of the citation.
(4)
No formal hearing by City. The City shall not conduct any formal
hearing for those persons in receipt of a citation of infraction.
Any offender so cited may pay the fine as indicated in the citation
or elect to stand trial for the offense. This provision shall not
prevent an offender from requesting, either personally or through
an attorney, additional information concerning the infraction.
(5)
Election to stand trial. A person receiving the citation for an
infraction may elect to stand trial for the offense by notifying the
City, in writing, of his intention of standing trial. The notice shall be
given at least five days prior to the date of payment as set forth in
the citation.
(6)
Failure to pay fine. If a person receiving a citation for an infraction
fails to pay the fine for the infraction by the date of payment set
forth on the citation and fails to file a notice of his intention to
stand trial for the offense, the person is liable for the assessed fine.
The City may double the fine to an amount not to exceed $400
and request adjudication of the case through the District Court,
including the filing of a demand for judgment on affidavit. If the
person receiving a citation for an infraction shall be found by the
District Court to have committed an infraction, the person shall be
required to pay the fine determined by the District Court, not to
exceed $400. The person shall also be liable for the costs of the
proceedings in the District Court, and the Court may permit the
City to abate any such condition at the person's expense.
(7)
§ 1-18 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 1-18
1:12
Chapter 4
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Charter provisions — See §§ 7, 11 through 14
and 44.
Boards and commissions — See Ch. 7.
Elections — See Ch. 14.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 16.
Department of Finance — See Ch. 19.
Intergovernmental relations — See Ch. 24.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 29.
§ 1-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:13

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted as Ch. 2, Art. I, of the 1972 Code, as amended through
1990]
§ 4-1. Bonding of officers.
§ 4-2. Effect of termination of office, agency or employment.
Upon the termination of office or employment of any City officer, agent or
employee, such person shall, without delay, turn over to his successor in
office, agency or employment all money, books, papers, accounts and all
other things belonging to the City which may then be within his possession,
custody, direction or control; and if he has no designated successor, then to
the City Clerk-Treasurer.
The Chief Administrator, City Clerk-Treasurer, the Assistant City Clerk,
the Assistant City Treasurer, the cashier and all other officers,
employees and agents of the City who at any time shall have within
their possession or custody or under their direction or control any City
funds, securities, negotiable instruments or other such liquid assets
of the City exceeding $100 in value shall, before entering upon the
discharge of their official duties, give a bond payable to the City, in
such amounts as may be prescribed in this Code or by other ordinance,
resolution or order of the legislative body, conditioned upon the faithful
performance of their respective duties and a true accounting to be
given for all such assets of the City which may come within their
possession or custody or under their direction or control, provided
that the legislative body may provide for a blanket bond in lieu of
individual bonds, in which case the amount of such blanket bond shall
be not less than $25,000 for the Chief Administrator, City Clerk, the
City Treasurer and the cashier, and not less than $20,000 for each
policeman and not less than $10,000 for other officers and employees;
and provided, further, that nothing in this section shall be deemed to
preclude such other bonds as may be considered by the legislative body
to be desirable in the interests of the City. [Amended 4-26-2006 by
Ord. No. 750]
A.
All bonds required by this section shall have as surety a bonding or
casualty company authorized to do business in this state and shall be
approved by the legislative body and by the City Attorney.
B.
The word "bond" as used in this section shall be construed to include a
liability insurance policy.
C.
Premiums on bonds required or authorized by this section shall be paid
by the City.
D.
§ 4-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-3
1:15
§ 4-3. Right of entry.
Any officer, employee or agent of the City, while in the lawful discharge of
his official duties with regard to the water or sewerage disposal systems
of the City or with regard to the inspection of buildings or premises or the
inspection therein of electrical, heating or plumbing installations or fire or
health hazards or other dangerous or unsanitary conditions, shall have a
right of entry into and upon all buildings and premises, at all reasonable
hours and after reasonable advance notice to the owners, tenants or
occupants thereof and upon compliance with all applicable provisions of
law; and it shall be unlawful for any person to offer any restraint or
hindrance to any City officer, employee or agent lawfully seeking entry upon
or into any premises or building pursuant to the provisions of this section.
§ 4-4. Salaries and compensation.
City officers and employees for whom no definite compensation is
prescribed by this Code shall receive such compensation as may from time
to time be fixed by the legislative body.
§ 4-5. Social security.
The provisions of §§ 35 through 45 of Article 73B of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, 1957,4 shall be applicable with respect to all eligible officers and
employees of the City; and Ordinance No. 311, passed February 9, 1953,
as amended and in effect immediately prior to the effective date of this
Code, and all agreements entered into by the City pursuant thereto which
are in effect immediately prior to the effective date of this Code are hereby
continued in full force and effect.5
4. Editor's Note: Social security provisions are now covered under the State Personnel and
Pensions Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, § 36-101 et seq.
5. Editor's Note: Said ordinance and agreement are available for inspection in the City
Clerk's office.
§ 4-3 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 4-5
1:16
ARTICLE II
Legislative Body
[Adopted as Ch. 2, Art. II, of the 1972 Code, as amended through
1990]
§ 4-6. Authorization; empowerment; membership; elections; terms;
qualifications.
§ 4-6.1. Filling Council vacancies. [Added 3-27-1995 by Ord. No.
595]
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 3 of the City Charter, the
government of the City shall be vested in and enforced by a Mayor
and Common Council of five members who shall be elected by the
inhabitants of the City qualified to vote for delegates to the General
Assembly, who have actually resided within the corporate limits of the
City and whose names shall appear upon the books of registered voters
as provided in Sections 3 to 5, inclusive, of the City Charter and in
Chapter 14, Elections, of this Code.
A.
The Mayor shall be at least 25 years of age and a payer of taxes of the
assessed value of at least $1,000 worth of property subject to municipal
taxation; the members of the Common Council shall be at least 21 years
of age and payers of taxes upon the assessed value of at least $500
worth of property subject to municipal taxation; and the Mayor shall
have resided at least two years and the members of the Council at least
one year within the City.
B.
The qualified voters of the City shall elect three members of the
Common Council on the Tuesday following the second Monday of May
2015, and every four years thereafter, and two members of the Common
Council and the Mayor on the Tuesday following the second Monday of
May 2013, and every four years thereafter. [Amended 7-11-2011 by
Ord. No. 829]
C.
Section 6 of the Charter of the City of Westminster provides for the
Council to fill vacancies in its membership. This section implements
the provisions of the Charter by establishing a procedure under which
vacancies shall be filled.
A.
At the meeting when the Council is notified of a vacancy, the Council
shall set a date to fill the vacancy.
(1) The vacancy may be filled at a regular or special meeting.
The meeting will be held not less than three weeks nor more than
six weeks after the Council is notified of the vacancy.
(2)
For purposes of this section, "notification of the vacancy" shall be
the announcement of:
(3)
B.
§ 4-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-6.1
1:17
§ 4-7. Salaries and compensation.
A death that occurred or resignation that becomes effective
prior to the Council's meeting;
(a)
Formal notice of a member's intent to resign, made known to
the Council and the public generally; or
(b)
The impending elevation of the Council President to Mayor,
creating a vacancy on the Council.
(c)
The City Clerk shall publish a notice of vacancy in at least two
newspapers of general circulation in the City providing:
(1) Notice of the impending vacancy.
The Council's intention to fill the vacancy at the announced
meeting.
(2)
(3) The eligibility requirements for a Council member.
An invitation to qualified residents to apply, in writing, on a form
supplied by the City Clerk no later than 10 days before the meeting
at which the Council will act.
(4)
C.
At the meeting at which the Council intends to act, the Clerk will read
a list of the qualified applicants for the vacancy.
D.
All Council members, including the presiding officer, will then cast
their vote for any of the candidates on the Clerk's list. A majority of
the Council members voting shall be required to fill a vacancy. If no
candidate receives a majority of votes, additional ballots shall be taken
until the vacancy is filled, provided that said additional ballots must
occur no later than the next meeting.
E.
If the vacancy is caused by the elevation of the Council President to
Mayor, the Council shall wait to elect a new President until the vacancy
is filled.
The President Pro Tem shall preside over the selection of the new
Council member and may vote on filling the vacancy.
(1)
The new Council member shall take the oath of office as promptly
as possible and then participate in the election of a new President.
(2)
F.
The Mayor and members of the Common Council shall receive as full
compensation for their respective services the sums provided therefor
by ordinance. Changes in the salary of the Mayor and members of the
Common Council may be made by ordinance, from time to time, but
no ordinance effecting any such change shall become effective until
it has been submitted to the electorate of the City at a regular or
special municipal election and has been approved by the majority of the
qualified voters of the City voting thereon at such election.
A.
§ 4-6.1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 4-7
1:18
§ 4-8. Limitations.
No member of the legislative body, during the term for which he was
elected, shall be eligible for appointment to any other City office for which
any salary, emolument or other compensation is provided.
§ 4-9. Meetings.
Salaries of the Mayor and members of the Common Council shall
be paid in installments or otherwise, as provided by ordinance or
resolution of the legislative body.
B.
The salary of the Mayor of the City shall be $5,000 per annum. The
salary of the President of the Common Council shall be $1,500 per
annum. The salary of the members of the Common Council shall be
$1,200 per annum.
C.
From and after June 1, 1985, the salary of the Mayor of the City of
Westminster shall be $10,000 per annum. From and after June 1, 1985,
the salary of the President of the Common Council shall be $3,000 per
annum. From and after June 1, 1985, the salary of members of the
Common Council shall be $2,400 per annum.
D.
The Mayor and Common Council shall, by motion duly passed and
entered in the minutes, fix the date and time of regular meetings of the
legislative body.
A.
Special meetings may be called at any time by the Mayor or by any
two members of the Common Council, upon reasonable notice to all
members not joining in the call.
B.
At 7:00 p.m. on the third Monday in May of each odd-numbered year
or, if such third Monday should fall upon a holiday, then the next
succeeding business day, the newly elected and holdover members of
the legislative body shall meet for the purpose of organizing the City
government. The newly elected members shall file with the City Clerk
the prescribed oath of office, and the legislative body shall then elect
one of the Council members to the office of President of the Council.
It shall then adopt such resolutions as provided in Subsection E of
this section as it may consider appropriate, but all such then-existing
resolutions not amended or repealed at this meeting shall continue in
full force and effect. The legislative body shall then take such action
as may be considered appropriate with respect to vacancies in City
offices, which by law, the City Charter, this Code or other ordinance are
required to be filled by the Mayor and Common Council, provided that
such appointments shall be made by the Mayor with the approval of the
Common Council. [Amended 7-14-1997 by Ord. No. 619]
C.
All meetings of the legislative body, whether regular, special or biennial,
shall be open to the public at all times; but this shall not be construed to
prevent the legislative body from holding executive sessions from which
D.
§ 4-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-9
1:19
§ 4-10. Minutes.
The City Clerk shall keep a correct, official journal or minutes of all
proceedings of the legislative body and shall enter therein, among other
items, the yeas and nays upon final action on all ordinances, resolutions
and questions or at any other time when the entry of yeas and nays is
called for by any member. The City Clerk shall maintain a current file of
reports, resolutions, ordinances, orders, proclamations and other acts of the
Mayor and Common Council and shall certify to or attest to the correctness
thereof when required or directed so to do by law, ordinance, regulation or
resolution. He shall perform such other duties as the Mayor and Common
Council shall, from time to time, require.
§ 4-11. Attendance of other City officers and employees at meetings.
The legislative body may, by resolution or motion duly passed and entered
in the journal, require such City officers and employees as may be specified
in such resolution or motion to attend any or all meetings of the legislative
body, unless excused.
the public is excluded, but no ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation
shall be finally adopted or approved at any such executive session.
The legislative body may, from time to time, adopt resolutions not
inconsistent with state law, the City Charter or this Code providing
for the order of business and rules of procedure at meetings, the
appointment of standing and special committees and defining the
jurisdiction, powers and duties of such committees and the conduct of
its members at meetings; and such resolutions may impose penalties
for the violation thereof by members and for unexcused absence from
or tardiness in attendance at meetings.
E.
§ 4-9 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 4-11
1:20
ARTICLE III
Mayor
[Adopted as Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 2, of the 1972 Code, as amended
through 1990]
§ 4-12. General powers and duties. [Amended 5-31-1991 by Ord. No.
547; 4-26-2006 by Ord. No. 750]
The Mayor shall be chief executive officer of the City government and
shall be responsible for the enforcement of the City Charter, this Code
and other ordinances. The Mayor shall be the immediate supervisor
of the City Administrator and the City Attorney and have general
supervision over all administrative departments and offices of the City
government.
A.
The Mayor shall sign all ordinances, charter amendments, resolutions
and instruments; shall cause to be prepared annually an audited
statement of the finances of the City as of the end of the preceding
fiscal year; may call upon any officer of the City entrusted with the
receipt and expenditure of public money for a statement of the officer’s
account; shall advocate plans that address demands for municipal
services, enhance the quality of life, and strengthen the economic
vitality of the City; shall be the principal representative of the City
in official and ceremonial matters; shall develop and maintain
intergovernmental relationships so as to ensure that the interests, goals
and objectives of the City are fulfilled; shall report to the City Council
regularly on the Mayor’s activities and on the state of the City, its
finances and administrative activities; shall see that the actions of the
Common Council are duly and faithfully executed; and shall perform
such other executive duties as may be prescribed by this charter or
required by the ordinances and resolutions of the Common Council not
inconsistent with this section or as may be necessarily implied from the
powers and duties herein specified.
B.
§ 4-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-12
1:21
Chapter 7
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 4.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 29.
Zoning and subdivision of land — See Ch. 164.
§ 4-12 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 4-12
1:22
ARTICLE I
Recreation and Parks Advisory Board
[Adopted as Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 6, of the 1972 Code, as amended
through 19906]
§ 7-1. Creation. [Amended 6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 765]
The Recreation and Parks Advisory Board of the City of Westminster is
hereby created and hereinafter referred to in this Article as the "Board."
§ 7-2. Powers and duties. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 741;
6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 765]
The Board shall be solely advisory in nature to the Mayor and Common
Council unless otherwise specified by this article.
A.
The duties of the Board shall be to:
Foster continuing planning for recreation and parks activities in
the City.
(1)
Review periodically municipal, county, state and federal
cooperation in the field of recreation.
(2)
Seek a greater degree of coordination in the development of
recreational and park opportunities.
(3)
Work closely with the Department of Recreation and Parks in
planning annual budget requests.
(4)
Assist the Mayor and Common Council in carrying out the
development of the recreation and parks areas within the City.
(5)
Inform the citizens by meetings and through news media of the
progress of the Board's work.
(6)
B.
The Director of Recreation and Parks or his/her designee shall serve
as an advisor to the Board in matters relating to operation and
maintenance of City-owned or City-based facilities which the Director
believes to be the proper subject of the Board's study or
recommendation.
C.
The Board shall consider and evaluate and make recommendations on
any matter relating to immediate and long-range recreational programs
or policies, rules and regulations as it deems appropriate, provided that
notice is given to the Mayor and Common Council for its review and
approval through sanction of the Board's minutes.
D.
The Board shall not conduct any public hearing unless specifically
authorized to do so by the Mayor and Common Council.
E.
6. Editor's Note: Subsequent amendments are noted where applicable.
§ 7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-2
1:23
§ 7-3. Membership. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 741;
6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 765]
§ 7-4. Terms; vacancies; removal. [Amended 3-22-1993 by Ord. No.
565; 6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 765]
The Board shall report periodically to the Mayor and Common Council
on the progress of its activities and the results of its consideration of
any matters referred to it or otherwise taken up by it along with its
recommendation, if any.
F.
The Board shall cooperate and work with appropriate recreational
officials of both the City and the county, recognizing the responsibility
of these officials in the area of programs and activities in the field of
recreation; and the Board's efforts in this area should be in cooperation
with all other organizations dedicated to the propagation of recreation.
G.
The Board shall be charged with the responsibility of evaluating and
recommending fees and charges for all those properties, programs and
activities supervised or controlled by the Department of Recreation and
Parks, and these assessments shall be reviewed no less than annually
by the Board.
H.
The Board shall be composed of eight members, namely:
One ex officio member consisting of the Director of Recreation and
Parks or his/her designee; such ex officio member shall not have
the power to vote;
(1)
Six citizen members who shall be appointed by the Mayor and
Common Council; and
(2)
One Council member appointed by the Mayor and Common Council
to serve as a voting member of the Board.
(3)
A.
The Board may be expanded at any time for whatever reason deemed
necessary, but the Board may never contain fewer than seven voting
members without a revision of this article. Approval of the increase in
voting members will be decided by the Mayor and Common Council.
B.
The term of office of the citizen membership shall be for two years and
shall run from March 1, except as otherwise provided in Subsection B
herein.
A.
Upon the occurrence of a vacancy by resignation, etc., of a citizen
member, the Mayor and Common Council shall appoint a citizen
member to fill the unexpired term.
B.
The Mayor and Common Council may, from time to time, designate a
different one of its members to serve on the Board.
C.
The Mayor and Common Council may, by majority vote of its entire
membership, remove a citizen member from the Board.
D.
§ 7-2 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 7-5
1:24
§ 7-5. Compensation.
The members of the Board shall serve without compensation for their
services on the Board.
§ 7-6. Officers; secretary.
§ 7-7. Meetings. [Amended 6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 765]
§ 7-8. Quorum.
A quorum at any meeting of the Board shall be four voting members.
§ 7-9. Bylaws.
The Board shall adopt, subject to the approval of the Mayor and Common
Council, bylaws and amendments thereto relating to its rules of operation
and the conduct of its meetings.
§ 7-10. Services and supplies. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 741]
The Director of Recreation and Parks shall obtain for the Board all services
and supplies as the Board shall direct within the limits of the Board’s
appropriate funds and such other services and funds as shall be authorized
by the Mayor and Common Council.
§ 7-11. Records.
The Board shall keep records of its official actions, minutes and reports of
the Board. These records shall be retained by the secretary as provided for
in § 7-6B.
The officers of the Board shall consist of a Chairperson and Vice
Chairperson.
The Chairperson shall be elected by the members of the Board and
will hold such office at the pleasure of the Mayor and Common
Council.
(1)
The Vice Chairperson shall be elected by the members of the Board
and will hold such office at the pleasure of the Mayor and Common
Council.
(2)
A.
The Board shall have use of a secretary from the City staff to take
minutes and maintain records.
B.
The regular meeting of the Board shall be held on a regular date at a
specified time as seen fit by the Board.
A.
Special meetings shall be called by the Chairperson of the Board or
by the Director of Recreation and Parks whenever either deems it
necessary.
B.
§ 7-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-11
1:25

ARTICLE II
Planning and Zoning Commission
[Adopted as Ch. 2, Art. IV, of the 1972 Code, as amended through
1990; amended in its entirety 3-12-2018 by Ord. No. 888]
§ 7-12. Creation; territorial jurisdiction.
There is hereby created a Planning and Zoning Commission, the territorial
jurisdiction of which shall extend only over the corporate limits of the City.
The Commission may also render recommendations regarding properties
outside of the City's boundaries in connection with a joint City-county
planning effort or a jointly planned development project.
§ 7-13. Membership; terms.
§ 7-14. Compensation; removal.
All members shall serve without compensation and may be removed by the
Mayor and Common Council for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance
in office.
§ 7-15. Officers.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall elect a Chairman from amongst
its appointed members for one year, who shall be eligible for re-election and
shall fill such other of its offices as it may determine.
§ 7-16. (Reserved)7
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of five regular
members, including one member of the Common Council, who shall
serve as an ex officio member, and one alternate.
A.
The alternate member shall be expected to attend all meetings of the
Commission and is entitled to participate in the meeting, as are the
regular members, except in the matter of voting.
B.
Members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be eligible to
vote on any item of Commission business as to which 1) the member
was present for any hearing or other discussion or regarding which
the member has reviewed the entire record and 2) for which they have
no conflict of interest. In case a regular member is absent or cannot
vote, the alternate member shall vote if 1) the alternate was present
for any hearing or other discussion or regarding which the alternate
has reviewed the entire record and 2) a regular or ex officio member
abstains from the decision or is absent at the time of a decision.
C.
7. Editor's Note: Former § 7-16, Staff; finances, was repealed 3-12-2018 by Ord. No. 888.
§ 7-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-17
1:27
§ 7-17. Powers and duties.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have all the powers, functions,
responsibilities and duties as provided in Division I, "Single-Jurisdiction
Planning and Zoning," of the Land Use Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland and as set forth in Chapter 164 of the City Code.
§ 7-17 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 7-17
1:28
ARTICLE III
Environmental Advisory Board
[Adopted 11-8-1993 by Ord. No. 573]
§ 7-18. Findings, goals and authority.
§ 7-19. Creation.
The Environmental Advisory Board for the City of Westminster, Maryland,
is hereby created and hereinafter referred to in this article as the
"Environmental Advisory Board."
§ 7-20. Duties and responsibilities.
In the face of population growth, urbanization and technological
change, with their accompanying demands on natural resources, the
City finds that the preservation and the improvement of the quality
of the natural environment within the City is of increasing and vital
importance to the health, welfare and economic well-being of its
present and future inhabitants.
A.
The City finds that the biological integrity of the natural environment
upon which residents are dependent for survival and the natural beauty
of the City's surroundings which condition the quality of life experience
cannot be protected without the full cooperation and participation of
the inhabitants of the City working in partnership with local and state
officials and with various public and private institutions, agencies and
organizations.
B.
The City finds that the establishment of an Environmental Advisory
Board will assist The Mayor and Common Council in its efforts to
maintain, preserve and improve the quality of the natural environment
so that the public health, safety and welfare are enhanced.
C.
Article XI-E of the Maryland Constitution, Article 23A of the Annotated
Code of Maryland and the City's Charter authorize the City to enact
ordinances for the protection and promotion of the public health, safety,
morals and welfare.
D.
It shall be the responsibility of the Environmental Advisory Board to
study, investigate, counsel, develop, advise and recommend to the
Mayor and Common Council with respect to the state of the
environment within the City and effectiveness of City programs with
respect to environmental quality management.
A.
It shall be the responsibility of the Environmental Advisory Board to
review and report to the Mayor and Common Council regarding the
City's water, wastewater and sewer systems, its solid waste programs,
including recyclables, its stormwater management policies and any
other information necessary for it to review, recommend and advise
B.
§ 7-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-20
1:29
§ 7-21. Membership.
The Environmental Advisory Board shall consist of seven voting members
and one nonvoting City staff member.
regarding the conservation and improvement of the City's natural
resources.
It shall be the responsibility of the Environmental Advisory Board to
recommend to the Mayor and Common Council a plan for the
development of a broad policy designated to guide the City's
environmental future and to protect its environmental heritage. The
matters covered in said plan may include but not be limited to the
following environmental matters: air pollution, water quality,
groundwater protection, disposal of solid and hazardous waste, loss
of biological resources, conservation of the urban forest, open space
preservation, soil erosion, drainage and flooding and the need for
coordinated environmental management.
C.
It shall be the responsibility of the Environmental Advisory Board to
advise the Mayor and Common Council of actions which could be
undertaken by the City to improve the quality of its environment and
also advise as to any circumstances which may threaten that
environment.
D.
It shall be the responsibility of the Environmental Advisory Board to
report to the Mayor and Common Council on or before the 31st day of
December of each and every year. Said report may set forth the duties,
tasks and responsibilities performed by the Environmental Advisory
Board during the previous year and provide such recommendations and
suggestions as the Environmental Advisory Board deems appropriate
or necessary. The Environmental Advisory Board may provide such
additional reports and recommendations as it deems necessary or
appropriate to the Mayor and Common Council.
E.
The Environmental Advisory Board shall cooperate with local and state
officials, as well as other public and private institutions, agencies and
organizations, to achieve the goals set forth in § 7-18.
F.
The Environmental Advisory Board shall perform any additional duties
and responsibilities which may be assigned to it by resolution of the
Mayor and Common Council.
G.
The voting members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval
of the Common Council, and six voting members shall be residents of
the City. [Amended 8-8-1994 by Ord. No. 592]
A.
The voting members shall be qualified by special interest, knowledge
and training in such fields as arborists, architects, biologists, botanists,
business management, chemists, ecologists, engineers, environmental
scientists, planners and other citizens who are interested in the
improvement and preservation of the environment.
B.
§ 7-20 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 7-21
1:30
§ 7-22. Terms of office; vacancies; removal.
§ 7-23. Compensation.
Members of the Environmental Advisory Board shall serve without
compensation for their services.
§ 7-24. Officers; proceedings; quorum; bylaws.
§ 7-25. Services and supplies. [Amended 12-6-2007 by Ord. No. 773]
The Director of Planning or the Director's designees shall obtain for the
Board all services and supplies as the Environmental Advisory Board shall
direct within the limits of its appropriated funds and such other services
and funds as shall be authorized by the Mayor and Common Council.
§ 7-26. Meetings.
The nonvoting staff member shall be the Director of Planning or the
Director's designee. [Amended 12-6-2007 by Ord. No. 773]
C.
The term of the seven persons appointed by the Mayor and approved
by the Common Council shall be for four years; except that the terms
of two members initially appointed shall be for only one year, the terms
of two other members shall initially be appointed for two years, and the
terms of two other members initially appointed shall be for three years.
A.
In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member,
a successor shall be appointed and approved for the unexpired portion
of the term.
B.
Members may be removed by the Mayor and Common Council for
inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office.
C.
The officers of the Environmental Advisory Board shall consist of a
Chairperson, a Vice Chairperson and a Secretary. These officers shall
be initially appointed by the Mayor with the approval by the Common
Council and thereafter shall be elected by the members of the Board.
They will hold their such offices at the pleasure of the Mayor and
Common Council.
A.
The Environmental Advisory Board shall adopt its own rules of
procedure and bylaws, and its Secretary shall keep a journal of its
proceedings, including all official actions, minutes and reports.
B.
C. A quorum at any meeting shall be four voting members.
A favorable vote of a majority of the members present and voting at a
meeting shall be required for the adoption of any action.
D.
§ 7-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-26
1:31
The regular meeting of the Environmental Advisory Board shall be
held on a regular date at a specified time as determined by the
Environmental Advisory Board to occur not less than once each quarter.
A.
Special meetings shall be called by the Chairperson or Vice
Chairperson of the Environmental Advisory Board when either deems it
necessary.
B.
§ 7-26 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 7-26
1:32
Chapter 10
CIVIL EMERGENCIES
§ 10-1. Existence of state of emergency.
For the purposes of this chapter, a state of emergency shall be deemed
to exist whenever, during times of great public crisis, disaster, rioting,
catastrophe or similar public civil emergency, for any reason, municipal
public safety authorities are unable to maintain public order or afford
adequate protection for lives or property.
§ 10-2. Public proclamation by Mayor.
§ 10-3. Authorized prohibitions and restrictions.
During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, the Mayor may
impose, by proclamation, any or all of the following prohibitions and
restrictions:
In the event of an existing or threatened state of emergency
endangering the lives, safety, health and welfare of the people within
the City or threatening damages to or destruction of property, the
Mayor is hereby empowered to issue a public proclamation declaring
to all persons the existence of such a state of emergency and, in order
to more effectively protect the lives and property of people within the
City, to place in effect any or all of the prohibitions and restrictions
authorized by this chapter.
A.
The Mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to limit by such
proclamation the application of all or any part of such prohibitions and
restrictions to any area specifically designated or described within the
City and to specific hours of the day or night and to exempt from all or
any part of such prohibitions and restrictions law enforcement officers,
firemen and other public officers and employees, doctors, nurses,
employees of hospitals and other medical facilities; on-duty military
personnel, whether state or federal; on-duty employees of public
utilities, public transportation companies and newspaper, magazine,
radio broadcasting and television broadcasting corporations operated
for profit; and such other classes or persons as may be essential to the
preservation of public order and immediately necessary to serve the
safety, health and welfare needs of the people within the City.
B.
Prohibit or regulate the possession on one's own premises of explosives,
firearms, ammunition or dangerous weapons of any kind, and prohibit
the purchase, sale, transfer or other disposition thereof.
A.
Prohibit or regulate the buying or selling of beer, wine or intoxicating
beverages of any kind and their possession or consumption off one's
own premises.
B.
§ 7-26 CIVIL EMERGENCIES § 10-3
10:33
§ 10-4. Extension, alteration and rescission of proclamation.
Any proclamation of emergency promulgated pursuant to this chapter may
be extended, altered or rescinded in any particular during the continued
or threatened existence of a state of emergency by the issuance of a
subsequent proclamation.
§ 10-5. Compliance required.
During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, it shall be unlawful
for any person to violate any provision of any prohibition or restriction
imposed by any proclamation authorized by this chapter.
§ 10-6. Request for state forces; martial law.
If, in the sound discretion of the Mayor, it shall appear that the emergency
is or that the threatened emergency is likely to be of such proportions that
the means available to the City to maintain law and order within the police
jurisdiction of the City are insufficient for such purpose, the Mayor shall,
promptly and by the most expeditious means of communication, inform the
Governor of the situation and request that the necessary police or military
forces of the state be provided promptly; and if, during an actual state
of emergency the Mayor shall find that the civil courts within the police
jurisdiction of the City are unable to perform their lawful duties and that by
reason of widespread lawlessness writs and other process cannot be served
or executed, the Mayor shall inform the Governor of his findings and may
recommend to him that a state of martial law be proclaimed within the
police jurisdiction of the City.
§ 10-7. End of emergency period.
The Mayor shall proclaim the end of such state of emergency or all or any
part of the prohibitions and restrictions imposed as soon as circumstances
warrant or when directed to do so by the Common Council.
Prohibit or regulate any demonstration, parade, march, vigil or
participation therein from taking place on any of the public ways or
upon any public property.
C.
Prohibit or regulate the sale or use of gasoline, kerosene, naphtha or
any other explosive or flammable fluids or substances.
D.
Prohibit or regulate travel upon any public street or upon any other
public property, except by those in search of medical assistance, food
or other commodity or service necessary to sustain the well-being of
themselves or their families or some member thereof.
E.
Prohibit or regulate the participation in or carrying on of any business
activity, and prohibit or regulate the keeping open of places of business,
places of entertainment and other places of public assembly.
F.
G. Establish hours during which a curfew shall be in effect.
§ 10-3 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 10-7
10:34
Chapter 14
ELECTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Elections — See §§ 3 through 6 of the City
Charter.
Fees — See Ch. A175.
§ 14-1. Declarations of candidacy. [Amended 1-22-2007 by Ord. No.
757; 1-14-2019 by Ord. No. 905]
§ 14-1.1. Board of Elections. [Added 1-14-2019 by Ord. No. 905]
Nominations for the offices of Mayor and member of the Common
Council which are filled pursuant to the provisions of Section 3 of the
City Charter shall be made as follows: Each candidate for election shall
file a declaration of candidacy and shall meet the requirements as set
forth in Section 3 of the City Charter as to qualifications.
A.
Declarations of candidacy shall be filed under oath with the City Clerk,
not later than 5:00 p.m. on the Monday that is four weeks before
election day, and an announcement shall be made by the City Clerk of
the names of the persons who have filed such declarations at the first
regular Council meeting following said filing deadline.
B.
There shall be a Board of Elections comprised of six of the Election
Judges appointed pursuant to § 3 of the City Charter and § 14-5 of this
Code, who shall be designated at the time of their appointment as
members of the Board of Elections by the Mayor. The chairperson and
the vice chairperson of the Board of Elections shall each serve as a
Chief Judge for one of the City's polling places. Members of the Board
of Elections shall be qualified voters of the City and shall not hold or
be a candidate for any elective office during his or her term of office.
Any Board member may be removed for good cause by the Common
Council. The compensation of the members of the Board for the services
as Election Judges shall be determined by resolution of the Council.
A.
In this chapter, the term "Board" shall mean the City's Board of
Elections.
B.
Persons appointed to the Board between February 15, 2019, and the
date of the City election in 2021 shall serve until the results of that
election are certified. Persons appointed to the Board thereafter shall
serve until February 14 of the year preceding the City election next
following their appointments.
C.
The chairperson and vice chairperson of the Board of Elections shall be
chosen by the members of the Board.
D.
§ 10-7 CIVIL EMERGENCIES § 14-1.2
10:35
§ 14-1.2. Duties of Board. [Added 1-14-2019 by Ord. No. 905]
§ 14-2. Filing fees. [Amended 1-22-2007 by Ord. No. 757;
11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 791
The Board shall be in charge of all City elections and shall supervise
any additional election judges appointed by the Mayor. The Board shall
decide all questions arising in connection with the conduct of City
elections and the operation of the polls.
A.
The Board shall have the following duties, in addition to any other
prescribed by this Code or the City Charter:
Plan and conduct regular and special City elections in coordination
with the City Clerk;
(1)
(2) Periodically review City elections procedures;
(3) Serve as Election Judges in City elections;
Recommend additional qualified individuals to the Council for
appointment as Election Judges during a regular or special City
election;
(4)
Promulgate rules and regulations to implement the provisions of
the Charter and Code for the conduct of City elections;
(5)
(6) Encourage voter registration in the City;
Conduct voter education programs and prepare and distribute
voter outreach materials;
(7)
Recommend to the Council amendments to the City's elections law
and regulations when it deems such amendments are necessary
and will provide for the improved conduct of elections;
(8)
Perform such other duties as may be assigned to the Board of
Elections by Charter, ordinances and resolutions, and by the
direction of the Council.
(9)
B.
The Board may consult with the City Attorney or with such other
counsel as may be appointed to represent it by the Common Council
with respect to the duties and functions set forth in Subsection B of this
section.
C.
The Board shall meet at least once a year and may meet at such
additional times as the Board deems necessary to perform the duties
and functions set forth in this chapter. Regular or special meetings shall
be convened by the chairperson or by a majority of the members of the
Board.
D.
Each candidate for nomination for Mayor and member of the Common
Council shall pay a filing fee as provided in the General Fee Ordinance.8
All such payments shall be made to the City Clerk and shall accompany
A.
§ 14-1.2 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 14-2
10:36
§ 14-2.1. Campaign finances. [Added 11-8-1993 by Ord. No. 583]
the declaration. These sums shall be retained by the City, and in the
event that any candidate who has paid a filing fee shall withdraw his or
her declaration of intention of candidacy by 11:00 a.m. 10 days prior to
the day of the election or in the event that the name of any candidate
who has paid a filing fee shall not appear on the official ballot by reason
of death, the candidate's estate shall be entitled to a return of such
filing fee.9
Findings and authority. The City finds that requiring candidates for
election to City office to provide campaign finance information will
promote and enhance the integrity of the election process. The City
finds that the campaign finance requirements contained herein will
promote the health, safety and general welfare of the City's residents.
Article XI-E of the Maryland Constitution, Md. Code Ann., Local Gov't
Art., and the City's Charter authorize the City to enact ordinances
for the protection and promotion of public safety, health, morals and
welfare, including but not limited to matters relating to elections.
[Amended 1-14-2019 by Ord. No. 905]
A.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated: [Amended 1-22-2007 by Ord. No. 757]
CAMPAIGN STATEMENT — An itemized report, made according to a
form prescribed and supplied by the City Clerk, which, when completed
and filed, provides the information required in Subsections C and E.
CANDIDATE — Any individual who files a certificate of candidacy for
any elected City office.
CLERK OF THE ELECTION — City Clerk.
CONTRIBUTION — The gift, transfer or promise of a gift or transfer of
money or other thing of value to any candidate. The term "contribution"
includes the purchase of tickets for events such as dinners, luncheons,
rallies and similar fund-raising events, the granting to the candidate of
discounts or rebates not available to the general public and payment
for the services of any persons serving on behalf of a candidate who are
not volunteers.
CONTRIBUTOR — Any person who makes a contribution.
ELECTION — Any general or special election held for any elected City
office.
EXPENDITURE — A payment, pledge or promise of payment of money
or anything of value or other obligation, whether or not legally
enforceable, for goods, materials, services or facilities in aid of or in
opposition to the election of one or more candidates.
B.
8. Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
9. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, Waiver of filing fee, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 1-14-2019 by Ord. No. 905.
§ 14-2 CIVIL EMERGENCIES § 14-2.1
10:37
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association, firm,
committee, club or other organization or group of persons, however
organized.
Record of contributions and expenditures.
A candidate shall keep a true and full record of all contributions
and expenditures.
(1)
The record shall include:
The full name and complete mailing address of every
contributor who makes a contribution or contributions which
together exceeds $50.
(a)
(b) The amount and form of every contribution.
A full record of all disbursements, including the names and
addresses of every recipient thereof.
(c)
(2)
Records kept by the candidate shall be preserved for at least one
year after the dates of the election for which the accounts were
required. A candidate shall produce those records for examination
upon the written request of the City Clerk or the Judges of
Elections.
(3)
C.
Campaign statement filing.
Each candidate shall file a campaign statement during each of the
following periods:
From the 25th to 20th day preceding an election in which the
candidate is seeking election to an office.
(a)
(b) From the 10th to 7th day preceding such election.
Within 35 days following such election or not later than the
day preceding the day upon which the candidate takes office,
whichever occurs first.
(c)
(1)
Campaign statements shall be filed with the City Clerk during
regular business hours and shall be made available to the public.
Upon a showing of practical hardship, the City Clerk may extend
the time for filing a campaign statement for up to three days;
however, only one extension may be granted for each statement
that is required.
(2)
D.
Campaign statement contents. [Amended 1-22-2007 by Ord. No.
757]
Each campaign statement filed pursuant to Subsection D shall
contain the following information:
(1)
E.
§ 14-2.1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 14-2.1
10:38
The cumulative total amount of all contributions and
expenditures received by the candidate during the calendar
year in which the election was held, as well as for the prior
calendar year.
(a)
The full name and mailing address of any person from whom a
contribution or contributions which together exceeds $50 was
received and the amount received from that contributor.
(b)
A candidate shall verify, in writing, under penalty of perjury,
that the candidate has read the campaign statement and that
it is true and complete, as far as the candidate knows.
(c)
Where goods, materials, services, facilities or anything of value
other than money is contributed or expended, the monetary value
thereof shall be the fair market value.
(2)
Loans of money, property or other things made to a candidate or
committee during the period covered by the campaign statement
shall be reported separately in the statement with the following
information:
The total of all loans received during the period covered by the
campaign statement.
(a)
For loans of $50 or more in value, the full name and address
of each lender, the date of the loan, the interest rate and the
amount of the loan remaining unpaid.
(b)
(c) The cumulative total value of all loans received.
(d) The total amount of loans remaining unpaid.
(3)
If a loan has been forgiven or paid by a third person, it shall be
reported.
(4)
Limitations on campaign contributions. No anonymous contribution
shall be accepted by a candidate. Any anonymous contribution shall be
given by the candidate to the City Clerk for deposit into the treasury of
the City of Westminster.
F.
Exceptions to campaign statement. A candidate shall not be required to
file a campaign statement if neither the contributions received nor the
expenditures made on behalf of the campaign exceeds $50. However,
between the 25th and the 20th day preceding the election, and again
between the 10th and 7th day preceding the election, such a candidate
shall file a written, notarized declaration attesting that neither
contributions nor expenditures of the candidate have exceeded $50.
G.
Duties of the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall have the following duties:
Supply appropriate forms for campaign statements to all
candidates.
(1)
H.
§ 14-2.1 CIVIL EMERGENCIES § 14-2.1
10:39
§ 14-3. Lack of declared candidates.
In case of any vacancy which may exist in respect to a declared candidate
for the office of Mayor or member of the Common Council, the town meeting
called by the Mayor pursuant to this section shall choose a qualified
candidate who will consent to nomination for such office.
Furnish written instructions explaining the duties of candidates
under the provisions of this section, including closing and filing
dates for all campaign statements.
(2)
Examine all campaign statements filed in the Clerk's office
pursuant to this section and check for irregularities that do not
meet the requirements of this section. Acceptance of the statement
by the City Clerk shall not constitute approval of said statement.
(3)
Notify promptly all persons known to have failed to file a statement
in the form or at the time required.
(4)
Refer all irregularities or failures to file required statements to the
Judges of Election for subsequent action.
(5)
Maintain a current list of all campaign statements on file in the City
Clerk's office.
(6)
Make available for public inspection, commencing as soon as
practicable, filed campaign statements and preserve each
campaign statement for each one year from the date upon which it
was required to be filed.
(7)
Duties of the Board. In addition to other duties designated in this
chapter and by the City's Charter, the Board shall determine whether
the required campaign statements have been properly filed and make
a public report to the Mayor and Common Council within 40 days after
such election, including but not limited to, violations of this section.
[Amended 1-14-2019 by Ord. No. 905]
I.
Effect of nonfiling or late filing. The City Clerk shall not issue any
certificate of election to any candidate until the candidate's campaign
statements required by Subsection D or, if no campaign statement
is required, the written declaration of exemption required under
Subsection G has been filed in the form and at the place required.
J.
Violations and penalties. In addition to all of the remedies provided
by law, any nonfiling of the required campaign statement or any
intentional filing of a false statement by a candidate shall be punished
as a municipal infraction. The penalty for violation shall be a fine
of $400 for each offense. Additionally, the City may institute any
appropriate action or proceedings to prevent any violation of this
section.
K.
§ 14-2.1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 14-3
10:40
§ 14-4. Election date, time and place; notice. [Amended 6-22-1992
by Ord. No. 550; 7-11-2011 by Ord. No. 829]
Regular City elections shall be held on odd-numbered years on the Tuesday
following the second Monday in May between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
8:00 p.m. at such place or places as shall be designated by the Mayor and
Common Council, and notice thereof shall be given as provided in § 14-3B.
§ 14-4.1. Establishment of precincts. [Added 6-22-1992 by Ord. No.
550]
Candidates for the offices of Mayor and member of the Common
Council shall be nominated at a town meeting called by the Mayor for
such purpose, to be held on the Monday which precedes by 14 days the
second Monday in May of each odd-numbered year, provided that if the
Monday which precedes by 14 days the second Monday in May is a legal
holiday, then the next following regular business day shall be the date
for such town meeting.
A.
The Mayor shall determine the place and hours for the holding of such
town meeting and shall give notice thereof to the public during the
period beginning March 15 and ending March 22 by publication in the
newspapers published in the City and by such other means as he may
elect. Such notice shall state the offices to be filled at the ensuing
general City election; the deadline date for the filing of declarations of
intention of candidacy and the deposit of filing fees with the City Clerk;
the place, date and hours of the town meeting for the nomination of
candidates and who is eligible to vote at such meeting; and the place,
date and hours of the general City election.
B.
The presiding officer at such town meeting shall be a Chairman, who
shall be elected by those in attendance who are qualified to vote at
the ensuing City election, and all such qualified voters who are present
shall be entitled to vote for the nomination of candidates at the meeting.
The Chief of Police shall designate two police officers of the City to
attend such meeting as Sergeants at Arms to preserve order and
decorum.
C.
Nominations for the offices of Mayor and member of the Common
Council, respectively, shall be made only from among those qualified
persons who have duly filed declarations of intention of candidacy and
have made timely deposit of the required filing fee, except as provided
in this section.
D.
In the event that the Mayor and Common Council designates more than
one polling place for City elections, the Mayor and Common Council,
by resolution, shall subdivide the City into two or more precincts as
is deemed expedient for the convenience of the voters. Said precincts
shall be established utilizing a written description and a map of their
boundaries.
A.
§ 14-3 CIVIL EMERGENCIES § 14-4.1
10:41
§ 14-5. Judges of Election. [Amended 3-25-1991 by Ord. No. 538;
6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 550; 1-14-2019 by Ord. No. 905]
For each regular and special City election, the Mayor shall designate at
least three citizens of the City for each polling place who are qualified
and legal voters thereof to serve as Judges, at least 10 days before such
election, and shall direct the City Clerk to issue to them a commission
authorizing them to conduct such election in the manner herein set forth
and requiring a statement of the results thereof to be made and returned
by them to the Mayor and Common Council, to which commission shall be
annexed an oath, to be taken by the Judges before a person duly authorized
to administer oaths, that they will faithfully and honestly discharge the
duties of the Judges of Election and shall permit all persons to vote who,
in their judgment, shall be qualified according to the law and ordinances
and will in all things execute the office of Election Judges to the best of
their knowledge and ability and without favor or partiality. The Mayor may
appoint alternate Election Judges, who may serve at the request of the
chairperson of the Board in the event of the absence of a regular Election
Judge.
§ 14-6. Clerk of Election. [Amended 1-22-2007 by Ord. No. 757]
The City Clerk's duty shall be to keep the poll books or lists containing a
column headed "Number" and another headed "Names of voters"; all entries
therein shall be made in ink, and the name of each person who shall vote
shall be entered on each of the poll books by the Clerk having charge
thereof, the number of such voter being placed opposite his name in the
column headed "Number."
§ 14-7. Ballot box. [Amended 1-14-2019 by Ord. No. 905]
Absentee ballots shall be placed by the City Clerk in a locked ballot box
reserved for that purpose that shall not be opened until after the close of
the polls and the canvassing, counting or tabulation of regular ballots as
Whenever the City is subdivided into two or more precincts as provided
in Subsection A, the City Clerk shall provide for and cause to be
prepared such additional sets of cards or loose-leaf pages or other
forms as may be required for transcribing the names of registered
voters transferred to such newly established precinct or polling place
and to correct and transfer the registration forms or cards of the
registered voters affected thereby.
B.
Whenever the City is subdivided into two or more precincts as provided
in Subsection A, the City Clerk shall notify or cause to be notified the
voters affected by the establishment of precincts by mail within 30
days after such change. A voter's registration may not be invalidated
by the establishment of precincts, nor shall the right of any voter be
prejudiced by any error in filing or in making out the list of voters and
the assignment of said voters to a precinct.
C.
§ 14-4.1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 14-7
10:42
provided in § 14-9 of this chapter. At that time, the Election Judges shall
open the absentee ballot box and ensure that all ballots are removed and
that each absentee ballot is counted.
§ 14-8. Qualifications of voters.
Each person qualified to vote for delegates to the General Assembly of
Maryland and who has resided within the City not less than six months
preceding the election and whose name appears upon the books of
registered voters as provided in Section 5 of the City Charter shall be
entitled to cast one ballot.
§ 14-9. Counting of votes. [Amended 1-22-2007 by Ord. No. 757]
At the hour designated for the closing of the polls, the Judges of Election
shall refuse to receive any additional votes and proceed forthwith to canvass
the votes cast, which canvass shall not be adjourned or postponed until
it shall have been fully completed. Any candidate or challenger for such
candidate shall have the right to be present and so near that they can see
the Judges and Clerk are faithfully performing their duties.
§ 14-10. Tallying of votes.
When the canvass of the votes shall have been completed, the Clerk shall
announce to the Judges the total number of votes received by each
candidate and the number for and the number against any proposition that
shall be put to the vote of the people; and the Judges shall announce and
declare the name of the successful candidate for any office and the success
or failure of any proposition submitted to the voters, and such proclamation
shall be prima facie evidence of the canvass of such ballots and the results
of such election.
§ 14-11. Return statement. [Amended 1-14-2019 by Ord. No. 905]
Following their announcement of the results of the election, the Board shall
then forthwith proceed to make up a statement of the results of the election,
which statement shall contain the total number of ballots in the ballot
box and the number of votes found therein for each and every candidate,
designating the office for which they are given. Such statement shall be
written or partly written and partly printed, and in case any proposition
has been submitted to vote at such election, such statement shall show all
votes cast for or against such proposition, and at the end of such statement
shall be written a certificate that the same is correct in all respects, which
certificate and statement or return shall be subscribed by the Board and
returned to the Mayor and Common Council, together with the tally sheets,
poll books or lists and the ballots cast at such election and all papers
showing the qualification of the Election Judges.
§ 14-7 CIVIL EMERGENCIES § 14-12
10:43
§ 14-12. Notice to successful candidate. [Amended 1-14-2019 by
Ord. No. 905]
Immediately following the return of election results to the Mayor and
Common Council, the City Clerk shall sign a notice directed to the persons
who have been by the City Clerk declared elected to the office of Mayor
or Common Council, informing them of their election, which notice shall be
mailed or personally delivered to the successful candidates.
§ 14-13. Time limit for retaining ballots; destruction.
The ballots returned to the Mayor and Common Council shall be by them
retained for a period of 60 days, securely sealed, and shall not be opened or
examined unless under order of court in a contest relating to such election,
and such ballots shall, after the expiration of 60 days, be destroyed.
§ 14-14. Elections called by voters.
If notice of any election shall not be given as required by this chapter or if
the Judges of Election shall not be appointed or refuse to act, five or more
voters of the City may call an election by notice set up in the most public
places in the City, not less than one week previous to such election, therein
naming the time and place of holding such election and naming three Judges
thereof, who or any two of whom may hold such election and have the same
powers in respect thereto as Judges appointed by the Mayor.
§ 14-15. Use of voting machines. [Amended 1-14-2019 by Ord. No.
905]
The Board, in its discretion, may provide for the use of voting machines.
Regular ballots shall be cast in person by duly registered voters at the time
or times and place or places designated by the City Charter or by resolution
of the Common Council pursuant to § 14-4.1 of this Code for the conduct of
City elections at a duly designated polling place by use of that paper ballot
or voting machine or device officially designated by the Board of Elections
prior to the opening of the polls on election day. Nothing herein shall be
construed to prevent a duly registered voter from casting an absentee ballot
in conformance with any provision of the City Charter or this Code.
§ 14-16. Prohibited acts. [Amended 1-14-2019 by Ord. No. 905]
If at any City election any person shall falsely personate any voter or
other person and shall attempt to vote in the name of such persons,
whether living or dead, or shall knowingly, willfully or fraudulently vote
more than once upon any question or for any candidate or candidates
for the same office or interfere with or attempt to hinder any qualified
voter from executing his right to vote or shall interfere with any
Election Judge in performing his or her duties, he or she shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished as provided in § 1-18A of this Code.
A.
§ 14-12 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 14-16
10:44
§ 14-17. Expenses. [Amended 1-14-2019 by Ord. No. 905]
All expenses connected with the conduct of City elections, including the
compensation of the Election Judges, shall be paid out of the general funds
of the City. Compensation of the members of the Board for their service as
Election Judges, and of additional Election Judges, if any, may be set from
time to time by resolution of the Common Council. Any such compensation
shall be set before the Monday that is four weeks before election day.
§ 14-18. Effect of State Election Law.
Any matter relating to elections which is not provided for in the City Charter
or this Code or another ordinance shall be in conformity, as nearly as may
be practicable, with the general election laws of the state,10 as determined
by resolution of the legislative body or by the Mayor if there is insufficient
time in which to present such matter to the legislative body.
Chapter 16
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 4.
Boards and commissions — See Ch. 7.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 29.
§ 16-1. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter apply to all City employees, to appointees to
those boards and commissions identified in § 16-6, to City elected officials
and, with respect to the disclosure statements required by § 16-5, to
candidates for City elective office.
§ 16-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings indicated:
Any Election Judge who shall make, sign or publish any false tally of
a City election or any false statement of the result of such election,
knowing the same to be false, or who shall willfully exclude any vote
tendered, knowing the person offering the same is entitled to vote at
such election, or who shall willfully receive a vote from any person
whom he or she knows has no right to vote shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished as provided in § 1-18A of this Code.
B.
10.Editor's Note: See Art. 33 of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
§ 14-16 CIVIL EMERGENCIES § 16-2
10:45
BUSINESS or BUSINESS ENTITY — A commercial endeavor, regardless of
form, whether or not operated for profit, other than a governmental entity.
COMMISSION — The City Ethics Commission established under § 16-3 of
this chapter.
DOING BUSINESS WITH THE CITY — Having or negotiating a contract
with the City that involves the commitment, either in a single transaction
or a combination of transactions, during the five-year period immediately
preceding the filing, of $5,000 or more of City-controlled funds.
ELECTED OFFICIAL — Any individual who holds an elective office of the
City.
GIFT — A monetary donation, other than a campaign contribution, or other
item of more than nominal value received by an official or employee for
his or her personal use or for the use of a family member of the official or
employee, whether or not the official or employee disposes of the item at
any time after receipt but does not include items received or solicited by an
official or employee for use by or benefit of the City and that are delivered
to the custody of the City Manager directly by the donor or transferred to
the custody of the City Manager by the employee or official within seven
days of receipt.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY — Spouse and dependent children.
INTEREST —
Ownership of:
(1) Any share or portion of real property;
Ownership of securities of any kind representing more than 3% of
a publicly traded corporation;
(2)
A legal or equitable interest in a business entity other than a
publicly traded corporation as a result of which the owner has
received within the past three years, is presently receiving, or in
the future is entitled to receive, more than $1,000 per year.
(3)
A.
Interest does not include:
An interest held in the capacity of agent, custodian, fiduciary,
personal representative, or trustee, unless the holder has an
equitable interest in the subject matter;
(1)
(2) An interest in a time or demand deposit in a financial institution;
An interest in an insurance policy, endowment policy, or annuity
contract by which an insurer promises to pay a fixed amount of
money in a lump sum or periodically for life or a specified period;
(3)
A common trust fund or a trust that forms part of a pension or a
profit-sharing plan that:
(a) Has more than 25 participants; and
(4)
B.
§ 16-2 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 16-2
10:46
LOBBYIST — Any person who communicates with a City official in the
presence of such official for the purpose of influencing any official action of
that official or engages in activities with the express purpose of soliciting
others to communicate with a City official with the intent to influence an
offical action of that official, and is required to register and report expenses
related thereto under § 16-7 of this chapter.
NOMINAL VALUE — Having a fair market value of less than $20.
OFFICIAL or OFFICIALS — The Mayor, the members of the Common
Council, the City Administrator, City Clerk, the Director of Planning, the
Director of Public Works, the Director of Recreation and Parks, the Director
of Finance, and the Chief of Police, members of the Planning and Zoning
Commission, members of the Board of Zoning Appeals, and members of the
City Ethics Commission.
QUALIFIED RELATIVE — A spouse, parent, child, or sibling.
§ 16-3. Ethics Commission.
Is determined by the Internal Revenue Service to be a qualified
trust or college savings plan under the Internal Revenue Code.
(b)
There shall be a City Ethics Commission that shall consist of three
members and one alternate member appointed by the Mayor and
confirmed by the Common Council. The members of the Commission
shall not be employed by the City or hold any position with a board or
commission of the City. The Mayor and Common Council may approve a
temporary leave of absence for any member of the Ethics Commission,
provided that such leave of absence does not extend for a period of
time greater than nine months. The alternate member may participate
in any action of the Commission to the same extent as a regular member
when any regular member is unavailable for any reason, including any
temporary leave of absence taken by a regular member. [Amended
7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 855]
A.
The term of office shall be for five years, or until a member's successor
is appointed, whichever later occurs.
B.
The Commission shall be advised by the City Attorney or such other
counsel as may be designated by the Mayor and Common Council from
time to time, and shall be assisted by the City Clerk or such other staff
person as the City Administrator shall designate from time to time.
C.
The Commission shall have the following responsibilities:
(1) To devise, receive and maintain all forms required by this chapter.
To develop procedures and policies for advisory opinion requests
and to provide advisory opinions to persons subject to this chapter
as to the applicability of the provisions of this chapter to them.
(2)
D.
§ 16-2 CIVIL EMERGENCIES § 16-3
10:47
§ 16-4. Conflicts of interest.
To develop procedures and policies for processing complaints and
to make appropriate determinations as to complaints filed by any
person alleging a violation of this chapter.
(3)
To certify to the State Ethics Commission on or before October 1 of
each year that the City is in compliance with the requirements of
Annotated Code of Maryland, General Provisions, Title 5, Subtitle
6, with respect to elected officials.
(4)
To consider whether proposed changes to this chapter that are
forwarded to the Commission for its review are in compliance with
the requirements of Maryland Code Ann., Gen. Provs., Title 5, and
to forward any recommended changes and amendments to the
Common Council for its consideration.
(5)
In the event that a complaint is lodged against any member of the
Commission, that member shall be disqualified from participating in
any Commission proceedings regarding the complaint against said
member. A replacement member shall be appointed by the remaining
members to serve on the Commission for the sole purpose of
participating in proceedings relating to the complaint. The appointment
of a replacement member shall not be effective until the appointment is
approved by the Common Council.
E.
The Commission may request that the Mayor and Common Council
appoint an individual not connected with the City investigate any
complaint lodged against a commission member.
F.
Participation restrictions.
Except as permitted by an opinion of the Commission, City elected
officials, officials appointed to those City boards and Commissions
identified in § 16-2 and employees of the City shall not:
Except in the exercise of an administrative or ministerial duty
that does not affect the disposition or decision of the matter,
participate in any matter in which, to the knowledge of the
official or employee, the official or employee, or a qualified
relative of the official or employee has an interest.
(a)
Except in the exercise of an administrative or ministerial duty
that does not affect the disposition or decision with respect
to the matter, participate in any matter in which any of the
following is a party:
A business entity in which the official or employee has a
direct financial interest of which the official or employee
may reasonably be expected to know;
[1]
(b)
(1)
A.
§ 16-3 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 16-4
10:48
A business entity for which the official, employee, or a
qualified relative of the official or employee is an officer,
director, trustee, partner, or employee;
[2]
A business entity with which the official or employee or,
to the knowledge of the official or employee, a qualified
relative is negotiating employment or has any
arrangement concerning prospective employment.
[3]
If the contract reasonably could be expected to result in
a conflict between the private interests of the official or
employee and the official duties of the official or employee,
a business entity that is a party to an existing contract
with the official or employee, or which, to the knowledge
of the official or employee, is a party to a contract with a
qualified relative;
[4]
An entity doing business with the City in which a direct
financial interest is owned by another entity in which the
official or employee has a direct financial interest, if the
official or employee may be reasonably expected to know
of both direct financial interests; or
[5]
A business entity that:
The official or employee knows is a creditor or obligee
of the official or employee or a qualified relative of
the official or employee with respect to a thing of
economic value; and
[a]
As a creditor or obligee, is in a position to directly
and substantially affect the interest of the official or
employee or a qualified relative of the official or
employee.
[b]
[6]
A person who is disqualified from participating under Subsection
A(1) of this section shall disclose the nature and circumstances of
the conflict and may participate or act if:
The disqualification leaves a body with less than a quorum
capable of acting;
(a)
The disqualified official or employee is required by law to act;
or
(b)
The disqualified official or employee is the only person
authorized to act.
(c)
(2)
The prohibitions of Subsection A(1) of this section do not apply if
participation is allowed by regulation or opinion of the Commission.
(3)
(4) The prohibitions set forth in this subsection do not apply to:
§ 16-4 CIVIL EMERGENCIES § 16-4
10:49
Subject to other provisions of law, a member of a board or
Commission in regard to a financial interest or employment
held at the time of appointment, provided the financial interest
or employment is publicly disclosed to the appointing authority
and the Commission;
(a)
An official or employee whose duties are ministerial, if the
private employment or financial interest does not create a
conflict of interest or the appearance of a conflict of interest,
as permitted by and in accordance with regulations adopted by
the Commission; or
(b)
Employment or financial interests allowed by regulation of
the Commission if the employment does not create a conflict
of interest or the appearance of a conflict of interest or the
financial interest is disclosed.
(c)
Employment and financial interest restrictions.
Except as permitted by regulation of the Commission when the
interest is disclosed or when the employment does not create a
conflict of interest or appearance of conflict, an official or employee
may not:
Be employed by or have a financial interest in any entity that is
doing business with the City; or
(a)
Hold any other employment relationship that would impair
the impartiality or independence of judgment of the official or
employee.
(b)
(1)
B.
Post-employment limitations and restrictions.
A former official or employee may not assist or represent any party
other than the City for compensation in a case, contract, or other
specific matter involving the City if that matter is one in which the
former official or employee significantly participated as an official
or employee.
(1)
Within one year following termination of City service, a former
City elected official may not assist or represent another party for
compensation in a matter that is the subject of legislative action.
(2)
C.
Contingent compensation. Except in a judicial or quasi-judicial
proceeding, an official or employee may not assist or represent a party
for contingent compensation in any matter before or involving the City.
D.
Use of prestige of office.
An official or employee may not intentionally use the prestige of
office or public position for the private gain of that official or
employee or the private gain of another.
(1)
E.
§ 16-4 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 16-4
10:50
This subsection does not prohibit the performance of usual and
customary constituent services by an elected local official without
additional compensation. For purposes of this subsection, the term
"usual and customary constituent services" shall include but not be
limited to boosterism or other activities in support of a business
entity that is located in or near the City or contributes significantly
to the economic well-being of the City, so long as neither the
elected official, a qualified relative of the elected official, a business
in which the elected official or a qualified relative of the official has
an interest, nor a third party with any affiliation to the business
entity that is the subject of the constituent services, receives any
tangible or quantifiable personal gain or benefit from or in
connection with the transaction, other than items that are
permitted by Subsection F(5) of this section.
(2)
Solicitation and acceptance of gifts.
An official or employee may not solicit any gift for himself or herself
or for another person.
(1)
An official or employee may not facilitate the solicitation of a gift,
on behalf of another person, from a lobbyist.
(2)
An official or employee may not knowingly accept a gift, directly or
indirectly, from a person that the official or employee knows or has
reason to know:
(a) Is doing business with or seeking to do business with the City;
Has financial interests that may be substantially and materially
affected, in a manner distinguishable from the public generally,
by the performance or nonperformance of the official duties of
the official or employee;
(b)
(c) Is engaged in an activity regulated or controlled by the City; or
(d) Is a lobbyist.
(3)
Subsection F(5) of this section does not apply to a gift:
That would tend to impair the impartiality and the
independence of judgment of the official or employee receiving
the gift;
(a)
Of significant value that would give the appearance of
impairing the impartiality and independence of judgment of
the official or employee; or
(b)
Of significant value that the recipient official or employee
believes or has reason to believe is designed to impair the
impartiality and independence of judgment of the official or
employee.
(c)
(4)
F.
§ 16-4 CIVIL EMERGENCIES § 16-4
10:51
Notwithstanding Subsection F(3) of this section, an official or
employee may accept the following:
Meals and beverages consumed in the presence of the donor
or sponsoring entity;
(a)
Ceremonial gifts or awards that have insignificant monetary
value;
(b)
(c) Unsolicited gifts of nominal value or informational items;
Reasonable expenses for food, travel, lodging, and scheduled
entertainment of the official or the employee at a meeting
that is given in return for the participation of the official or
employee in a panel or speaking engagement at the meeting;
(d)
Gifts of tickets or free admission extended to an elected local
official to attend a charitable, cultural, or political event, if the
purpose of this gift or admission is a courtesy or ceremony
extended to the elected official's office;
(e)
A specific gift or class of gifts that the Commission exempts
from the operation of this subsection upon a finding, in writing,
that acceptance of the gift or class of gifts would not be
detrimental to the impartial conduct of the business of the City
and that the gift is purely personal and private in nature;
(f)
Gifts from a person related to the official or employee by blood
or marriage, or any other individual who is a member of the
household of the official or employee; or
(g)
Honoraria for speaking to or participating in a meeting,
provided that the offering of the honorarium is not related in
any way to the official's or employee's official position.
(h)
(5)
Disclosure of confidential information. Other than in the discharge
of official duties, an official or employee may not disclose or use
confidential information that the official or employee acquired by
reason of the official's or employee's public position and that is not
available to the public, for the economic benefit of the official or
employee or that of another person.
G.
Participation in procurement.
A person who assists the City in the drafting of specifications, an
invitation for bids, or a request for proposals for a procurement,
or a business entity or person that employs another person who
does so, may not submit a bid or proposal for that procurement
or assist or represent another person, directly or indirectly, who is
submitting a bid or proposal for the procurement.
(1)
H.
§ 16-4 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 16-4
10:52
§ 16-5. Financial disclosure: City elected officials and candidates for
City elective office.
The Commission may establish exemptions from the requirements
of this section for providing descriptive literature, sole source
procurements, and written comments solicited by the City.
(2)
Financial disclosure statement required.
Except as provided in Subsection B of this section, a City elected
official or a candidate for City elective office shall file with the
City Clerk a financial disclosure statement on a form provided by
the Commission, under oath or affirmation. The City Clerk shall
promptly transmit each statement to the Commission for review.
(1)
Deadlines for filing statements.
An incumbent City elected official shall file a financial
disclosure statement annually no later than the close of
business on January 15 of each year for the preceding calendar
year, except that if January 15 falls on day on which City offices
are closed, the statement shall be filed by the close of business
on the next regular business day, except that in calendar year
2015, an incumbent shall file a financial disclosure statement
on or before the close of business on April 13.
(a)
An individual who is appointed to fill a vacancy in a City
elective office and who has not already filed a financial
disclosure statement shall file a statement for the preceding
calendar year within 30 days after appointment.
(b)
An individual who leaves an office for which a statement is
required hereunder shall file a statement within 60 days after
leaving the office. The period covered by the statement shall
include:
The calendar year immediately preceding the year in
which the individual left office, unless a statement
covering that year has already been filed by the individual;
and
[1]
The portion of the current calendar year during which the
individual held the office.
[2]
(c)
(2)
A.
Candidates to be local elected officials.
Except for an official who has filed a financial disclosure statement
under another provision of this section for the reporting period,
a candidate for City elective office shall file a financial disclosure
statement each year beginning with the year in which the
certificate of candidacy is filed and continuing through the year of
the election.
(1)
B.
§ 16-4 CIVIL EMERGENCIES § 16-5
10:53
A candidate for City elective office shall file a statement required
under this section:
In the year in which the certificate of nomination is filed, at the
time of filing of the certificate of nomination;
(a)
If the election for which a certificate of nomination is filed
occurs in a year following the year in which the certificate has
been filed, on or before the deadline for filing certificates of
nomination.
(b)
(2)
If a candidate fails to file a statement required by this section on
or before the deadline for filing certificates of nomination, the City
Clerk shall send a notice to the candidate within one week of the
deadline advising the candidate that his or her candidacy will be
deemed to be withdrawn if the required statement is not filed by
the close of business on the Monday that is 15 days before the
election.
(3)
The City Clerk may not accept any certificate of nomination unless
it is accompanied by a statement in proper form.
(4)
Public record.
Following review of a financial disclosure statement by the
Commission, the City Clerk shall maintain all such statements.
(1)
Financial disclosure statements shall be made available in the
office of the City Clerk during normal office hours for examination
and copying by the public subject to reasonable fees and
administrative procedures established by the Commission.
(2)
If an individual examines or copies a financial disclosure statement,
the City Clerk shall record:
The name and home address of the individual reviewing or
copying the statement; and
(a)
The name of the person whose financial disclosure statement
was examined or copied.
(b)
(3)
Upon request by the official or employee whose financial disclosure
statement was examined or copied, the City Clerk shall provide the
official with a copy of the name and home address of the person
who reviewed the official's financial disclosure statement.
(4)
C.
Retention requirements. The City Clerk shall retain financial disclosure
statements for four years from the date of receipt.
D.
Contents of statement.
(1) Interests in real property.
E.
§ 16-5 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 16-5
10:54
A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule
of all interests in real property located in the City or located
elsewhere if acquired from or in conjunction with a person or
entity that is regulated by the City or does business with the
City or has done business with the City during the preceding
five years.
(a)
For each interest in real property, the schedule shall state:
The location by street address, mailing address, or legal
description of the property;
[1]
Whether the property is used for residential or commetical
purposes;
[2]
Whether the property is held solely by the individual
reporting and, if not, the extent of the reporting person's
interest in the property;
[3]
Whether there are any encumbrances on the interest and,
if so, a description of each such encumbrance;
[4]
[5] The date on which the interest was acquired;
The identity of the person from whom the interest was
acquired;
[6]
The nature and amount of the consideration given in
exchange for the interest or, if acquired other than by
purchase, the fair market value of the interest at the time
acquired;
[7]
If any interest was transferred, in whole or in part, at
any time during the reporting period, the nature of the
interest transferred, the identity of the person to whom the
interest was transferred, and if the transferee is a person
or business entity that is regulated by or is doing business
with the City or has done business with the City in the
preceding five years, the amount of the consideration
received for the interest (including the value of any
nonmonetary consideration received); and
[8]
The identity of any other person or entity with an interest
in the property and the extent of such interest, if such
person or business entity is regulated by or is doing
business with the City or has done business with the City
in the preceding five years.
[9]
(b)
Interests in business entities.
A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of
any interest in any business entity that is regulated by the City
(a)
(2)
§ 16-5 CIVIL EMERGENCIES § 16-5
10:55
or doing business with the City or has done business with the
City in the preceding five years.
For each interest reported under this subsection, the schedule
shall include:
The name and address of the principal office of the
business entity;
[1]
The nature and amount of the interest held, including any
conditions and encumbrances on the interest;
[2]
If any interest was transferred, in whole or in part, at
any time during the reporting period, the nature of the
interest transferred, the identity of the person to whom the
interest was transferred, and if the transferee is a person
or business entity that is regulated by or is doing business
with the City or has done business with the City in the
preceding five years, the amount of the consideration
received for the interest (including the value of any
nonmonetary consideration received); and
[3]
With respect to any interest acquired during the reporting
period:
The date on which the interest was acquired and the
identity of the person or business entity from whom
the interest was acquired; and
[a]
The nature and the amount of the consideration given
in exchange for the interest or, if acquired other than
by purchase, the fair market value of the interest at
the time acquired.
[b]
[4]
(b)
An individual may satisfy the requirement to report the amount
of the interest held under Subsection E(2)(b)[2] of this section
by reporting, instead of a dollar amount:
For an equity interest in a corporation, the number of
shares held and, unless the corporation's stock is publicly
traded, the percentage of equity interest held; or
[1]
For an equity interest in a partnership, the percentage of
equity interest held.
[2]
(c)
Interests in mutual funds may be excluded from the disclosure
of interests in business entities otherwise required by this
subsection.
(d)
Gifts.
A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule of
each gift in excess of $20 in value or a series of gifts totaling
(a)
(3)
§ 16-5 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 16-5
10:56
$100 or more received during the reporting period from or
on behalf of, directly or indirectly, any one person who does
business with or is regulated by the City.
For each gift reported, the schedule shall include:
[1] A description of the nature and value of the gift; and
The identity of the person from whom, or on behalf of
whom, directly or indirectly, the gift was received.
[2]
(b)
Employment by entities doing business with City.
A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule
of all offices, directorships, and salaried employment by the
individual or member of the immediate family of the individual
held at any time during the reporting period with entities doing
business with the City.
(a)
For each position reported under this subsection, the schedule
shall include:
The name and address of the principal office of the
business entity; and
[1]
The title and nature of the office, directorship, or salaried
employment held and the date it commenced.
[2]
(b)
(4)
Indebtedness to entities doing business with City.
A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule
of all liabilities, excluding retail credit accounts, to persons or
entities doing business with the City owed at any time during
the reporting period:
[1] By the individual; or
By a member of the immediate family of the individual if
the individual was involved in the transaction giving rise
to the liability.
[2]
(a)
For each liability reported under this subsection, the schedule
shall include:
The identity of the person or business entity to whom the
liability was owed and the date the liability was incurred;
[1]
The amount of the liability owed as of the end of the
reporting period;
[2]
The terms of payment of the liability and the extent to
which the principal amount of the liability was increased
or reduced during the year; and
[3]
[4] The security given, if any, for the liability.
(b)
(5)
§ 16-5 CIVIL EMERGENCIES § 16-5
10:57
Family members. A statement filed under this section shall include
a schedule of the immediate family members of the individual
employed by the City in any capacity at any time during the
reporting period.
(6)
Sources of earned income.
A statement filed under this section shall include a schedule
of the name and address of each place of employment and
each business entity of which the individual or a member
of the individual's family was a sole or partial owner and
from which the individual or a member of the individual's
immediate family received earned income, at any time during
the reporting period.
(a)
A minor child's employment or business ownership need not be
disclosed if the City does not regulate, license, or contract with
the place of employment or business entity of the minor child.
(b)
(7)
Additional information. A statement filed under this section may
also include a schedule of additional interests or information that
the individual making the statement wishes to disclose.
(8)
Imputed interests. For the purposes of Subsection E(1) and E(2) of this
section, the following interests are considered to be the interests of the
individual making the statement:
An interest held by a member of the individual's immediate family,
if the interest was, at any time during the reporting period, directly
or indirectly controlled by the individual.
(1)
An interest held by a business entity in which the individual held a
30% or greater interest at any time during the reporting period.
(2)
If the reporting individual exercised or may exercise, directly or
indirectly, any control over the holdings or investments of the trust
or estate, an interest held by a trust or an estate in which, at any
time during the reporting period:
The individual held a reversionary interest or was a
beneficiary; or
(a)
(b) If a revocable trust, the individual was a settlor.
(3)
F.
Review and enforcement.
The Commission shall review the financial disclosure statements
submitted under this section for compliance with the provisions of
this section and shall notify an individual submitting the statement
of any omissions or deficiencies.
(1)
G.
§ 16-5 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 16-5
10:58
§ 16-6. Financial disclosure: employees and appointed officials.
§ 16-7. Lobbying.
The Commission may recommend to the Mayor and Common
Council that the City take appropriate enforcement action to
ensure compliance with this section.
(2)
This section only applies to the following appointed officials and
employees:
The City Administrator, the City Clerk, the City Attorney, the City
Treasurer, the Director of Community Planning and Development,
the Director of Public Works, the Director of Recreation and Parks,
the Director of Finance and the Chief of Police, members of the
Planning and Zoning Commission, members of the Board of Zoning
Appeals, and members of the City Ethics Commission.
(1)
A.
A statement filed under this section shall be filed with the City Clerk
under oath or affirmation on forms provided by the Commission. The
City Clerk shall promptly transmit statements filed under this section
to the Commission, which shall review such statements for compliance
with this chapter. Following the Commission's review and approval, the
City Clerk shall maintain all such forms.
B.
On or before the close of business on the second Monday in April of
each year during which an official or employee holds office, an official
or employee shall file a statement disclosing:
Gifts received during the preceding calendar year from any person
that contracts with or is regulated by the City, including the name
of the donor of the gift and the approximate retail value at the time
or receipt; and
(1)
Employment and interests that raise conflicts of interest or
potential conflicts of interest in connection with a specific proposed
action by the employee or official sufficiently in advance of the
action to provide adequate disclosure to the public.
(2)
C.
The City Clerk shall maintain all disclosure statements filed under this
section as public records available for public inspection and copying as
provided in Subsections C and D of § 16-5 of this chapter. The City Clerk
shall retain such statements for four years from the date of receipt.
D.
A person shall file a lobbying registration statement with the
Commission if the person:
Personally appears before a City official or employee with the
intent to influence that person in the performance of the official
duties of the official or employee; and
(1)
A.
§ 16-5 CIVIL EMERGENCIES § 16-7
10:59
§ 16-8. Exemptions and modifications.
The Commission may grant exemptions and modifications to the provisions
of §§ 16-4, 16-5, and 16-6 of this chapter when the Commission finds that
an exemption or modification would not be contrary to the intent of this
chapter to prevent conflicts of interest and self-dealing and to preserve the
integrity of City government and that the application of this chapter would:
§ 16-9. Violations and penalties.
In connection with the intent to influence, expends or reasonably
expects to expend in a given calendar year in excess of $150 on
food, entertainment, or other gifts for officials or employees of the
City.
(2)
A person shall file a registration statement required under this section
on or before the earlier of January 15 of the calendar year and the date
that is five days after the person first performs an act that requires
registration in the calendar year.
B.
The registration statement referred to in Subsection A shall include
complete identification of the registrant and of any other person on
whose behalf the registrant acts. It shall also identify the subject matter
on which the registrant proposes to make such appearances. The
registration statement shall cover a defined registration period not to
exceed one calendar year.
C.
In addition to the registration statement set forth above, all lobbyists
shall file an annual report within 30 days after the end of any calendar
year during which they were registered, disclosing the value, date
and nature of any food, entertainment or other gift provided to a City
official(s) or employee. Where a gift or series of gifts to a single official
exceeds $50 in value, the official(s) shall also be identified.
D.
All registration statements and annual reports filed under this section
shall be retained by the City Clerk for a period of at least four years
and shall be open for inspection and copying at the City offices during
regular business hours.
E.
A. Constitute an unreasonable invasion of privacy; and
Significantly reduce the availability of qualified persons for public
service.
B.
Enforcement action by the City. The City may, upon the
recommendation of the Commission:
Assess a late fee of $2 per day up to a maximum of $250 for a
failure to timely file a financial disclosure statement required under
§ 16-5 or § 16-6 of this chapter;
(1)
A.
§ 16-7 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 16-9
10:60
Assess a late fee of $10 per day up to a maximum of $250 for
a failure to file a timely lobbyist registration or lobbyist report
required under § 16-7 of this chapter; and
(2)
Issue a cease and desist order against any person found to be in
violation of this chapter.
(3)
Enforcement action by the Commission.
Upon a finding of a violation of any provision of this chapter, the
Commission may:
Issue an order of compliance directing the respondent to cease
and desist from the violation;
(a)
(b) Issue a reprimand; or
Recommend to the Mayor and Common Council appropriate
discipline of the respondent, including censure or removal if
that discipline is authorized by law.
(c)
(1)
If the Commission finds that a respondent has violated § 16-7 of this
chapter, the Commission may:
Require a respondent who is a registered lobbyist to file any
additional reports or information that reasonably relates to the
information that is required under § 16-7 of this chapter;
(a)
(b) Impose a fine of $1,000 for each violation; and
Suspend the registration of an individual registered lobbyist
if the Commission finds that the lobbyist has knowingly and
willfully violated § 16-7 of this chapter or has been convicted of
a criminal offense arising from lobbying activities.
(c)
(2)
B.
Judicial enforcement.
At the direction of the Mayor and Common Council upon the
recommendation of the Commission, the City Attorney or another
attorney appointed by the Mayor and Common Council may file
a petition for injunctive or other relief in a court of appropriate
jurisdiction and venue for the purpose of requiring compliance with
the provisions of this chapter.
(1)
The court may:
(a) Issue an order to cease and desist from the violation;
Except as provided in Subsection B of this section, void an
official action taken by an official or employee with a conflict
of interest prohibited by this chapter when the action arises
from or concerns the subject matter of the conflict and if the
legal action is brought within 90 days of the occurrence of the
(b)
(2)
C.
§ 16-9 CIVIL EMERGENCIES § 16-9
10:61
Chapter 19
FINANCE, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
City Treasurer — See § 9 of the City Charter
and Ch. 29, Art. III.
Fiscal matters — See Ch. 20.
Procurement and contracts — See Ch. 36.
Taxation — See Ch. 143.
§ 19-1. Creation.
The Department of Finance is hereby created.
§ 19-2. Director designated.
The City Treasurer shall be ex officio Director of the Department of Finance.
§ 19-3. Powers and duties of Director.
The Director of the Department of Finance shall be responsible for the
general supervision and administration of the Department, including
correlation and preparation of the City's budget; collection of taxes, general
revenue and other City income; utility billing; internal audit of the City's
finances; administrative control of purchases; and the preparation of
official action, if the court deems voiding the action to be in the
best interest of the public; or
Impose a fine of up to $5,000 for any violation of the provisions
of this chapter, with each day upon which the violation occurs
constituting a separate offense.
(c)
A court may not void any official action appropriating public funds,
levying taxes, or providing for the issuance of bonds, notes, or
other evidences of public obligations.
(3)
Other disciplinary action, fines and consequences. In addition to any
other enforcement provisions in this chapter:
A City official or employee found to have violated this chapter
is subject to disciplinary or other appropriate personnel action,
including removal from office, disciplinary action, suspension of
salary when authorized by law, or other sanction.
(1)
A violation of § 16-7 of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor subject
to a fine of up to $1,000 or imprisonment of up to one year.
(2)
A finding of a violation of this chapter by the Commission is public
information.
(3)
D.
§ 16-9 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 19-3
19:62
reports; and he shall cause to be maintained the necessary and proper
records in connection with such functions and duties as the legislative body
shall prescribe.
§ 19-4. Duties of officers and employees.
All officers and employees of the Department of Finance shall perform such
duties not inconsistent with this chapter as the Director of the Department
may from time to time assign or prescribe.
§ 19-5. Reports.
The Director of the Department of Finance shall make periodic reports on
the financial condition, organization, personnel and other matters affecting
or reflecting upon the Department to the legislative body.
§ 19-6. Budget request. [Amended 5-31-1991 by Ord. No. 547;
4-26-2006 by Ord. No. 750]
The Director of the Department of Finance shall, in addition to other
requirements of this chapter, prepare a budget request for the activities
under his supervision and submit it to the City Administrator for review and
correlation with budget requests of other department heads.
§ 19-7. Personnel. [Amended 5-31-1991 by Ord. No. 547]
The Department of Finance shall include the City Treasurer, the Assistant
City Treasurer, the Cashier, and such other personnel as the legislative body
may authorize from time to time and who shall be hired by the Mayor upon
recommendation of the Director of the Department of Finance to fill any
vacant position or grade authorized by the legislative body.
§ 19-8. Cashier. [Amended 5-31-1991 by Ord. No. 547; 4-26-2006 by
Ord. No. 750]
The Cashier shall be chosen solely on the basis of qualifications to perform
the duties of the office. He shall be appointed for an indefinite term as
provided in § 29-3.
§ 19-9. Assistant Treasurer. [Amended 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 699]
The duties of the Assistant City Treasurer shall include supervision
of the Cashier, the disbursement of budgeted funds for approved
purchases, payrolls, services and expenditures and for the recording
and posting thereof to the applicable financial records; assisting in
the preparation of reports, summaries, balances and other accounting
information required by the approved accounting system; verifying
daily cash receipts; and performing such other general accounting
duties as the City Treasurer may assign.
A.
§ 19-3 FINANCE, DEPARTMENT OF § 19-9
19:63
§ 19-10. City Treasurer. [Amended 3-28-2005 by Ord. No. 730]
The City Treasurer shall pay all bills of the City when such bills have been
approved or passed by the Common Council; keep true and just accounts of
all receipts and disbursements in such manner as may now or hereinafter
be required; and submit his accounts for an auditing and examination to the
legislative body as often and at such times as it may require.
§ 19-11. Corporate credit card. [Added 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 69911]
The duties of the Assistant City Treasurer shall include the inspection
and administrative control of additions and discontinuance of users
of the sanitary sewer service, the verification and administration of
the City's accounts payable, the establishment and maintenance of
a perpetual inventory of the City's property and materials, the
establishment and maintenance of a purchase control system and the
performance of such other general administrative and clerical duties as
the Director of the Department of Finance may assign.The inventory of
property herein referred to shall include a record of rents and revenues
therefrom, if any, and a record of insurance thereon and premiums for
such insurance..
B.
The Assistant City Treasurer shall assume the powers and duties of the
Director of the Department of Finance when the Director is absent or
disabled, unless otherwise provided by the legislative body.
C.
Collection of sidewalk paving assessments and other assessments and
penalties. It shall be the duty of the City Treasurer to collect all money
due and owing the City for grading and paving or repairing sidewalks
from persons who have refused or neglected to pay such money, and
he shall also collect from all persons the amount of benefits assessed
against them respectively under and by any ordinance of the City and
collect any other money or penalties due the City when required so to
do by the legislative body.
A.
Collection of delinquent real property taxes. The City Treasurer shall
utilize the provisions of Part III, Title 14 of the Tax-Property Article of
the Annotated Code of Maryland or as it may be amended to collect
delinquent real property taxes.
B.
Collection of delinquent personal property taxes by suit and execution.
With respect to taxes solely on personal property, the City Treasurer is
hereby directed to bring a proper suit for such taxes as soon as may
be practical after the expiration of two years from the date such taxes
became in arrears and, after securing judgment, to execute on such
judgment for the amount thereof.
C.
The City Treasurer shall have the authority to obtain a corporate credit
card(s) in the name of the City for carrying out the municipal purposes
A.
11.This ordinance also repealed former § 19-11, Assistant City Treasurer. See now § 19-9.
§ 19-9 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 19-11
19:64
§ 19-12. Petty cash. [Amended 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 699]
Except for such amount of petty cash, not exceeding $2,000 at any one
time, as may be authorized by the legislative body to be kept on hand in a
secure place within the office of the Department of Finance, all cash and
funds of the City shall be maintained on deposit in such lawful depository or
depositories as may be designated by the legislative body for such purpose
and shall be subject to withdrawal only by checks, debit memorandum or
electronic funds transfers, as approved or signed and countersigned by
such officers as the legislative body shall from time to time designate by
resolution.
Chapter 20
FISCAL MATTERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Finance — See Ch. 19.
Procurement and contracts — See Ch. 36.
Taxation — See Ch. 143.
§ 20-1. Annual budget; fiscal year.
The City shall operate on an annual budget. The fiscal year of the City shall
begin on the first day of July of each year and shall end on the last day
of June of the following year. Such year shall constitute the tax year, the
budget year and the accounting year.
of the City of Westminster. The obtaining of credit shall constitute a
pledge of the full faith and credit of the Mayor and Common Council of
Westminster.
The use of the corporate credit card shall be for the express purpose
of obtaining or procuring goods or services as approved or passed
by the Common Council. The City Treasurer shall keep true and just
accounts of all receipts and disbursements in such manner as may
now or hereinafter be required; submit his accounts for an auditing
and examination to the legislative body as often and at such times
as it may require. The aggregate amount of such credit at any one
time under the authority of this section shall not exceed $60,000. The
City Treasurer shall approve the delegation of signature authority, in
writing, to other officers or employees of the City, where the City
Treasurer deems it appropriate, necessary and in the best interest of
the City. The City Treasurer is authorized to adopt such rules and
policies as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
[Amended 3-28-2005 by Ord. No. 730]
B.
§ 19-11 FINANCE, DEPARTMENT OF § 20-2
19:65
§ 20-2. Preparation of budget; presentation to Common Council.
The City Administrator shall prepare the budget for the Mayor to present
to the Common Council at or before the first meeting of the Mayor and
Common Council in April of each year. The budget shall provide a financial
plan for the budget year and shall contain estimates of anticipated revenues
and proposed expenditures for the coming year. The total of the anticipated
revenues and surplus shall equal or exceed the total of proposed
expenditures.
§ 20-3. Budget message.
The Mayor shall present a budget message which explains the budget, both
in fiscal terms and in terms of the work programs. It shall outline the
proposed financial policies of the City for the ensuing fiscal year, describe
the important features of the budget, indicate any major changes from
the current year in financial policies, expenditure, and revenues together
with the reasons for such changes, summarize the City's debt position and
include such other material as deemed pertinent.
§ 20-4. Capital improvement program.
§ 20-5. Action on budget.
The City Administrator shall prepare and submit along with the budget
a six-year capital improvement program.
A.
The capital improvement program shall include:
(1) A clear summary of its contents;
A list of all capital improvements proposed for the next six fiscal
years; and
(2)
Cost estimates, funding sources and recommended time schedules
for each of the capital projects.
(3)
B.
The capital improvement program shall be revised and extended each
year as the current portion is adopted as part of the operating budget.
C.
The capital improvements program will be submitted for review and
comment by the Planning and Zoning Commission prior to adoption of
the operating budget.
D.
The Common Council shall hold a public hearing and, thereafter, adopt
the capital improvement program as submitted or amended at the same
time as the adoption of the operating budget.
E.
The City Administrator shall include in the proposed operating budget
those capital projects adopted by the Council for the ensuing fiscal year.
F.
Notice and hearing. The City shall publish in one or more newspapers of
general circulation a notice stating the times and places where copies
A.
§ 20-2 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 20-5
19:66
§ 20-6. Appropriation action.
Upon adoption of the budget, the Common Council shall appropriate funds
for the ensuing fiscal year. Funds shall be appropriated to each of the
various departments, offices, agencies or functions in accordance with the
adopted budget. The appropriation shall include a summary of estimated
income for the ensuing fiscal year in accordance with the adopted budget.
§ 20-7. Appropriations.
No public money may be expended without having been appropriated by the
Common Council. From the effective date of the budget, the amounts stated
as proposed expenditures shall be appropriated to the several objects and
purposes stated in the budget.
§ 20-8. Transfer of funds.
Any transfer of funds between appropriations proposed by the Mayor must
be approved by the Common Council before becoming effective.
§ 20-9. Expenditures in excess of appropriations forbidden.
During any budget year, no officer or employee shall expend or contract to
expend any money or incur any liability or enter into any contract which
involves the expenditure of money for any purpose in excess of the amounts
appropriated for or transferred to that general classification of expenditure.
Any contract, verbal or written, made in violation of this chapter shall be
null and void. Nothing in this section, however, shall prevent the making of
contracts or the spending of money for capital improvements to be financed
in whole or in part by the issuance of bonds, nor does this section preclude
the making contracts of lease or for services for a period exceeding the
budget year in which such contract is made, when the contract is permitted
by law or an emergency procurement as authorized by § 36-4 of the City
Code.
of the message and budget are available for inspection by the public
and the time and place for a public hearing on the budget.
Amendment before adoption. After the public hearing, the Common
Council may adopt the budget with or without amendment. In amending
the budget, it may add or increase programs or amounts and may delete
or decrease any programs or amounts, except expenditures required by
law or for debt service or for estimated cash deficit, provided that no
amendment to the budget shall increase the authorized expenditures
to an amount greater than the total of estimated income or applied
surplus, if any.
B.
Adoption. The Common Council shall adopt the budget on or before
the 15th day of June of the fiscal year currently ending. As provided in
§ 143-2, the tax levy shall also be made no later than that date.
C.
§ 20-5 FINANCE, DEPARTMENT OF § 20-10
19:67
§ 20-10. Lapse of unexpended appropriations.
All appropriations that have not been expended or lawfully encumbered
shall lapse at the end of the budget year. Any unexpended and
unencumbered funds shall be considered a surplus and shall be included
among the anticipated revenues for the next succeeding budget year.
Chapter 21
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 33. Fire prevention — See Ch. 78.
§ 20-10 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 20-10
19:68
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted as Ch. 7, Art. III, of the 1972 Code, as amended through
1990]
§ 21-1. Designation of official fire company.
The Westminster Fire Engine and Hose Company No. 1 of Westminster,
Maryland, an incorporated company formed in Westminster for the
suppression of fires therein, or its officers or persons having command
according to the rules and regulation of such company shall be and are
hereby vested with all the necessary power and authority to carry into effect
the purposes for which said company was organized, i.e., the suppression
and prevention of fires and explosions in the City of Westminster, and to do
all acts and things necessary for said purposes, the same not being contrary
to law.
§ 21-2. Compliance with fire personnel.12
§ 21-3. Authority of officers; violations.
It shall be the duty of the President or other officer of the Westminster
Fire Engine and Hose Company No. 1, or the person having command
according to the regulations of said company, and they shall have full power
to preserve order and regularity at all fires in the City, to direct the positions
of engines or apparatus of the company and the places from which the
supply of water or other necessary material is to be brought and to see that
the several divisions of the company and of other persons called on to assist
shall act in concert and perform their respective duties at such fires, and
they shall have full power and authority to order and force away from the
vicinity of such fire any disorderly person. If any person shall refuse to obey
or shall resist the authority of the officers of such company or other persons
commanding by its authority as aforesaid on such occasions or shall aid,
assist or encourage others in such disobedience or resistance, he shall be
guilty of an offense against this section.
§ 21-4. Fire Police Corps. [Amended 1-12-2009 by Ord. No. 800]
The citizens of Westminster are hereby required and enjoined to comply
with and aid and assist the authority and directions of the officers of
said company or persons authorized as aforesaid.
A.
All persons present at the scene of any fire or explosion are hereby
required and enjoined to comply with all lawful orders given them by
firemen acting in the line of duty and, upon request, to aid and assist
firemen in the protection of life, health and property from the hazards
of fire and explosion.
B.
12.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 78, Fire Prevention, § 78-1, Prohibited acts, of Art. I of that
chapter; and § 106-8, Interference with officers and employees, of Ch. 106, Peace and
Good Order, Art. III, City Officers, Employees and Property.
§ 21-1 FINANCE, DEPARTMENT OF § 21-4
19:69
The provisions of Ordinance No. 306, Section 1, adopted February 20,
1952, authorizing the establishment of a Fire Police Corps, are hereby
continued in full force and effect to the extent that the provisions
thereof are not inconsistent with this article.
A.
In this section, the following words shall have the meanings indicated:
FIRE CHIEF — The Fire Chief of the Westminster Fire Engine and Hose
Co. No. 1.
FIRE COMPANY — The Westminster Fire Engine and Hose Co. No. 1.
FIRE POLICE CHIEF — Chief of the Westminster Fire Police Corps.
POLICE CHIEF — Police Chief of the City of Westminster.
PUBLIC SAFETY ACTIVITY — Includes any event occurring in the City
of Westminster and requiring fire or police resources. These activities
include, but are not limited to, the following:
Fire emergencies such as traffic collisions, fires, medical
emergencies, explosions and chemical hazards.
(1)
Police emergencies, such as significant crimes, traffic accidents,
power outages and road closures.
(2)
Planned events, such as parades, festivals, funerals,
demonstrations and public events.
(3)
B.
The members of the Westminster Fire Police shall be appointed by
the President of the Fire Company upon the written request and
recommendation of the Fire Police Chief. Said President shall only
appoint those applicants who have received a favorable
recommendation from the Westminster Police Department based upon
a background investigation.
C.
Members of the Westminster Fire Police shall have the authority to
direct vehicular and pedestrian traffic within a reasonable area
surrounding a fire, police or public safety activity occurring in the City.
In instances where there is no police involvement, the Fire Police
will operate under the general direction of the Fire Chief or ranking
member of the Fire Company in charge of the public safety activity.
(1)
In instances where there is police involvement, the Fire Police will
operate under the general direction of the Police Chief or ranking
member of the Westminster Police Department in charge of the
public safety activity.
(2)
D.
Members of the Westminster Fire Police may perform vehicular and
pedestrian control activities, only after the successful completion of a
training program approved by the Police Chief or the Chief's designee.
This training will be provided by the Westminster Police Department at
no cost and will include both initial training and annual recertification
training.
E.
§ 21-4 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 21-4
19:70
Members of the Westminster Fire Police will be provided accident,
health care and general liability insurance while acting in their official
capacity as a Westminster Fire Police officer as follows:
The Fire Company will provide insurance coverage in those
instances where Fire Police officers provide service at the scene
of a public safety activity under the direction of the Fire Chief or
ranking member of the Fire Company.
(1)
The City of Westminster will provide insurance coverage in those
instances where where Fire Police officers provide service at the
scene of a public safety activity under the direction of the Police
Chief or ranking member of the Westminster Police Department.
(2)
F.
§ 21-4 FINANCE, DEPARTMENT OF § 21-4
19:71

ARTICLE II
False Fire Alarms
[Adopted 5-10-1993 by Ord. No. 564]
§ 21-5. Definitions.
In this article, the following words shall have the meanings indicated:
ALARM SIGNAL OR SIGNALS — The activation of a fire alarm system that
requests a response by the Westminster Fire Engine and Hose Company No.
1.
ALARM SYSTEM — A fire alarm system, including an automatic fire alarm
system and a system of manual fire alarm stations, that produces an audible
signal when activated.
ALARM SYSTEM CONTRACTOR —
ALARM USER —
FALSE ALARM — Any request for immediate assistance by the Fire
Department regardless of cause that is not in response to an actual
emergency situation or threatened emergency situation.
A person engaged in installing, maintaining, monitoring, altering or
servicing fire alarm systems; or
A.
An agency that furnishes the services of a person engaged in installing,
maintaining, monitoring, altering or servicing fire alarm systems.
B.
"Alarm service contractor" does not include a person who only sells or
manufactures fire alarm devices unless that person services, installs,
monitors or responds to fire alarm systems at protected premises.
C.
A person in control of an alarm system within, on or around any
building, structure, facility or site.
A.
Includes the owner or lessee of an alarm system or of the building,
structure, facility or site in which an alarm system is operational.
B.
"False alarm" includes:
(1) Negligently or accidentally activated signals.
Signals that are the result of faulty, malfunctioning or improperly
installed or maintained equipment.
(2)
Signals that are purposely activated to summon the Fire
Department in nonemergency situations.
(3)
A.
"False alarm" does not include:
Signals activated by unusually severe weather conditions or causes
beyond the control of the alarm user or alarm system contractor;
or
(1)
B.
§ 21-5 FINANCE, DEPARTMENT OF § 21-5
19:73
FIRE DEPARTMENT — The Westminster Fire Engine and Hose Company
No. 1.
§ 21-6. Intentional activation of system.13
Any person who intentionally activates an alarm signal for a nonemergency
situation is guilty of a municipal infraction. The penalty for violation shall
be a fine of $400 for each offense.
§ 21-7. Negligent or accidental activation of system.
§ 21-8. Defective systems.
Signals activated during the initial sixty-day period following new
installation.
(2)
An alarm system that is activated a second time within a twelve-hour
period when the premises are unoccupied shall be deemed a "false
alarm" if:
Access to the building is provided to the alarm system contractor;
and
(1)
An alarm system contractor or an employee of an alarm system
contractor or an employee of the owner or lessee responds.
(2)
C.
Failure to comply with Subsection C of this section shall result in each
subsequent alarm being counted as a false alarm.
D.
Except for alarm systems activated by acts of God, weather conditions
or causes beyond the control of the alarm user, an alarm system that
is negligently or accidentally activated as the result of faulty,
malfunctioning or improperly installed or maintained equipment shall
be subject to the provisions of Subsections B and C of this section.
A.
The City's Code Enforcement Officer may issue a municipal infraction
to an alarm user if the number of false alarms to which the Fire
Department actually responds exceeds:
(1) Three responses within a thirty-day period; or
(2) Five or more responses within a twelve-month period.
B.
The penalty for violation of this section shall be a fine of $100 for each
initial false alarm and $200 for each additional false alarm.
C.
Presumption. In this section an alarm system is deemed a defective
alarm system if:
(1) More than three false alarms occur within a thirty-day period; or
(2) Five or more false alarms occur within a twelve-month period.
A.
13.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 106, Peace and Good Order, § 106-20, False alarms.
§ 21-5 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 21-8
19:74
§ 21-9. Notice of service.
Notice of condition. The Fire Department that answers false alarms
shall provide notice to the alarm user of the defective condition.
B.
Actions by alarm user. Upon notice from the Fire Department, an alarm
user who has a defective alarm system shall:
Have the system inspected within 30 days by an alarm system
contractor or alarm user, if qualified; and
(1)
Within 15 days after the inspection file a written report with the
Fire Department, with a copy to the City's Code Enforcement
Officer.
(2)
C.
Report. The report shall contain:
The results of the alarm system contractor's or alarm user's
inspection;
(1)
(2) The probable cause of the false alarms; and
(3) Actions taken or recommendations for eliminating the false alarms.
D.
Any alarm user who continues to use a defective alarm system after
being notified that the system is defective is guilty of a municipal
infraction. The penalty for violation shall be a fine of $400. Each day a
violation continues is a separate event.
E.
An alarm system contractor shall notify the Fire Department by
telephone before servicing an alarm system.
A.
Violation of this section is declared to be a municipal infraction. The
penalty for violation shall be a fine of $100 for each offense.
B.
§ 21-8 FINANCE, DEPARTMENT OF § 21-9
19:75
Chapter 24
INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals and fowl — See Ch. 48.
Buildings — See Ch. 56.
Cable television — See Ch. 61.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 83.
§ 24-1. Applicability of county regulations.
§ 24-2. Interpretation.
Except as provided in Subsections A and B of this section, the Mayor
and Common Council hereby exempts the City of Westminster, a
municipal corporation, from all legislation and regulations heretofore
or hereafter enacted by Carroll County, Maryland, relating to any
subject or matter upon which the Mayor and Common Council of the
City of Westminster has heretofore or is hereafter granted legislative
authority.
A.
The following ordinances of Carroll County as they now exist or as
may hereafter be amended are exceptions to the general exemption set
forth in Subsection A above and shall be applicable within the City of
Westminster until such time as the Mayor and Common Council shall
duly exempt the City from their application: [Amended 2-22-1993
by Ord. No. 572; 2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 585; 2-13-1995 by Ord.
No. 593; 6-26-2000 by Ord. No. 657; 3-26-2001 by Ord. No. 662;
4-26-2006 by Ord. No. 749]
(1) Animal Control, Chapter 81.
(2) Building Code, Chapter 97.
Cable Television, Ordinance No. 113, Ordinance No. 126 and
Ordinance No. 00-4.
(3)
(4) Grading and Sediment Control, Chapter 121.
(5) Forest Conservation, Chapter 115.
B.
Aside from the specific exceptions to the general exemption from the
application and effect of Carroll County legislation and regulations set
forth in Subsections A and B, Carroll County laws and regulations shall
only apply within the City of Westminster as provided by Maryland law
pursuant to Article 23A, § 2B(b), of the Annotated Code of Maryland
(1987 Replacement Volume), or as hereinafter amended.
C.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall limit or otherwise affect the
City's authority, whether exercised previously or in the future, to
A.
§ 21-9 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 24-2
24:76
Chapter 29
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
City Clerk and City Treasurer — See § 9 of the
City Charter.
Street Commissioner — See § 10 of the City
Charter.
Administration of government — See Ch. 4.
Planning and Zoning Commission — See Ch.
7, Art. II.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 16.
request the enforcement of City legislation in whole or in part by
Carroll County and to enter into agreements providing for the same.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall repeal or impair any agreement
or authorization previously executed between the City and the county,
until and unless done so by consent of the City and county.
B.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall repeal any City ordinance which
may have specifically adopted or incorporated by reference any county
legislation, unless and until so repealed by ordinance of the Mayor and
Common Council of the City of Westminster.
C.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall limit or otherwise affect the
City's authority to adopt by reference any law or regulation of Carroll
County as its own law or regulation.
D.
§ 24-2 INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS § 24-2
24:77

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted as Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 1, of the 1972 Code, as amended
through 1990]
§ 29-1. Residency of appointed officers.
Except as may be provided by state law, the City Charter, this Code or other
ordinance, appointive officers of the City need not be residents of this City
or state at the time of their appointment.
§ 29-2. Holding multiple offices. [Amended 5-31-1991 by Ord. No.
547; 4-26-2006 by Ord. No. 750]
Except as may be provided otherwise by state law, the City Charter, this
Code or other ordinance, any nonelective officer of the City may be
appointed or designated to fill two or more appointive offices concurrently
as provided in § 29-3.
§ 29-3. Vacancies in appointive offices. [Amended 5-31-1991 by Ord.
No. 547; 4-26-2006 by Ord. No. 750]
When a vacancy occurs in any appointive City office, whether by reason of
death, disability, resignation, failure to qualify or to assume the duties of
office or any cause other than expiration of the term of office, the Mayor
shall appoint a qualified person to fill such vacancy for the unexpired term,
subject to the approval of a majority of the Common Council (3/5 vote) or
by 4/5 vote of the Common Council without the Mayor’s approval, unless
other provision is made for the filling of such vacancy by state law, the City
Charter, this Code or another ordinance.
§ 29-4. Removal or suspension of certain City officials. [Amended
5-31-1991 by Ord. No. 547; 4-26-2006 by Ord. No. 750; 5-22-2006 by
Ord. No. 755; 12-10-2012 by Ord. No. 837]
The City Administrator, the City Attorney, and any other City department
head, including the City Clerk, serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and
Common Council and can be removed, reassigned, or temporarily
suspended from his or her position or not reappointed to his or her position
by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the Common Council
(3/5 vote) or by 4/5 vote of the Common Council without the Mayor’s
approval. Except with respect to the City Administrator, the City Clerk,
and the City Attorney, which offices may be eliminated by ordinance as
the Mayor and Common Council see fit, the Mayor and Common Council
may reorganize City government and create or eliminate departments,
including department head positions, as they deem suitable to the City’s
best interests, with the approval of a majority of the Common Council (3/5
vote) or by 4/5 vote of the Common Council without the Mayor’s approval. In
the event that a department is eliminated, any reference in the City Code to
such department shall be deemed to be a reference to the office of the City
§ 29-1 INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS § 29-4
24:79
Administrator, and any reference to the head of such department shall be
deemed to be a reference to the City Administrator or his or her designee.
§ 29-5. Acting appointed officers. [Amended 5-31-1991 by Ord. No.
547; 4-26-2006 by Ord. No. 750]
When any appointive City officer is temporarily absent from the City, ill,
disabled, under suspension or otherwise unable to discharge the duties of
the office under conditions which do not cause a vacancy to occur, the City
Administrator, after consultation with the appropriate department head, if
available, may appoint a suitable person to discharge the duties of such
officer on a temporary basis.
§ 29-6. Deputies and assistants.
Duly appointed or designated deputies and assistants to nonelective City
officers shall have such authority and perform such duties as may be
prescribed for them by their principals in addition to such authority and
duties as may be prescribed for them by state law, the City Charter, this
Code or other ordinance, except in any case in which, by law or the City
Charter, such delegation of authority or performance of duty is not
authorized.
§ 29-4 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 29-6
24:80
ARTICLE II
City Administrator14
[Adopted 4-26-2006 by Ord. No. 750]
§ 29-7. Appointment; compensation; powers and duties; temporary
absence or disability.
§ 29-8. (Reserved)
§ 29-9. (Reserved)
§ 29-10. (Reserved)
There shall be a City Administrator who shall be the chief
administrative officer of the City. The City Administrator shall be the
direct subordinate of the Mayor and the immediate supervisor of each
department director. The Mayor and Common Council shall select a
City Administrator solely on the basis of executive and administrative
qualifications in the field of government and public administration,
with special reference to actual experience in or knowledge of the
operations of municipal government. The City Administrator shall be
appointed as provided in § 29-3.
A.
The City Administrator shall devote full time to the duties of the office
and shall be compensated as provided in § 4-4.
B.
The City Administrator shall have the following powers and duties:
To exercise supervisory authority over the department directors
and the City Clerk;
(1)
(2) To direct the operations of the City government;
To supervise the preparation of the City budget for the Mayor to
present to the Common Council;
(3)
To assist The Mayor and Common Council in the development of
City policy and the implementation of plans to address demands for
municipal services, enhance the quality of life and strengthen the
economic vitality of the City;
(4)
To perform such other duties not inconsistent with this chapter as
may be delegated by The Mayor and Common Council.
(5)
C.
During any temporary absence or disability, after consultation with the
City Administrator, the Mayor may designate, by letter filed with the
City Clerk, a qualified administrative officer of the City to perform the
duties of the office until the return or cessation of disability of the City
Administrator.
D.
14.Editor's Note: Former Art. II, City Manager, adopted as Ch. 2, § 2-21A, of the 1972 Code,
as amended through 1990, was repealed 5-31-1991 by Ord. No. 547.
§ 29-7 INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS § 29-10
24:81

ARTICLE III
City Clerk and City Treasurer
[Adopted as Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 3, of the 1972 Code; amended in its
entirety 4-26-2006 by Ord. No. 750]
§ 29-11. Powers and duties generally.
The City Clerk and the City Treasurer, under the general supervision of the
City Administrator shall have the powers and perform the duties prescribed
by the City Charter, this Code and other ordinances for the City Clerk and
the City Treasurer and as prescribed by state law for city clerks and city
treasurers generally.
§ 29-12. Appointments; terms; qualifications.
§ 29-13. Specific powers and duties of City Clerk.
The City Clerk shall issue all City licenses and permits not required to
be issued by some other officer under any provision of state law, the City
Charter, this Code or other ordinance. The City Clerk shall have custody
of all oaths of office and official bonds of City officers, employees and
agents and all other casualty bonds, insurance policies and other written
instruments, books and records for which the custody is not vested in some
other City officer.
§ 29-14. Assistant City Clerk.
The City Clerk and the City Treasurer shall each be appointed as
provided in § 29-3 for indefinite terms.
A.
Qualifications.
The City Clerk shall be appointed after consideration of
administrative ability and knowledge of municipal procedures,
regulations, requirements and practices.
(1)
The City Treasurer shall be appointed after consideration of
accounting qualifications and knowledge of municipal and utility
accounting procedures.
(2)
B.
The Assistant City Clerk shall be appointed as provided in § 29-3 for
an indefinite term of office, and the appointment shall be solely on the
basis of qualifications to perform the duties of the office of Assistant
City Clerk as provided in this Code or other ordinances. The Assistant
City Clerk shall act for the City Clerk when that officer is absent or
disabled, including attendance at meetings of the Common Council and
taking the minutes thereof.
A.
The Assistant City Clerk shall perform such other duties as may be
required by this Code or other ordinance or by the City Clerk.
B.
§ 29-11 INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS § 29-15
24:83
§ 29-15. Specific powers and duties of City Treasurer.
The City Treasurer shall be responsible for the billing and collection of all
taxes, utility and other services furnished by the City and the collection
of obligations due to the City. The City Treasurer shall be responsible for
maintaining up-to-date accounts and accounting procedures for the City.
The City Treasurer shall supervise the issuance of and shall sign all checks
or drafts issued by the City and shall sign such other documents as may
require the signature of the City Treasurer and shall have such other
powers and duties as may be prescribed by the Mayor and Common Council
or required in the position of Director of Finance.
§ 29-16. Assistant City Treasurer.
The Assistant City Treasurer shall be appointed as provided in § 29-3, for
an indefinite term of office, and the appointment shall be solely on the basis
of [his] qualifications to perform the duties of the office of Assistant City
Treasurer as provided in this Code or other ordinances. The Assistant City
Treasurer shall perform such duties as may required [of him] by this Code
or other ordinance or by the City Treasurer.”
§ 29-15 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 29-16
24:84
ARTICLE IV
City Attorney
[Adopted as Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 4, of the 1972 Code; amended in its
entirety 4-26-2006 by Ord. No. 750]
§ 29-17. Appointment; qualifications; compensation.
§ 29-18. Powers and duties.
It shall be the duty of the counsellor or attorney appointed by virtue of this
article to perform such legal services as may from time to time be assigned
to or requested of said attorney.
§ 29-19. Attendance at meetings of legislative body.
The counsellor or attorney appointed pursuant to this article shall attend
regular and special meetings of the Mayor and Common Council when the
City Attorney’s presence is requested by the Mayor or the Common Council.
There shall be appointed as provided in § 29-3 from the members of the
Maryland State Bar Association a counselor or attorney for the City to
act as its Attorney, with whom the Mayor and Common Council and the
officers and department heads may consult as occasion may require.
A.
Such counsellor or attorney shall be compensated in such manner as
the Mayor and Common Council shall from time to time determine.
B.
§ 29-17 INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS § 29-19
24:85

ARTICLE V
Planning Director
[Adopted as Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 5, of the 1972 Code; amended in its
entirety 12-6-2007 by Ord. No. 773]
§ 29-20. Creation of office.
The office of Planning Director is hereby created.
§ 29-21. Appointment; term; qualifications.
The Planning Director shall be appointed as provided in § 29-3 for an
indefinite term. The Planning Director shall be chosen solely on the basis
of his/her administrative and planning qualifications and his/her knowledge
of City, county, state and federal administrative laws, regulations,
requirements and practices, in respect to the duties of his/her office.
§ 29-22. Powers and duties.
The duties of the Planning Director shall be those included in the job
description as approved by the Mayor and Common Council and as
amended from time to time.
§ 29-23. Reports.
The Planning Director will report to the City Administrator all activities
under his/her supervision or administration and, in addition, shall make
periodic progress reports to the legislative body.
§ 29-24. Preparation of budget.
The Planning Director shall prepare the budget for the activities under his/
her supervision and submit it to the City Administrator for consolidation
with budget requests of other department heads.
§ 29-25. Attendance at meetings of legislative body.
The Planning Director shall attend all meetings of the legislative body
unless excused therefrom.15
15.Editor's Note: Former Article VI, Public Works Director, adopted as Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 6.1,
of the 1972 Code, as amended, which immediately followed this section, was repealed
4-13-1992 by Ord. No. 555. See now Art. VII, Public Works Director.
§ 29-20 INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS § 29-25
24:87

ARTICLE VI
Recreation and Parks Director
[Adopted 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 741]
§ 29-26. Creation of office.
The office of Recreation and Parks Director is hereby created.
§ 29-27. Appointment; term; qualifications. [Amended 4-26-2006 by
Ord. No. 750]
The Recreation and Parks Director shall be appointed as provided in § 29-3
for an indefinite term. The Recreation and Parks Director shall be chosen
solely on the basis of his/her administrative and recreation and parks
qualifications and his/her knowledge of City, county, state and federal
administrative laws, regulations, requirements and practices, in respect to
the duties of his/her office.
§ 29-28. Powers and duties. [Amended 6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 766]
The duties of the Recreation and Parks Director shall be those included in
the job description as approved by the Mayor and Common Council and as
amended from time to time. The Director shall also make recommendations
to the Mayor and Common Council of Westminster regarding park rules and
regulations. The Mayor and Common Council of Westminster is authorized
to adopt such park rules and regulations by resolution. Any violation thereof
shall constitute a municipal infraction. The penalty for violation shall be a
fine of $200 for each offense, which may be doubled in accordance with
applicable law.
§ 29-29. Reports.
The Recreation and Parks Director will report to the Mayor all activities
under his/her supervision or administration and, in addition, shall make
periodic progress reports to the legislative body.
§ 29-30. Preparation of budget. [Amended 4-26-2006 by Ord. No.
750]
The Recreation and Parks Director shall prepare the budget for the
activities under his/her supervision and submit it to the City Administrator
for consolidation with budget requests of other department heads.
§ 29-31. Attendance at meetings of legislative body.
The Recreation and Parks Director shall attend all meetings of the
legislative body unless excused therefrom.
§ 29-26 INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS § 29-31
24:89

ARTICLE VII
Public Works Director
[Adopted 12-6-2007 by Ord. No. 773]
§ 29-32. Creation of office.
The office of Public Works is hereby created.
§ 29-33. Appointment term; qualifications.
The Public Works Director shall be appointed as provided in § 29-3 for
an indefinite term. The Public Works Director shall be chosen solely on
the basis of his/her administrative and planning qualifications and his/
her knowledge of City, county, state and federal administrative laws,
regulations, requirements and practices, in respect to the duties of his/her
office.
§ 29-34. Powers and duties.
The duties of the Public Works Director shall be those included in the
job description as approved by the Mayor and Common Council and as
amended from time to time.
§ 29-35. Reports.
The duties of the Public Works Director shall be those included in the
job description as approved by the Mayor and Common Council and as
amended from time to time.
§ 29-36. Preparation of budget.
The Public Works Director shall prepare the budget for the activities under
his/her supervision and submit it to the City Administrator for consolidation
with budget requests of other department heads.
§ 29-37. Attendance at meetings of legislative body.
The Public Works Director shall attend all meetings of the legislative body
unless excused therefrom.
§ 29-32 INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS § 29-37
24:91
Chapter 33
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Charter provisions — See § 8 of the City
Charter.
Fire Department — See Ch. 21.
§ 33-1. Department established.
The Police Department of this City is hereby created.
§ 33-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BAILIFF — Includes the Chief of Police, commissioned officers,
noncommissioned officers, and all sworn police officers as certified by the
Maryland Police Training Commission who, by authority of the governing
body, are designated as "bailiffs."
§ 33-3. Powers and duties.
The Police Department shall have general charge and control of the peace
and good order of the City. The bailiffs of the Department shall enforce
the laws of the state, this Code and other ordinances and perform all such
duties appertaining to the office of bailiff as may now or hereinafter be
prescribed or may be prescribed by departmental regulations and orders.
§ 33-4. Chief of Police. [Amended 4-26-2006 by Ord. No. 750]
The bailiff in charge of the Police Department shall be the Chief of
Police, who shall be appointed as provided in § 29-3 for an indefinite
term. The Chief of Police shall be chosen on the basis of his or her
professional standing as a police officer and ability as a police
administrator.
A.
The Mayor and Common Council may call upon the services of the state
police or other such agencies for advice and for testing of candidates
for the position of the Chief of Police. At the time of appointment the
Chief need not be a resident of the City or the state, except as may be
provided otherwise by state law, the City Charter, this Code or other
guidance.
B.
The Chief of Police may be removed or temporarily suspended from his
or her position or not reappointed to his or her position as provided in
§ 29-4 of the City Code.
C.
§ 29-37 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 33-4
33:92
§ 33-5. Rules and regulations; orders.
§ 33-6. Organization.
The Police Department may be organized into shifts, squads, bureaus,
divisions and offices, which organization shall be determined by the Chief
of Police. The total salaries for such positions shall be consistent with the
budget approved by resolution of the legislative body.
§ 33-7. Other personnel.
The Police Department may employ civilian staff who are not bailiffs as
approved in the annual operating budget. These employees shall perform
such duties as the Chief of Police may from time to time assign or prescribe,
including, but not limited to, the issuance of citations for violations of
Chapter 155, Vehicles and Traffic, of the Westminster City Code.
§ 33-8. Parking enforcement.
The Chief of Police may authorize certified police officers of law
enforcement agencies sharing concurrent jurisdiction with the Westminster
Police Department to enforce specific provisions of Chapter 155, entitled
The Chief of Police shall be the commanding officer of the Police
Department, and the Chief shall have such powers and perform such
duties as are prescribed for the Chief by this Code and other ordinances
and as may at any time be prescribed for the Chief by the legislative
body and department rules and regulations. Among other duties, the
Chief of Police shall:
Make periodic reports on matters affecting or reflecting upon the
Police Department to the legislative body.
(1)
Prepare a budget request for the Police Department and submit it
to the City Administrator for review and correlation with budget
requests of other departments.
(2)
Attend meetings of the legislative body when requested to do so by
it.
(3)
D.
The Chief of Police shall establish rules and regulations for the
administration and discipline of the members of the Police Department,
not inconsistent with law. The Chief of Police shall supplement, revise,
modify or repeal such rules and regulations as circumstances require
and in conformance with approved funding.
A.
The Chief of Police is hereby empowered to issue operational orders
and special orders including, but not limited to, the disposition of
unclaimed, found or lawfully seized personal property, not inconsistent
with law, this Code or other ordinances or approved departmental rules
and regulations, which shall have the same force and effect as rules and
regulations of the governing body.
B.
§ 33-4 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 33-8
33:93
"Vehicles and Traffic," of the Westminster City Code, as well as to issue
citations for violations of that chapter. The Chief of Police may also
authorize properly trained safety/security representatives of private and
public entities within the City to enforce specific provisions of Chapter
155, Vehicles and Traffic, of the Westminster City Code, as well as to issue
citations for violations of that chapter.
§ 33-9. Compensation.
The Chief of Police, bailiffs and employees of the Police Department shall
receive the compensation provided in the approved City budget for their
respective offices, grades or positions.
§ 33-10. Westminster Auxiliary Police.
Establishment. The Chief of Police is hereby empowered to establish
and maintain an auxiliary police force to be known as the "Westminster
Auxiliary Police" to assist the Westminster Police Department in the
matters set forth herein.
A.
Duties of Westminster Auxiliary Police. The Westminster Auxiliary
Police shall perform the following duties under the direction of the
Westminster Police Department:
Render assistance as requested in major disasters and
emergencies, as determined by the Chief of Police.
(1)
Render assistance as requested with regard to directing and
controlling vehicular and pedestrian traffic and parking at such
functions within the jurisdiction of the Westminster Police
Department.
(2)
(3) Such other duties as may be directed by the Chief of Police.
B.
Powers of Westminster Auxiliary Police. Westminster Auxiliary Police
shall have the powers necessary to carry out the functions as directed
by the Westminster Police Department as set forth herein. The
Westminster Auxiliary Police shall not be deemed "bailiffs" as defined
by the City Code and shall not have general arrest and law enforcement
powers, shall not carry or use firearms while on duty and shall not have
general investigative responsibility.
C.
The Chief of Police shall be empowered to promulgate such rules,
regulations and orders as the Chief may deem necessary to implement
this section.
D.
§ 33-8 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 33-10
33:94
Chapter 36
PROCUREMENT AND CONTRACTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 16.
Department of Finance — See Ch. 19.
Fiscal matters — See Ch. 20.
§ 36-1. Purpose.
The purposes of this chapter are to provide for the fair and equitable
treatment of all persons or firms involved in procurement by the City;
to assure that supplies, materials, equipment, construction of public
improvements or contractual services are procured efficiently, effectively
and at the most favorable prices available to the City; to promote
competition in contracting; and to provide safeguards for maintaining a
procurement system of quality and integrity.
§ 36-2. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all contracts for the
procurement of supplies, materials, equipment, construction of public
improvements or contractual services entered into by the City after the
effective date of this chapter.
§ 36-3. Administration. [Amended 7-28-2003 by Ord. No. 708]
The City Treasurer shall administer the system of procurement and
contracts established pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The City
Treasurer shall discharge those duties and responsibilities in cooperation
with the City's various department heads. The City Treasurer is authorized
to adopt such rules and regulations as are necessary to carry out the
provisions of this chapter, subject to the approval of the Mayor and Common
Council.
§ 36-4. Specific regulations. [Amended 7-28-2003 by Ord. No. 708;
4-26-2006 by Ord. No. 750; 5-23-2011 by Ord. No. 826]
Under $25,000. Expenditures, including petty cash, for supplies,
materials, equipment, construction of public improvements or
contractual services involving less than $25,000 shall be made by either
the Mayor, City Clerk, City Treasurer or the City's various department
heads, provided that the procurement is for a budgeted item.
[Amended 10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 871]
A.
$25,000 and above. Except as otherwise provided in this section,
expenditures for supplies, materials, equipment, construction of public
improvements or contractual services involving $25,000 or more shall
B.
§ 33-10 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 36-4
33:95
§ 36-5. Written contracts. [Amended 7-28-2003 by Ord. No. 708;
4-26-2006 by Ord. No. 750; 5-23-2011 by Ord. No. 826; 7-8-2013 by
Ord. No. 844]
be made by written contract, as provided in § 36-5. [Amended
10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 871]
Sole-source procurement. A contract involving $25,000 or more may
be awarded without competition when the City Treasurer determines,
after a good-faith review of available sources and the receipt of a
written recommendation of the department head, that there is only one
source for the required supplies, materials, equipment, construction
of public improvements or contractual services. The department head
shall conduct negotiations, as appropriate, as to price, delivery and
terms. Sole-source procurement shall be approved by the Mayor and
Common Council, as provided in § 36-5. [Amended 10-24-2016 by
Ord. No. 871]
C.
Professional services. [Amended 10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 871]
Architectural, engineering, land surveying and planning services
in amounts in excess of $25,000 shall be procured as provided
pursuant to resolution of the Mayor and Common Council. When
reasonably possible, at least three proposals shall be submitted
to the Mayor and Common Council for its consideration. Services
below that amount shall be subject to the provisions of Subsection
A.
(1)
All contracts for other professional services, such as accounting,
auditing, legal and insurance, in excess of $25,000 shall not be
subject to the competitive bids provided in this chapter but shall
be approved on an individual basis by the Mayor and Common
Council. Services below that amount shall be subject to the
provisions of Subsection A.
(2)
D.
Emergency procurements. Upon the request of a department head, the
Mayor, the City Administrator, or the City Treasurer may authorize
emergency procurements of all required supplies, materials,
equipment, construction improvements or contractual services where
there exists a threat to public health and safety or welfare. A written
determination for the basis for the emergency and for the selection of
a particular contractor shall be included in the file with respect to the
procurement. The Mayor, the City Administrator or the City Treasurer
shall notify the Common Council promptly, in writing, of any emergency
procurement exceeding $10,000 or any emergency procurement below
that amount if it has not been approved in the budget. In the absence
of the Mayor, the City Administrator or the City Treasurer, the Council
President may exercise the authority contained herein.
E.
All expenditures for supplies, materials, equipment, construction of
public improvements or contractual services involving more than
A.
§ 36-4 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 36-5
33:96
$25,000 shall be made by written contract. [Amended 10-24-2016 by
Ord. No. 871]
The City shall advertise for sealed bids for written contracts which
shall be awarded to the bidder who offers the most responsible and
responsive bid, taking into account the price, quality of goods and work,
time of delivery or completion, responsibility of bidders, and any other
factors reasonably deemed relevant by the City. The specifications for
such sealed bids shall be prepared under the direction of the City's
various department heads and the request for bids advertised in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City, which shall mean a
publication with a print run of at least [insert number] and need not
have paid circulation if no state or federal grant funds are to be used
in connection with the purchase or acquisition, and/or on eMaryland
Marketplace, where appropriate and required or permitted by law. All
sealed bids shall be directed to the City Treasurer. A formal bid-opening
process will be conducted by the Mayor or the City Administrator, the
City Treasurer and the responsible department head or the department
head's designee. Upon the opening of bids, the responsible department
head shall promptly review the bids and make a written
recommendation. The written recommendation shall include a
summary of the bids received and a description of the basis for the
department head's recommendation of award, and the recommendation
shall then be submitted to the City Clerk for placement on the agenda
of the Mayor and Common Council. The Mayor and Common Council
may accept and may reject any and all bids, waive technical defects and
accept a bid which in its judgment is in the best interest of the City. It
may also require the readvertisement of bids.
B.
Where the acquisition of sealed bids is impractical, unreasonable or
not advantageous to the City, in a manner determined by the City
Administrator to be unusual or infrequently occurring, the department
head, with the approval of the City Administrator, shall institute an
alternate procurement method by utilizing the open market. In that
regard, the department head must submit to the City Administrator,
in writing, at least three quotations or offers and a recommendation.
Upon receipt of the same, the City Clerk shall place a description
of the basis for the department head's recommendation of award on
the agenda of the Mayor and Common Council. Thereafter, the Mayor
and Common Council may accept or reject such quotations or offers
that, in its judgment, are in the best interest of the City. [Amended
10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 871]
C.
In the event that a federal, state, county, municipal corporation or
other political subdivision of this state or another state, or an agency
or instrumentality of such governmental entity, a quasi-governmental
entity, bi-state or bi-county agency, or any affiliation, alliance,
consortium or group composed solely of governmental entities that is
established for purposes of promoting intergovernmental cooperative
purchasing has conducted a competitive bidding process for an item
D.
§ 36-5 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 36-5
33:97
§ 36-6. Additional provisions.
needed by the City, and if the City Administrator determines that the
bid price obtained by such entity is competitive, the City Treasurer may,
without soliciting bids, purchase the item in question at the bid price
from the successful bidder, provided that such governmental entity or
association has adopted procurement regulations that are comparable
to those enacted by the City and has awarded a contract authorizing
local governments to purchase the bid item at the bid price. The City
Clerk shall place the contract for said purchase on the agenda of the
Mayor and Common Council for approval. No such single purchase
shall exceed $100,000 without a waiver by the Common Council of the
bidding process for good cause shown.
All written contracts shall be signed by the Mayor or, in the Mayor's
absence or unavailability, by the City Administrator and attested by
the City Clerk and may be protected by such bonds, penalties and
conditions as the Mayor and Common Council may require.
E.
Except as provided for in § 36-4E, no elected official, department head,
City Clerk or the City Treasurer is authorized to enter into any contract
for nonbudgeted items for the City without the approval of the Mayor
and Common Council, and the City shall not be liable on any such
contract. [Amended 7-28-2003 by Ord. No. 708]
A.
No elected official shall direct that the City Treasurer or a department
head procure goods or services from any designated person or entity.
[Amended 7-28-2003 by Ord. No. 708]
B.
All provisions of Chapter 16, entitled "Ethics, Code of," shall apply to
all procurement and contracting conducted pursuant to this chapter.
Additionally, except for emergencies, any expenditure for supplies,
materials, equipment, construction of public improvements or
contractual services shall be let or awarded only on the basis of
competitive bidding where any official or employee of the City or
members of their immediate family is financially interested. For
purposes of this section, "immediate family" means spouse and
dependent children. A person who owns less than 5% in any business
or business entity shall not be considered financially interested.16
C.
16.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, regarding cooperative procurement, which subsection
immediately followed, was repealed 7-8-2013 by Ord. No. 844.
§ 36-5 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 36-6
33:98
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 48
ANIMALS AND FOWL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Intergovernmental relations — See Ch. 24. Fishing — See Ch. 80.
§ 36-6 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 36-6
48:99

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 48-1. Keeping of poultry and fowl.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor within the City any
poultry or fowl except upon property zoned for agricultural or poultrydressing
uses and upon which the keeping or harboring of poultry and fowl
is not prohibited. No coop, pen or other enclosure shall be within 10 feet of
any street or within 50 feet of any dwelling or other structure frequented by
human beings.
§ 48-2. Maintenance of stables and pens.
It shall be the duty of each person who keeps or harbors any animal or
fowl within the City to maintain the stable, pen or other enclosure wherein
such animal or fowl is kept or harbored in a clean and sanitary condition
at all times and in such manner as to prevent offensive odors, liquids or
substances to emanate therefrom and so as not to constitute a nuisance.
§ 48-3. Running at large.
§ 48-4. Impoundment.
Any animal or fowl which constitutes a public nuisance as defined in § 48-3A
or which is found running at large in violation of § 48-3B shall be subject
to immediate impoundment by any police officer of the City or by any other
public officer or employee having proper authority to take up and impound
dogs or other animals and fowl, provided that if any animal which is subject
to impoundment pursuant to this section is vicious or rabid and cannot
safely be taken into custody by the impounding officer, the impounding
officer may, if he considers such action to be necessary, forthwith destroy
such vicious or rabid animal.
§ 48-5. Notice of impoundment.
The impounding officer, upon taking into custody any fowl or animal other
than a dog pursuant to § 48-4, shall take such animal or fowl to a pound or
animal shelter designated for such purpose by the legislative body (or by
the Mayor or Chief of Police, if the legislative body has not acted on the
Animals and fowl running at large within the City to the inconvenience
or annoyance of the public or so as to constitute a danger to the health
or safety of persons or property are hereby declared to constitute a
public nuisance subject to abatement.
A.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any poultry, fowl or animal
owned, kept or harbored by him to run at large within the City, provided
that dogs which are subject to rule, regulation or resolution of the
County Commissioners of Carroll County shall be excluded from this
subsection.
B.
§ 48-1 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 48-5
48:101
premises), and he shall then notify the Chief of Police of all pertinent facts.
The Chief of Police shall then notify the owner or keeper of the impounded
animal or fowl, if such person's identity is known or can be ascertained
without unreasonable effort and he shall then cause to be prepared a notice
which described the impounded animal or fowl and states the reason for
impoundment, the time and place of taking up the animal or fowl and the
place of impoundment and further states that such animal or fowl will be
sold at auction by a police officer at a designated place on a designated day
and hour, which shall be not less than five nor more than eight days from
the date of the notice, unless such animal or fowl is redeemed by its owner
or keeper prior to the designated date and hour of sale. Copies of this notice
shall be posted promptly on the City Hall bulletin board and at four other
public places within the City.
§ 48-6. Redemption.
Any animal or fowl impounded pursuant to this chapter may be redeemed
by its owner or keeper at any time prior to its sale or other final disposition
upon payment to the Chief of Police of the actual cost of its board, shelter
and care during the period of its impoundment and the actual cost, if any,
of taking it up and conveying it to the place of impoundment, plus an
impoundment fee of $0.50 for a fowl or $1 for an animal other than a horse
or other beast of burden or $2 for a horse or other beast of burden, provided
that the payment of such costs and impoundment fee shall not be construed
as a bar to prosecution for any violation of state law, this Code or other
ordinance.
§ 48-7. Sale or other disposition.
Any impounded animal or fowl not redeemed by its owner or keeper
prior to the date and hour of sale as specified in the notice mentioned
in § 48-5 shall be sold by a police officer to the highest bidder at auction
sale, as provided in such notice and the officer conducting the sale
shall give to the purchaser a quit claim bill of sale therefor, citing
this section as authority so to do. The officer conducting the sale shall
promptly deliver the proceeds of the sale to the City Treasurer, who
shall apply such sum to the payment of all costs incurred by the City
for taking up and impounding such animal or fowl and for its board,
shelter and care, the costs of the sale and all other costs incurred by
the City by reason of such impoundment, and the remainder shall be
paid over to the owner or keeper of such animal or fowl, if such person's
identity is known, and if not known, such remainder shall credited to
the general fund of the City, provided that if such remainder is in excess
of $20, the City Treasurer shall post a notice on the City Hall bulletin
board and at four other public places within the City which shall give
notice of the animal or fowl having been sold and that of the proceeds
of such sale there remains in the City Treasury, after payment of all
costs, the sum of ______________ dollars, which is subject to payment to
any person making claim therefor within 30 days of such notice and
upon proof of claimant's lawful title to such animal or fowl immediately
A.
§ 48-5 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 48-7
48:102
§ 48-8. Exceptions.
§ 48-9. Leaving horses or other animals.
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave a horse or other beast of
burden upon any street or other unenclosed place unless such animal is
attended by and under the control of some responsible person or unless
such animal is securely tethered in such manner as to prevent such animal
from endangering the safety of persons or property.
§ 48-10. Dangerous riding or driving.
It shall be unlawful to ride or drive any animal upon the streets or public
places in the City in such manner or at such speed as to endanger the safety
of any person or property.
prior to its having been sold by a City police officer at auction, and
if any claimant proves such lawful title to the satisfaction of the City
Treasurer within such thirty-day period, the City Treasurer shall pay
over to him such remainder, and otherwise such remainder shall be
credited to the general fund of the City upon the expiration of such
thirty-day period.
If at any auction of an impounded animal or fowl held pursuant to
this chapter there is no responsible bidder, the officer conducting the
auction shall terminate the proceeding and return the animal or fowl
to the place of impoundment In any such case, the Chief of Police may
authorize the Poundmaster to hold such animal or fowl for a reasonable
period and release it to any responsible person who may desire to have
it; and animals and fowl not so disposed of shall be destroyed in a
humane manner.
B.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as requiring the sale at
auction of any impounded animal or fowl estimated by the Chief of
Police and the Poundmaster to have a current market value less than
$10, and any such animal or fowl shall be held impounded for 10 days.
During the first five days of impoundment, such animal or fowl shall be
subject to redemption only by its owner or keeper as provided in § 48-6,
and during the second five days, it shall be subject to redemption by its
owner or keeper or may be turned over to any responsible person who
shall pay the actual costs as provided in § 48-6, or the Chief of Police
may waive the payment of such costs in any case deemed by him to be
worthy; and any such animal or fowl not disposed of as aforesaid within
10 days shall be destroyed in a humane manner.
A.
In case of the impoundment of an animal or fowl having a current
market value of less than $10 as provided in Subsection A of this
section, the notice mentioned in § 48-5 shall be made to conform to the
provisions of Subsection A of this section.
B.
§ 48-7 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 48-11
48:103
§ 48-11. Cockfights.
It shall be unlawful for any person to match cocks or other fowl in any fight
against each other or to attend or wager upon the outcome of any such
fight.
§ 48-12. Disposal of carcasses.
Animal and fowl carcasses found upon private property shall be disposed
of by the occupant of such property or by the owner if such property has
no occupant within eight hours and in a lawful and sanitary manner which
does not endanger the health of any person, animal or fowl. Any carcass
not so disposed of within eight hours shall be disposed of by the City at
the expense of the occupant or owner of the premises upon which such
carcass is found, pursuant to regulations or instructions promulgated or
given by the Police Department, and carcasses found upon the streets or
public places within the City shall be disposed of promptly by the City
pursuant to such regulations or instructions.
§ 48-11 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 48-12
48:104
ARTICLE II
County Regulations
§ 48-13. Adoption of standards by reference.
Ordinance No. 26 of the County Commissioners of Carroll County,
entitled "Animal Control Ordinance,"17 and Ordinance No. 26A of the
County Commissioners of Carroll County amending said ordinance be
and the same are hereby fully adopted to be effective in the City of
Westminster, except as hereinafter set forth:
All references to the "County Commissioners of Carroll County"
in Section 10, entitled "Public Nuisance Animals and Vicious
Animals," of said Ordinance No. 26 are deleted and replaced with
the "Mayor and Common Council of Westminster."
(1)
A.
The County Commissioners of Carroll County, through the
appropriately designed agencies, be and the same is hereby granted
authority and jurisdiction to license and control animals within the City
of Westminster in the same manner and to the same extent as though
such activity were being carried on in Carroll County outside of the
corporate limits of the City of Westminster.
B.
17.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 24, Intergovernmental Relations, § 24-1B(1).
§ 48-13 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 48-13
48:105
Chapter 56
BUILDINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Intergovernmental relations — See Ch. 24.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 78.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 83.
Plumbing — See Ch. 112.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 119.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 139.
Zoning and subdivision of land — See Ch. 164.
§ 48-13 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 48-13
48:106
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 56-1. Applicability of County Building Code.
Any memorandum of understanding made and entered into by and between
the County Commissioners and the Mayor and Common Council which
relates to the applicability of the County Building Code within this City and
which is in effect immediately prior to the effective date of this City Code
shall continue in full force and effect within the City until such time as it
may be amended or rescinded by resolution of the legislative body or by the
County Commissioners.18
§ 56-2. Office of Building Official established.
The office of Building Official is hereby established. The Building Official
shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of the Common Council,
for no fixed term of office. The Building Official shall administer and enforce
the provisions of any building code which may be applicable within the City
except as may be provided otherwise by any memorandum of understanding
with the county, and he shall have such other powers and duties as may
be prescribed for him in this City Code or by other ordinance or resolution
of the legislative body. The Building Official may be referred to as the
"Building Inspector."
§ 56-3. Fire limits.
The following shall be and are hereby declared to be the fire limits:
Beginning at a point in the center of East Main Street opposite to the center
of Court Street; thence westerly sixty feet to the center line of Adelsberger
Alley and thence with the center line of Adelsberger Alley to the center line
of East Green Street; thence with the center line of East Green Street to
the center line of Madison Street; thence with the center line of Madison
Street to the corporate line and thence with the corporate line to the center
of Bond Street; thence with the center line of Bond Street to the center line
of West Green Street; thence along the center line of West Green Street to
the center line of Norment's Lane (King's Lane) and thence along the center
line of said Lane to the center line of West Main Street; thence continuing
in the same direction four hundred fifty feet to the center line of Turn Alley;
thence with the center line of Turn Alley to the center line of Carroll Street;
thence with the center line of Carroll Street to the corporate line and thence
with the corporate line to the center line of Longwell Avenue; thence along
the center line of Longwell Avenue to the center line of Turn Alley; thence
along the center line of Turn Alley to the center line of Court Street; and
thence along the center line of Court Street to the place of beginning.
§ 56-4. Streets.
18.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 24, Intergovernmental Relations, § 24-1B(2).
§ 56-1 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 56-4
48:107
§ 56-5. Demolitions within Westminster Historic District. [Amended
11-11-2002 by Ord. No. 687]
No person shall excavate for or lay the foundation of any structure
or erect any wall or fence fronting on any street in the City before
having obtained information as to the true line and proper grade of
such street. Such information shall be supplied, upon request of the
owner or occupant of the property fronting upon such street, by the
Director of Public Works, who may cause any necessary survey to be
made at the expense of such owner or occupant. [Amended 12-6-2007
by Ord. No. 773]
A.
It shall be the duty of the Building Official to prevent encroachments
upon City streets by any building, wall or fence.
B.
Findings, intent and authority.
The City of Westminster contains a wealth of buildings and
structures that are historically significant and contribute to the
overall historic character of the community.
(1)
In June 1980, an application was submitted to the Maryland
Historic Trust for inclusion of a portion of the City designated
as the "Westminster Historic District" in the National Register of
Historic Places.
(2)
In September 1980, the application was approved by the Maryland
Historic Trust, and the Westminster Historic District was included
in the National Register of Historic Places.
(3)
The background research for the application required the
preparation of a map showing the rating of the historic significance
of individual buildings and structures within the Westminster
Historic District and the contributions of individual buildings and
structures to the overall historic character of the Westminster
Historic District.
(4)
The inclusion of the Westminster Historic District in the National
Register of Historic Places provides certain protections and taxcredit
opportunities, but not the additional protections and local
control provided by historic district zoning.
(5)
On October 12, 1992, the Mayor and Common Council amended
the City's Zoning Ordinance to provide for an Historic District
Zone and created the Historic District Commission in Article IXA
of Chapter 164 of the Westminster City Code. Subsequently, the
Mayor and Common Council has rezoned certain properties into
the Historic District Zone.
(6)
The Mayor and Common Council finds that certain procedures are
required to protect buildings and structures that are historically
significant or contribute to the overall historic character of the
(7)
A.
§ 56-4 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 56-5
48:108
community from demolition without their owners being advised as
to historic tax credits, the value of historic buildings and other
related matters.
The purposes of this section are as follows:
To safeguard the heritage of the City of Westminster by
preserving sites, structures or districts therein which reflect
elements of its cultural, social, economic, political,
archeological or architectural history;
(a)
To stabilize and approve property values of such sites,
structures or districts;
(b)
(c) To foster civic beauty;
(d) To strengthen the local economy;
To promote the preservation and appreciation of sites,
structures and districts for the educational welfare of the
residents of the City of Westminster.
(e)
(8)
Article XI-E of the Maryland Constitution, Articles 23A and 66B
of the Annotated Code of Maryland and § 15 et seq. of the City's
Charter authorize the Mayor and Common Council to enact
ordinances for the protection and promotion of public safety,
health, morals and welfare, including but not limited to matters
relating to planning and zoning.
(9)
Application for permits within the Westminster Historic District and
related areas. Any applicant for a building permit to demolish any
building or structure which is located within the Westminster Historic
District, as entered in the National Register of Historic Places, listed
as state or federal registered properties, or nominated for the federal,
state or local registry with the consent of the property owner shall
disclose such fact on the application. A copy of the boundary map of the
Westminster Historic District is available from the office of the Planning
Director. [Amended 12-6-2007 by Ord. No. 773]
B.
Referral to Director of Planning. [Amended 12-6-2007 by Ord. No.
773]
Upon receipt of such application from the Carroll County
Department of Permits and Regulations, the Zoning Administrator
shall promptly forward the same to the Director of Planning
("Director") for processing and approval under the following
procedures:
The Director will add a check-off sheet to the permit
application requiring the following sign-offs before the
Director takes action on the permit:
(a)
(1)
C.
§ 56-5 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 56-5
48:109
Town Planner: explanation of historic tax credits, value of
historic preservation and related matters;
[1]
Administrator of Economic Development: explanation of
Neighborhood Business Development Program and other
possible financing options for potential uses; and
[2]
Rehabilitation Coordinator: explanation of state and local
rehabilitation programs, lead paint and related programs.
[3]
The applicant must receive a briefing from each of the above
three officials before the Director makes any decision on the
permit application. If the Director finds that the demolition
permit will have an adverse effect on the historical integrity
of the City, the Director will refer the permit to the Historic
District Commission for its recommendation before taking any
final action on the permit request. If the Commission's
recommendation is not made within a thirty-day period, the
Commission shall be deemed to have no objection to the permit
application, unless said period has been extended by the
Director.
(b)
The applicant shall provide the Historic District Commission
with archiving information as to the property under guidelines
established by it similar to those adopted by the Maryland
Historic Trust.
(c)
Once all sign-offs have been received and the Historic District
Commission has given its recommendation, if required, the
Director will take action on the permit.
(d)
The Zoning Administrator shall also forward a notice of any such
application for demolition to the Mayor and Common Council and
the Historic District Commission for their information
contemporaneous with providing the application to the Director.
(2)
The provisions of this section shall not apply to any properties which
are in the Historic District Zone. Applications for any demolition of any
site or statue therein shall be reviewed and decided by the Historic
District Committee under § 164-51.4.
D.
Violations and penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this
section or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or
disobeys or fails to abide by the conditions of a permit shall be subject
to punishment for a misdemeanor. The penalty for violation shall be
$1,000 for each initial offense and $1,000 for each repeat offense. Each
day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a repeat offense.
Additionally, the Mayor and Common Council may initiate any
appropriate action or proceedings to prevent to permit any violation of
this section.
E.
§ 56-5 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 56-5.1
48:110
§ 56-5.1. Review of B Business, C-C Commerce, C-B Central
Business and D-B Downtown Business Zones and limitations upon
building permit, zoning certificate and site plan approvals. [Added
6-14-1999 by Ord. No. 640; amended 9-13-1999 by Ord. No. 642;
11-22-1999 by Ord. No. 646]
Findings, intent and authority.
The City of Westminster contains certain properties located within
the C-B Central Business and B Business Zones which were
previously endorsed by the Mayor and Common Council of
Westminster as being "key sites" which remain undeveloped and
which are deserving of particular attention and concern with the
potential to make significant contributions to the renovation of the
City's downtown area.
(1)
On November 1, 1994, the Hyett Palma Study was presented to
the Mayor and Common Council which it subsequently endorsed.
The study recognized certain properties as being key sites with
respect to the development and renovation of the downtown area.
On September 25, 1995, the Mayor and Common Council again
referred to the importance of these key sites and established a
policy regarding development. Those properties were: Farmers
Supply Co. property located at 12-24 Liberty Street, the
Westminster Fire Hall located at 66 East Main Street and the
Post Office property located at 83 East Main Street. The Farmers
Supply Co. property and the Post Office property remain currently
undeveloped (undeveloped key sites).
(2)
In 1998 the City began to undertake a review of the abovereferenced
business zones, including the adoption of a new D-B
Downtown Business Zone which would be the subject of a zoning
text amendment application which affect the development and use
of the undeveloped key sites and surrounding properties.
(3)
On June 9, 1999, the City's Committee on Housing and Community
Affairs continued the process of studying the above-referenced
proposals and is expected to complete its work and make a
recommendation to the Mayor and Common Council of
Westminster no later than September 15, 1999, and has requested
that the City defer processing approval of building permits and/or
site plan approvals for said undeveloped key sites until said review
has been completed. Due to unexpected circumstances, the City's
Committee on Housing and Community Affairs has been unable to
complete its review and make a recommendation by the September
15, 1999, date. On September 13, 1999, by Ordinance No. 642, the
Mayor and Common Council of Westminster extended the deferral
for permits for undeveloped key site properties until November 23,
1999.
(4)
A.
§ 56-5.1 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 56-5.1
48:111
On October 11, 1999, the Housing and Community Affairs
Committee met and expressed concern as to the desirability of
utilizing key sites for noncommercial or business purposes. As a
result, it discussed the preparation and consideration of another
zone for business and commerce purposes to be designated as the
"C-C Central Commerce Zone" which would focus upon uses which
were commercial and business-oriented in nature. The Committee
indicated its support for a zoning text amendment making revisions
to the C-B Central Business Zone and proposing the new D-B
Downtown Business Zone and a C-C Central Commerce Zone.
(5)
On October 11, 1999, a zoning text amendment in Case No. TA99-3
addressing the Central Business District, the Downtown Business
District and the C-C Central Commerce Zone was filed with the
Zoning Administrator.
(6)
On November 4, 1999, the Planning and Zoning Commission
conducted a public hearing on the proposed zoning text
amendment in Case No. TA99-3. A public hearing on said proposed
zoning text amendment has been scheduled before the Mayor and
Common Council of Westminster for December 13, 1999.
(7)
The Mayor and Common Council of Westminster find that
immediate steps are required to protect the use and development
of the undeveloped key sites pending receipt of the
recommendation of the Committee on Housing and Community
Affairs and action by the Mayor and Common Council on the
pending zoning text amendment in Case No. TA99-3. It further finds
that the public interest generally requires this temporary deferral.
It further finds that said deferral is reasonably necessary to achieve
the public goal regarding the systematic and coordinated
development and revitalization of the City's downtown area and
the encouragement of development in a manner designed to
strengthen business and commerce with the City.
(8)
Article XI-E of the Maryland Constitution, Articles 23A and 66B
of the Annotated Code of Maryland and § 15 et seq. of the City's
Charter authorize the Mayor and Common Council of Westminster
to enact ordinances for the protection and promotion of public
safety, health, morals and welfare, including but not limited to
matters relating to planning and zoning.
(9)
Deferral of applications for permits for undeveloped key site properties.
From and after the effective date of this section until February 22,
2000, the City shall not process or approve an application for a building
permit, or site plan for any use or development of the undeveloped
key site properties in order to allow the Mayor and Common Council
of Westminster and its Committee on Housing and Community Affairs
to complete its findings with respect to the impact on the use of
said undeveloped key site properties resulting from any proposed text
B.
§ 56-5.1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 56-5.1
48:112
amendment and to take action on the pending zoning text amendment
in Case No. TA99-3.
§ 56-5.1 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 56-5.1
48:113

ARTICLE II
Uninhabitable Buildings19
[Added 7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 783]
§ 56-6. Purpose; statutory authority.
§ 56-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls,
used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals
or chattels, including any cabin or mobile house.
DIRECTOR — Director of Planning, Zoning and Development.
UNINHABITABLE BUILDING — Any building which shall be found to have
any of the defects set forth in § 56-8 so as to make it uninhabitable for
human habitation.
§ 56-8. Finding of building as uninhabitable.
Any building which is found by the Director to have any of the following
defects so as to make it uninhabitable for human habitation shall be so
designated and placarded by the Director. Said building is uninhabitable if
the Director finds that it is:
The purpose of this article is to promote the health, safety, morals
and general welfare of the community by providing for the vacation,
removal, repair or demolition of dangerous buildings which may exist
in the City.
A.
Article XI-E of the Maryland Constitution, Article 23A of the Annotated
Code of Maryland and the City's Charter authorize the Mayor and
Common Council to enact ordinances for the protection and promotion
of public safety, health, morals and welfare.
B.
One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, or
vermin-infested that it creates a serious hazard to the health or safety
of the occupants or of the public; or
A.
One which lacks illumination, ventilation, or sanitation facilities
adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or of the
public;
B.
One which because of its general condition or location is unsanitary or
otherwise dangerous to the health or safety of the occupants or of the
public.
C.
19.Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Uninhabitable Buildings, added 1-19-1995 by Ord. No. 591,
was repealed 3-26-2001 by Ord. No. 662.
§ 56-6 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 56-9
48:115
§ 56-9. Posting of placard; contents.
§ 56-10. Removal or defacement of placard or notice.
§ 56-11. Vacating.
Any building declared as uninhabitable and so designated and posted shall
be vacated within a reasonable time as ordered by the Director, and it
shall be unlawful for any owner or landlord to let any person inhabit or
occupy said building which has been declared and posted by the Director as
uninhabitable after the date set forth in the placard.
§ 56-12. Notice to owner.
The Director shall cause to be posted on any building declared by
the Director as uninhabitable with a placard reading "Uninhabitable
Building." It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such building or
structure after the date set forth on the placard to vacate except for the
reason of making required repairs or of demolishing the building.
A.
The placard shall include the following:
(1) Name of the City;
(2) The chapter and section of the Code under which it is issued;
An order that the building shall be vacated by a stated date and
must remain vacant until the order to vacate is withdrawn;
(3)
(4) The date the placard is posted;
The statement of the penalty for defacing or removal of the placard;
and
(5)
A statement stating "This Building Is Declared Uninhabitable and
Its Use or Occupancy Has Been Prohibited By The City of
Westminster," and the placard shall bear the signature of the
Director.
(6)
B.
No person shall deface or remove the placard from any building which
has been declared or placarded as uninhabitable except by authority in
writing from the Director.
A.
The Director shall cause to be removed the said placard whenever the
defect or defects upon which the declaration and placarding action
were based have been eliminated or when the building is demolished.
B.
Whenever the Director has declared a building as uninhabitable, the
Director shall give written notice to the owner. Such notice to the owner
shall:
(1) Be in writing;
A.
§ 56-9 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 56-12
48:116
§ 56-13. Sealing.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property to remove all
unsanitary or flammable material and to board up all windows and doors
after a building has been properly determined to be uninhabitable, if such
boarding up is determined by the Director to be necessary for reasons
of health and safety. In the event that the owner of the property fails to
properly seal the building against unlawful entry, the Director shall take
action to remove unsanitary or flammable waste material and to board up
all windows and doors so as to prevent entrance. The cost of such action
shall be a lien on the property and shall be collectable in the same manner
as delinquent taxes.
§ 56-14. Demolition.
(2) Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification;
(3) Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued;
State the date when the occupants must vacate the building if
the defects have not been eliminated and the order to vacate
withdrawn;
(4)
State the corrections needed to rectify the conditions which form
the basis of the finding that the building is uninhabitable:
(5)
State if the building's windows and doors are required to be
boarded up; and
(6)
State the time provided to correct the conditions or to provide for
the demolition of the building.
(7)
Service of notice. Service of notice that a building is uninhabitable and
must be vacated is required as follows:
By delivery to the owner personally or by leaving a notice at the
usual place of abode of the owner with a person of suitable age and
discretion; or
(1)
By depositing the notice in the United States post office addressed
to the owner at the owner's last known address with postage
prepaid thereon; or
(2)
By posting a copy of the notice in placard form in a conspicuous
place on the premises to be vacated.
(3)
B.
The Director shall order a building to be demolished if it has been
designated as uninhabitable, has been posted as such, has been
vacated, and has not been put into proper repair as to rescind the
designation as uninhabitable and to cause the placard to be removed in
the time provided in the notice to the property owner.
A.
§ 56-12 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 56-14
48:117
§ 56-15. Emergency action.
Whenever in the judgment of the Director an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health, safety and welfare,
said Director may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an order
requiring such action as is appropriate to correct or abate the emergency
condition.
§ 56-16. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this article shall be deemed a municipal infraction. The penalty
for violation shall be $400 for each offense, which may be doubled in
accordance with Article 23A of the Annotated Code of Maryland. Each
day that the violation continues shall be a separate offense. In addition
thereto, the Mayor and Common Council of Westminster may institute an
injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate actions or proceedings at law
or equity for the enforcement of this article or to correct the violations
of it, and any court of competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue
restraining orders, temporary or permanent, injunctions or mandamus or
other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
After the Director has given an order to demolish an uninhabitable
building, the following procedures shall be followed:
The owner of any building which has been ordered demolished
shall be given notice in the manner provided for service of notice
for uninhabitable buildings and shall be given reasonable time not
to exceed 90 days to demolish such structure.
(1)
If the owner fails, neglects or refuses to demolish an uninhabitable
building within the requisite time, the Director may apply to a
court of competent jurisdiction for a demolition order to undertake
demolition. Before taking that action, the Director shall request
a recommendation from the Historic District Commission. Said
recommendation shall be made within 45 days from receipt. If a
recommendation is not made by the Commission within that time,
the request shall be deemed to be approved by it. The Director shall
also obtain the approval of the Mayor and Common Council before
applying to a court for a demolition order. In seeking that approval,
the Director shall provide the Mayor and Common Council with a
copy of the recommendation of the Historic District Commission as
well as other information that the Director deems appropriate. The
cost of the demolition shall be a lien on the property and collected
in the same manner as delinquent taxes.
(2)
B.
§ 56-14 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 56-16
48:118
Chapter 58
BUSINESS REGULATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 33.
§ 56-16 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 56-16
48:119

ARTICLE I
Designation of Primary Law Enforcement Unit
[Adopted 7-13-2015 by Res. No. 15-05]
§ 58-1. Westminster Police Department Designated.
The Westminster Police Department is hereby designated in the place and
stead of the Carroll County Sheriff as the primary law enforcement unit for
the purposes of receipt of records in accordance with Title 12, Title 17,
Subtitle 10 and Title 20 of the Business Regulation Article of the Annotated
Code of Maryland.
§ 58-1 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 58-1
48:121
Chapter 61
CABLE TELEVISION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Intergovernmental relations — See Ch. 24.
§ 61-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated below. Words not defined herein shall have the meaning set
forth in the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended, 47
U.S.C. § 521 et seq., or, if not defined therein, their common and ordinary
meanings:
BASIC SERVICE — Any tier of cable service which includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals or access channels.
BROADCAST SIGNAL — A television or radio signal that is transmitted over
the air and is received by a cable television system off the air, by satellite,
by microwave or by direct connection to a broadcasting station.
CABLE ACT — The Cable Communications Act of 1984, as amended, 47
U.S.C. § 521 et seq., and as may hereafter be amended.
CABLE SERVICE — Shall have the meaning given it under the Cable Act.
CABLE SYSTEM — Shall have the meaning given it under the Cable Act.
CHANNEL — Shall have the meaning given it under the Cable Act.
COMMERCIAL SUBSCRIBER — A subscriber who receives a service in a
place of business, where the service may be utilized in connection with a
business, trade or profession or institution.
EDUCATIONAL ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel where educational
authorities are the designated programmers.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FRANCHISE or FRANCHISE AGREEMENT — The separate agreement by
which a franchise is granted to a franchisee, pursuant to this chapter.
FRANCHISEE — Any provider of a cable communications system that
receives a franchise pursuant to this chapter.
GROSS REVENUES — All revenues, without any deduction for cost or
expense, derived, directly or indirectly, by the franchisee, its affiliates,
subsidiaries, parents and any other person in which the franchisee has a
financial interest from the franchisee's operation of a cable system in the
City to provide cable service.
§ 58-1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 61-1
48:122
LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel as to which
the City or other local governments or agencies are the designated
programmers.
PROGRAMMER — Any person, firm, corporation, institution or entity who
or which produces or otherwise provides program material for transmission
by video, audio, digital or other signals, either live or from recorded tapes
or films or by other means, to the subscriber by means of the cable system.
PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel where any member of the
general public may be a programmer on a first-come-first-served
nondiscriminatory basis.
PUBLIC STREET — The surface of the space above and below any public
street, avenue, highway, boulevard, concourse, driveway, bridge, tunnel,
park, parkway, waterway, dock, bulkhead, wharf, pier, alley, right-of-way,
public utility easement, public utility and any other public ground or water
subject to the jurisdiction and control of the City of Westminster.
RESIDENTIAL SUBSCRIBER — A subscriber who receives a service in an
individual dwelling unit, where the service is not to be utilized in connection
with a business, trade, profession or institution.
SERVICE AREA — The geographic area in which a franchisee provides cable
service.
SUBSCRIBER — Any person, firm, institution, corporation or other entity
who or which elects to receive, for any purpose, a service provided by the
franchisee by means of or in connection with the cable television system.
SUBSCRIBER SERVICE DROP — Each extension wiring from the
franchisee's distribution lines to a subscriber point of use.
§ 61-2. Application procedures.
A person may apply, in writing, for a cable franchise. A written
application for a franchise submitted to the Council shall contain the
following information:
The name, address and form of business of the applicant. If the
applicant is a corporation, it shall also state the percentage of
ownership and the names, addresses and occupations of its
officers, directors and major stockholders (1% or more) and the
names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary companies. If
the applicant is a corporation controlled by another corporation,
the names, addresses and occupations of the officers, directors
and major stockholders (owner of 1% or more) of the controlling
corporation shall also be stated. If the applicant is a partnership or
other unincorporated association, the percentage of ownership and
the name and address of each member, whether active or inactive,
shall be set forth, and, if one or more partners are corporations, the
names, addresses and occupations of such corporation's officers,
directors and major stockholders shall also be stated. It shall also
specify the names and technical and professional qualifications and
(1)
A.
§ 61-1 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 61-2
48:123
§ 61-3. Public hearing; award of contract.
career backgrounds of the persons who will manage the system
proposed by the applicant.
A list of all other cable television systems, if any, in which the
applicant or any partner or major stockholder of the applicant has a
substantial interest (1% or more), stating the location, approximate
number of homes served and the name and address of the local
franchising body.
(2)
A thorough description of the proposed cable television system to
be installed and operated, the time schedule for such installation
and the manner in which the applicant proposes to conduct, install,
maintain and operate the same.
(3)
A statement setting forth all agreements and understandings,
whether written, oral or implied, existing between the applicant
and any person, firm or corporation with respect to the proposed
franchise or the proposed cable system operation. If a franchise is
granted hereafter to a person, firm or corporation posing as a front
or as the representative of another person, firm or corporation,
and such information is not disclosed in the original application,
such franchise shall be forfeited and the franchisee shall forfeit all
revenues and any bond to the City.
(4)
A financial statement prepared by a certified public accountant
or person otherwise satisfactory to the Council and/or such other
financial documents as may be required by the Council, showing
the applicant's financial status and its financial ability to construct
and operate the proposed cable system.
(5)
The Council may, at any time, demand, and the applicant shall provide,
such supplementary, additional or other information as the Council
deems reasonably necessary to show the applicant's true ownership
and control and financial, technical and character qualifications.
B.
The applicant shall specifically set forth that it will comply with each of
the provisions of this chapter and/or City rules and regulations related
thereto.
C.
The applicant may submit any other information it feels relevant or that
will enhance its proposal.
D.
The applicant will accompany its application with a check, made
payable to the City, in the amount of not less than $1,000 to help defray
the administrative costs involved in the processing of applications. No
part of this sum shall be refundable. In addition, the successful bidder
shall remit to the City the difference between the application deposit
received and the actual prefranchise award administrative costs,
including attorneys' fees, incurred by the City, if any. Payment must be
received by the City prior to its execution of the franchise agreement.
E.
§ 61-2 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 61-3
48:124
§ 61-4. Franchise regulations and restrictions.
To the extent permitted by law, the Council reserves the right to reject
any application. The Council, following the receipt of an application,
may hold a public hearing to hear comments on the application, and
may give the public 30 days' advance notice of any such hearing by
publishing the notice in a newspaper of general circulation in Carroll
County. At such public hearing, if any, the applicant shall be requested
to make a presentation and answer questions propounded by the public
or Council relating to any aspect of its application.
A.
Following the public hearing, although not necessarily on the same
date, the Council may grant or deny an application or take such action
empowered to it by law.
B.
By resolution, the Council may grant a franchise for a cable system
to any applicant as may appear from its application to be, in the
Council's reasonable judgment, appropriately qualified to render safe
and efficient cable service to residents in the service area. If favorably
considered, the application submitted shall constitute and form part of
the franchise agreement, except as otherwise indicated in the franchise
agreement.
C.
General provisions. Any franchise granted hereunder shall be subject to
the right of the Council:
To terminate the same for misuse or failure to comply with any
material provisions of this chapter, a franchise agreement, or any
federal, state or local laws, ordinances, rules or regulations.
(1)
To control and regulate the use of its streets, alleys, bridges and
public places and the space above and beneath them. Each
franchisee shall pay such part of the cost of improvement or
maintenance of streets, alleys, bridges and public places as shall
arise from the franchisee's use thereof and shall protect and save
the county, City, the Council, their agents, employees and servants
harmless from all claims and/or damages arising from said use.
(2)
To require joint use of the property and appurtenances of each
franchisee located in the streets, alleys and public places of the
City by the Council and insofar as such joint use may be reasonable
and practicable.
(3)
To inspect all construction or installation work performed subject
to the provisions of the franchise agreement and this chapter and
any amendments, rules or regulations thereunder and make such
inspections as it shall feel necessary to ensure compliance
therewith. However, the franchisee shall remain primarily
responsible for design and installation and for compliance with all
requirements.
(4)
A.
§ 61-3 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 61-4
48:125
To require, at the expiration of the term for which this franchise
is granted, or upon the termination and cancellation as provided
herein, the franchise to remove, at its own expense, any and all
portions of the cable system from the public ways within the
service area within a reasonable period of time, as established by
the Council.
(5)
Transfer or assignment.
The franchise shall not be transferred or assigned, either in whole
or in part, or leased, sublet or mortgaged in any manner, nor
shall title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right, interest
or property therein pass to or vest in any person, corporation,
association or other entity, either by act of the franchisee or by
operation of law, without the written consent of the Council and
under such terms and conditions as the Council may require.
(1)
A transfer, within the meaning of Subsection B(1), requiring
Council consent shall occur where control of more than 25% of
the franchise is proposed to be acquired by a person, partnership,
association, corporation or group of persons acting in concert,
none of whom own or control 25% or more of such right of control,
singularly or collectively, at the time the franchise is granted. By its
acceptance of a franchise, the franchisee specifically acknowledges
and agrees that any such acquisition occurring without prior
approval of the Council shall constitute a material violation of a
franchise.
(2)
B.
A franchise shall be for a term not to exceed 15 years. All franchises
shall be nonexclusive, and the City specifically reserves the right to
grant a similar use of the streets, lanes, avenues, sidewalks, alleys,
bridges, rights-of-way, utility poles and other public places to any
person at any time during the period of any franchise.
C.
Unless a franchise agreement otherwise provides, a franchisee's
application for a franchise shall be incorporated by reference in the
franchise agreement. The franchise agreement shall contain such
further conditions or provisions as may be negotiated by the Council
and the franchisee. In case of conflict or ambiguity between any terms
or provisions of the franchise agreement and this chapter, the terms of
the franchise agreement shall control if otherwise permitted by law.
D.
The franchisee shall erect, maintain and operate a cable system on,
in, under, over, along, across or upon the streets, lanes, avenues,
sidewalks, alleys, bridges, easements, rights-of-way, utility poles and
other public places in the City, and subsequent additions thereto, solely
in accordance with the laws and regulation of the United States of
America, the State of Maryland and the ordinances and regulations of
the City. Detailed plans and specifications for the installation of works
or improvements authorized herein shall first be approved by the City
E.
§ 61-4 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 61-4
48:126
and shall be inspected by the City during construction to ensure quality
control and compliance to plans, specifications and applicable costs.
Public utilities agreements.
A franchisee shall, when and where practicable, lease, rent or in
any other lawful manner obtain the use of towers, poles, conduits,
lines, cables and other equipment and facilities from present
holders of public licenses and franchises within the corporate limits
of the City, including the Baltimore Gas and Electric Company,
Potomac Edison and Verizon Maryland Inc., and said towers, poles,
conduits, lines, cables, and other equipment and facilities on such
terms as agreed, subject to all existing and future ordinances and
regulations of the county.
(1)
Wherever such facilities are not reasonably available from the
sources specified in Subsection F(1) hereof, the franchisee shall,
subject to the City's consent and conditions, have the right to
erect and maintain its own poles, conduits and related facilities as
may be necessary for the proper construction and maintenance of
its cable television distribution system, subject to applicable laws,
ordinances and regulations and restrictions of titles.
(2)
F.
Facilities erected by franchisee.
All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment
erected by a franchisee within the City shall be so located as
to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets,
alleys, and other public ways and places and to cause minimum
interference with the rights of reasonable convenience of property
owners who adjoin any of said streets, alleys or other public ways
and places. Any opening or obstruction in the streets or other
public places made by the franchisee in the course of its operations
shall be guarded and protected at all times by the placement
of adequate barriers, fences or boardings, the bounds of which,
during periods of dusk and darkness, shall be clearly designated by
warning lights.
(1)
In the event that, at any time during the period of a franchise,
the City shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade of any
public street, water main or sewer main, the franchisee, upon
reasonable notice by the City, shall remove, relay and relocate its
poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other
telephone fixtures at its own expense.
(2)
A franchisee shall not place new poles or other fixtures where the
same will interfere with any gas, electric or telephone fixtures,
water hydrant or main, sewer main, sewer and water services or
other fixtures placed in any street and shall, where practicable, be
placed at the outer edge of the sidewalk and inside the curbline,
and those placed in alleys shall be placed close to the line of the lot
(3)
G.
§ 61-4 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 61-4
48:127
abutting on said alley and then in such a manner as not to interfere
with the usual travel on said public streets.
A franchisee shall, upon the request of any person holding a
building moving permit, temporarily raise or lower its wires to
permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary
removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person
requesting the same, and the franchisee shall have the authority to
require such payment in advance. The franchisee shall be given no
less than 48 hours' advance notice to arrange for such temporary
wire changes.
(4)
A franchisee shall be required to trim trees upon and overhanging
streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the City so as to
prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the
wires and cables of the franchisee, all trimming to be done at the
expense of the franchisee.
(5)
The construction and maintenance of a cable system, including house
connections, shall be in accordance with the provisions of the National
Electrical Safety Code, prepared by the National Bureau of Standards,
the National Electrical Code of the National Board of Fire Underwriters
and such applicable laws and regulations of the City, county, State of
Maryland and of the United States affecting such installations, which
may be presently in effect or may be from time to time in the future
in effect, including a securing of all permits for such construction
and maintenance required by applicable law. All structures, equipment,
lines and connections shall be of permanent nature, durable and
installed in accordance with good engineering practice and maintained
in a safe, suitable and substantial condition in good order and repair,
wherever situated or located.
H.
Copies of all petitions, applications and communications by or to the
franchisee involving the Federal Communications Commission,
Securities and Exchange Commission or any other state, county or City
regulatory commission, agency or department having jurisdiction in
respect to any matters affecting the franchisee shall also be furnished
simultaneously to the City by the franchisee.
I.
The franchisee or applicant for a franchise shall have all necessary
permits and authorizations required in the conduct of its business.
J.
Upon granting of any franchise as herein contemplated, the franchisee
shall, throughout the life of such franchise, keep the City fully informed
with respect to the matters specified below, and the failure to disclose
such information during the life of such franchise shall be considered
a material violation of the franchise and subject such franchise, at the
discretion of the Council, to suspension or termination.
Each franchisee shall allow the City to audit all of its accounting
and financial records upon reasonable notice; make available all
of its plans, contracts and engineering, statistical, customer and
(1)
K.
§ 61-4 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 61-4
48:128
service records relating to its system and to all other records
required to be kept hereunder; and at all times maintain complete
and accurate books of accounts, records of its business and
operations and all other records required by this specification.
Each franchisee shall file annually with the City a report indicating
all persons who, at any time during the preceding year, did control
an interest in the franchise of 1% or more, setting forth for each the
extent of this interest, and all creditors, secured and unsecured, in
excess of $1,000, setting forth for each the amounts owed.
(2)
Each franchisee shall annually file a report detailing maintenance,
state of the art, improvements, signal strength and signal quality at
the subscriber end of the system.
(3)
Each franchisee shall also file annually such other information
concerning its operating as may be required by the City. The City
shall retain, throughout the life of any franchise granted pursuant
to this chapter, the right to demand such supplemental, additional
or other information as above noted, and, upon proof of the failure
to supply such information upon reasonable demand, the franchise
under which any applicant may be operating may, at the option
of the City, be suspended upon order of the Council until such
information is forthcoming.
(4)
Each franchisee shall file a plan on an annual basis showing its
plans for extending its service to those parts of the service area
unserved at that time.
Installation and maintenance of equipment shall be such that
video programming signals shall be transmitted with full
fidelity to any subscriber receiver. The franchisee shall
maintain its service in accordance with such reasonable
standards regarding uniformity of transmission, noise levels
and channel signal voltages as may, from time to time, be
established by the FCC or other body within its lawful
authority.
(a)
Whenever it is necessary to shut off or interrupt service for
the purpose of making repairs, adjustments or installations,
the franchisee shall do so at times as will cause the least
amount of inconvenience to its customers, and, unless such
interruption is unforeseen and immediately necessary, it shall
give reasonable notice thereof to its customers.
(b)
(5)
Use of channels.
A franchisee shall provide public, educational, and governmental
access channel capacity and facilities as provided in its franchise
agreement.
(1)
L.
§ 61-4 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 61-4
48:129
The franchisee is prohibited from censoring any program which
is cablecast over public, educational or governmental access
channels, except such censoring as is required by FCC or other
applicable laws or regulations.
(2)
The public, educational and government access channel capacity
shall be made available free of charge and placed on the basic
service tier. Charges for use of equipment and personnel to
produce public access programming may be made, but shall be
reasonable and consistent with the goal of affording users a lowcost
means of television access. No equipment, personnel or
production charges shall be made for live public access programs
not exceeding five minutes in length per day.
(3)
The system shall be engineered to provide an audio alert system
to allow authorized officials, as designated by the City, to
automatically override the audio signal on all channels and
transmit and report emergency information.
(4)
State of the art. The franchisee shall continually upgrade its facilities,
equipment and service so that its system is as advanced as the current
state of technology will allow. Compliance with this provision shall be
determined by the City.
M.
A franchisee shall provide free installation and basic service to
municipal buildings, fire stations, schools, hospitals, jails and libraries
to the extent provided in its franchise agreement.
N.
Interconnection. The franchisee shall be capable of interconnecting its
system, or any part thereof, with any other broadband communications
facility operating in the City or county and/or the adjacent jurisdictions.
The interconnection shall be made within 60 days of an order by the
Council to proceed, unless, for good cause shown by the franchisee, a
reasonable time extension is granted by the City.
O.
Apartment buildings. No franchisee shall be required to pay any fee
to the building owner(s) to provide cable television service to any
member of the public in any privately owned buildings that are in
the City. Each franchisee shall report to the City any building owner
who requests a fee from the franchisee as a condition for allowing
the franchisee to install a cable system service in the building owner's
building. A franchisee is expressly prohibited from entering into any
agreement with an owner of a building containing multiple dwelling
units that would increase the rates or increase or decrease services
to a subscriber residing in the dwelling, other than with medical
organizations or education or charitable institutions; however, this shall
not contravene the provision of Subsection N above.
P.
Repair. Any damage caused to the property of building owners, users or
any other person by the franchisee shall be repaired by the franchisee.
Q.
§ 61-4 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 61-4
48:130
§ 61-5. Forfeit or surrender of franchise.
Removal of facilities upon request. Upon termination of service to
any subscriber, the franchisee shall promptly remove all its facilities
and equipment from the premises of such subscriber upon his written
request. The franchisee shall not charge a fee for the same.
R.
General provisions.
Termination and surrender.
A failure of the franchisee to commence to render cable service
to the residents of the service area, as contemplated and
provided for by its franchise agreement, shall be a material
violation of the franchise, and in such a circumstance, the City
shall have the right to revoke this franchise and all rights of
the franchisee thereunder.
(a)
If the franchisee shall fail to comply with any of the provisions
of this chapter or default in any of its obligations, except for
causes beyond the reasonable control of the franchisee, as
heretofore provided, and shall fail, within 30 days after written
notice from the City, to correct such default or noncompliance,
the City shall consider this as a material violation of the
franchise and, therefore, have the right to revoke this
franchise and all rights of the franchisee hereunder.
(b)
Upon the termination of this franchise or any renewal thereof,
the franchisee shall remove its posts, poles and all
aboveground equipment from the streets, lanes, sidewalks,
highways, alleys, bridges and other public places in the service
area and shall restore such streets, lanes, highways, sidewalks,
alleys, bridges and other public places to their original
condition. Following termination of this franchise, any property
owned by the franchisee and not removed from City properties
within six months from the termination date will become the
property of the City to do with as it may choose. Any cost
occurring to the City in removing the franchisee's former
possessions from City streets or land will be a claim against the
franchisee.
(c)
The franchisee may surrender its franchise at any time upon
filing with the City a written notice of its intention to do so
at least 60 days before the surrender date. On the surrender
date specified in such notice, all the rights and privileges and
all of the obligations, duties and liabilities of the franchisee
under this chapter shall cease and terminate, except that the
franchisee shall have an additional six months to remove its
plant and equipment from City streets and all other public
lands upon which it is located. At the end of said six months,
any property owned by the franchisee and not removed from
(d)
(1)
A.
§ 61-4 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 61-5
48:131
§ 61-6. Intervention of City.
A franchisee shall not oppose intervention by the City in any suit or
proceeding to which the franchisee is a party.
§ 61-7. Business office; complaint procedure.
City properties will become the property of the City to do with
as it may choose. Any costs occurring to the City in removing
the franchisee's former possessions from City streets or land
will be a claim against the franchisee.
In order that the City may exercise its option to take over the
facilities and property of the system, as authorized herein, upon
expiration or forfeiture or revocation of the rights and privileges
of the franchisee, the franchisee shall not make, execute or enter
into any deed, deed of trust, mortgage, contract, conditional sales
contract or any loan, lease, pledge, sale, gift or any other
agreement concerning any of the rights, facilities or property, real
or personal, of the system without prior approval of the Council and
upon the Council's determination that the transaction proposed
by the franchisee will not be harmful to the rights of the City
under this franchise; provided, however, that this section shall not
apply to the disposition or replacement of worn out or obsolete
facilities or personal property in the normal course of carrying on
the CATV20 business or to routine contractual relationships entered
into in the ordinary course of the cable business.
(2)
Any franchise granted hereunder shall, at the option of the Council,
cease and terminate upon the appointment of a receiver or receivers
or trustee or trustees to take over and conduct the business of the
franchisee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or
other similar action or proceeding. In the case of a foreclosure or other
judicial sale of the plant, property and equipment of the franchisee
or any part thereof, including or excluding this franchise, the Council
may serve notice of termination upon the franchisee and the successful
bidder at such sale, in which event the franchise herein granted and
all rights and privileges of the franchisee hereunder shall cease and
terminate 30 days after service of such notice, unless:
The Council shall have approved the transfer of this franchise as
and in the manner in this chapter provided; and
(1)
Such successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with the
Council to assume and be bound by all the terms and conditions of
this chapter.
(2)
B.
A franchisee shall maintain, within 20 miles of the service area, a local
business office or designated agent for the purpose of receiving and
A.
20.Editor's Note: "CATV" refers to community antenna television system.
§ 61-5 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 61-7
48:132
§ 61-8. Insurance; indemnification.
resolving all complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment
malfunctions and other similar matters.
A franchisee shall provide a toll-free telephone number at which
subscribers may contact the franchisee or agent thereof on a twentyfour-
hour basis in the case of emergencies and shall list such number
in the local telephone directory and shall notify its subscribers of such
service.
B.
Complaints by any subscriber may be filed with the franchisee, in
writing, or delivered to the franchisee orally, in person or by means of
the telephone.
C.
Any complaints received from subscribers shall be investigated by the
franchisee and service restored at least within 48 hours of their receipt.
In the event that service is not restored within 48 hours, the subscriber
shall be credited with a reduction in his monthly payment for each full
day or portion of a day that such service is not restored by determining
from the monthly charge the prorated charge for each day's service,
then multiplying said daily charge by the number of days during which
service was not wholly restored and subtracting the result from the
monthly charge.
D.
The franchisee shall keep a maintenance service log that will indicate
the nature of each complaint, the name of the employee of the
franchisee receiving the complaint, the date and time it was received,
the disposition of the complaint and the time and date thereof. In said
log, the franchisee shall state the specific steps taken by the company
to remedy the complaint. This log shall be made available for periodic
inspection by the City.
E.
The procedure for reporting and resolving complaints shall be stated,
in writing, by the franchisee to each subscriber at the time of initial
subscription to the cable system.
F.
A franchisee shall maintain the staff and facilities needed to handle
properly system maintenance and complaints.
G.
A franchisee shall maintain a duty roster of qualified technicians to
respond to complaints or malfunctions at other than normal office
hours.
H.
Liability and indemnification of the City and Council. A franchisee
shall indemnify and hold harmless the City and Council, its agents,
servants, officials and employees at all times, and by entering into
franchise agreement, specifically agrees that it will pay all damages
and costs which the City or Council or its agents, servants, officials or
employees may be legally required to pay arising from the franchise
granted herein. Such damages and penalties shall include but not be
limited to damages arising out of copyright infringements and other
A.
§ 61-7 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 61-8
48:133
damages arising out of the installation, operation or maintenance of
the cable system authorized, allowed or prohibited by the franchise. In
the event that suit shall be filed against the City, Council or its agents,
servants, officials or employees, either independently or jointly with
the franchisee, to recover for any claim or damages, the franchisee,
upon notice to it by the Council, shall defend the Council, City or its
agents, servants, officials or employees, as the case may be, against the
action, and in the event of a final judgment being obtained against any
of them, either independently or jointly with the franchisee by reason of
the acts of the franchisee, the franchisee will pay said judgment and all
costs and legal fees and hold the City and Council, its agents, servants,
officials and employees harmless therefrom.
Faithful performance bond. A franchisee shall, concurrently with its
acceptance of a franchise, file with the Council, at the franchisee's sole
expense, a corporate surety bond with a responsible company approved
by the Council and licensed to do business in Maryland, in the amount
of not less than $75,000, renewable annually and conditioned upon the
faithful performance of the franchisee and upon the further condition
that, in the event that the franchisee shall fail to comply with any one or
more of the provisions of the franchise agreement or this chapter, there
shall be recoverable, jointly and severally from the principal and surety
of such bond, any damages or loss suffered by the City or subscribers
as a result thereof, including the full amount of any compensation,
indemnification or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of
the franchisee as prescribed hereby, plus a reasonable allowance for
attorney's fees and costs, said condition to be a continuing obligation
on the part of the franchisee to the Council that may arise from the
acceptance of the franchise or its renewal or from the exercise of any
privilege or right herein granted. The bond shall provide that at least
30 days' prior written notice of intention not to renew or to cancel or of
any material change shall be given by the surety company by filing the
same with the City.
B.
Insurance.
A franchisee shall carry insurance in such forms and in such
companies as shall be approved by the City, such approval not to
be unreasonably withheld, to protect the City, Council, its agents,
servants, officials and employees and the franchisee from and
against any and all claims, injury or damage. The insurance policies
and performance bonds obtained by the franchisee in compliance
with this and other sections shall be issued by a company or
companies acceptable to the City, and a current certificate or
certificates of insurance and bonding, along with written evidence
of payment of all required premiums, shall be filed and maintained
with the City during the term of the franchise and prior to the
commencement of construction. Said policies shall name the City
as an additional insured and shall contain a provision that a written
notice of cancellation or reduction in coverage of said policy shall
(1)
C.
§ 61-8 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 61-8
48:134
§ 61-9. Franchise area; map.
§ 61-10. Rates and charges.
be delivered to the City 30 days in advance of the effective date
thereof. The policies shall protect the City, Council, their agents,
servants, officials and employees and the franchisee from and
against any and all claims, injury or damage to persons or property,
both real and personal, caused by the construction, erection,
operation or maintenance of the system. The amount of such
insurance shall be in the discretion of the Council, but not be less
than the following:
General liability insurance:
[1] One person: $300,000.
[2] One accident: $1,000,000.
[3] Property damage: $300,000.
(a)
Automobile insurance:
[1] One person: $300,000.
[2] One accident: $500,000.
[3] Property damage: $500,000.
(b)
Workers' compensation insurance shall also be provided as
required by laws of the State of Maryland.
(2)
Nonwaiver. Neither the provisions of this section nor any bonds
accepted by the Council or City pursuant hereto nor any damage
recovered by the City thereunder shall be construed to excuse
unfaithful performance by the franchisee or limit the liability of the
franchisee under this chapter or the franchise for damages, either to
the full amount of the bond or otherwise.
D.
A franchisee shall extend its cable system throughout the service area
covered by its franchise as rapidly as practicable, or as directed by
the City, but not later than five years following the issuance of the
franchise.
A.
A franchisee shall file a map and program report with the City at the
close of each calendar year, showing the exact area of the City being
served by the cable system, the location and identification of major
component parts of the system and plans for future service extensions
by year.
B.
The City reserves the right to regulate a franchisee's rates to the full
extent permitted by law.
A.
§ 61-8 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 61-10
48:135
§ 61-11. Franchise fees.
§ 61-12. through § 61-13. (Reserved)
A franchisee shall provide the City and all subscribers with a minimum
of 30 days' advance written notice of any change in rates, programming
services or channel positions.
B.
Annual fee. During the term of any franchise granted pursuant to this
chapter, the franchisee shall pay to the City, as compensation for its
use of its streets and public ways and other facilities, as well as the
City's maintenance, improvements and supervision thereof, an annual
franchise fee based upon a percentage of the annual gross revenues
derived from the franchisee's operation of a cable system within the
City to provide cable service. The percentage amount of the franchise
fee shall be set forth in the franchise agreement. The franchise fee
shall be in addition to, and not offset against, any other tax or payment
owed to the City by the franchisee. In this connection, "franchisee" shall
include any person, entity or firm that is a subsidiary of the franchisee
or part of a controlled group, as defined by the Internal Revenue Code.
A.
Method of computation. Payments due the City under the terms of
the franchise shall be computed quarterly and paid within 30 days of
the end of each quarter, that is, within 30 days after December 31,
March 31, June 30 and September 30, respectively. The City shall be
furnished with a statement with each payment, certified as correct by
the franchisee, and an annual statement for the entire year, prepared
by a certified public accountant. All statements shall reflect the total
amount of gross revenues. Statements accompanying payments of the
franchise fee shall set forth a detailed computation of the payment. The
City reserves the right to reasonable inspection of the books, records,
maps, plans and other material of the franchisee.
B.
Right of recomputations. No acceptance of any payment shall be
construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claims
the City may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise
fee under the franchise agreement or for the performance of any other
obligation hereunder.
C.
Failure to make required payment. Failure to pay any fees required by
this section shall be considered a material violation of the franchise in
accordance with the foregoing provisions of this chapter, and shall, at
the option of the Council, result in suspension or termination of the
franchise granted. Reinstatement of the franchise may, at the option of
the Council, be had upon payment of the delinquent fee or fees, plus
any interest and/or penalties as may be required by the Council.
D.
§ 61-10 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 61-14
48:136
§ 61-14. Costs.
Except where otherwise expressly stated herein, all costs incurred by a
franchisee in connection with any provision of this chapter shall be borne
by the franchisee.
§ 61-15. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a municipal infraction, subject
to the penalties and procedures set forth in § 1-18 of the City Code.
Chapter 68
DISORDERLY HOUSE NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals and fowl — See Ch. 48.
Nuisances — See Ch. 100.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 106.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 119.
Zoning — See Ch. 164.
§ 68-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
CITY — The City of Westminster.
CITY CODE — The Code of the City of Westminster.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Planning, Zoning and Development or the
Director's designee.[Amended 12-6-2007 by Ord. No. 773; 7-14-2008
by Ord. No. 784]
DWELLING — Any building arranged, designed or used in whole or part
to provide living facilities for one or more families. Dwelling shall include
boarding (lodging) and/or rooming houses. Dwelling shall also include both
the enclosed area within a dwelling, as well as the exterior premises of
the dwelling, within the boundary lines of any real property on which the
dwelling is located.
OCCUPANT — Any person who lives in or has possession of, or holds an
occupancy interest in a dwelling; or any person residing in or frequenting
the premises of the dwelling with the actual or implied permission of the
owner or lessee.
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal
or equitable interest in the dwelling; or recorded in official governmental
records as holding title to the dwelling; or otherwise having control of the
dwelling. including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the
executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take
possession of such property by a court.
§ 61-14 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 68-2
48:137
§ 68-2. Disorderly house nuisance defined.
A “disorderly house nuisance” is a dwelling as defined in this chapter
where any of the following has occurred within a three-hundred-sixty-fiveday
period:
§ 68-3. Prohibited actions.
Two or more criminal arrests, criminal citations, criminal indictments,
criminal warrants, criminal summonses, civil citations or civil
summonses arising out of separate and distinct facts and circumstances
(as defined by the statutes of the State of Maryland and/or the
ordinances of the City or of Carroll County, Maryland) which occur at a
dwelling or on property in close proximity to a dwelling;
A.
Two or more violations of Article 2B of the Annotated Code of Maryland
relating to alcoholic beverages arising out of separate and distinct facts
and circumstances; or
B.
Two or more violations of Chapter 48 of the City Code and/or Animal
Control Ordinance 26 of Carroll County, Maryland,21 relating to animals
and fowl arising out of separate, and distinct facts and circumstances;
or
C.
Two or more violations of Chapter 100 of the City Code relating to
nuisances arising out of separate, and distinct facts and circumstances;
or
D.
Two or more violations of Chapter 119 of the City Code relating to
property maintenance arising out of separate, and distinct facts and
circumstances; or
E.
Two or more violations of Chapter 164 of the City Code relating to
zoning, arising out of separate, and distinct facts and circumstances; or
F.
A combination of two incidents from any of the above categories,
arising out of separate, and distinct facts and circumstances.
G.
No owner or occupant of any dwelling shall allow or permit such
dwelling to be or become a disorderly house nuisance.
A.
An owner and/or occupant, as the case may be, shall be deemed to
have allowed or permitted a dwelling to be or become disorderly house
nuisance, if:
The owner or occupant has personally committed the acts set forth
in § 68-2; or
(1)
(2) Such acts were committed by invitees of the occupant or owner; or
B.
21.Editor's Note: See Ch. 81, Animals, of the Code of Carroll County.
§ 68-2 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 68-3
48:138
§ 68-4. Written notice of violation; contents.
Such acts were committed by persons attending events, or
functions, sponsored, permitted or allowed by the occupant or
owner; or
(3)
Such acts were committed by a combination of Subsection B(1), (2)
or (3); or
(4)
The owner or occupant has been provided with the written notice
of a disorderly house nuisance pursuant to § 68-4, below, the facts
alleged therein are true, and the owner or occupant fails or refuses
to enter into a nuisance abatement agreement or, after entering
into such agreement, fails to comply with its terms.
(5)
No person shall be prosecuted for a violation of § 68-3 until the Director
shall serve such person with the notice provided herein, and the person
has either failed or refused to enter into the nuisance abatement
agreement provided for hereinafter or, after entering into such
agreement, the person fails to comply with its provisions. Such notice
may be served on any person by personal service or, in the case of an
occupant, by restricted mail addressed to the address of the dwelling
or, in the case of a nonoccupant owner, by restricted mail to his/her last
known address or, if none, to the address to which any tax statement
is sent to such owner for the dwelling, or by posting of the dwelling,
either on the structure or at a location on the exterior premises, or by
any other method of service reasonably calculated to give actual notice.
A.
Such notice shall contain, at a minimum the following:
That a disorderly house nuisance exists, as defined by § 68-2, at the
location specified in the notice.
(1)
The date of the commission of the acts which constitute the basis
for the disorderly house nuisance, the name(s) of the person(s)
committing such acts, if known, and all other facts and
circumstances that the City relies upon to allege that such acts
form the basis for the disorderly house nuisance.
(2)
The date, time and place where the person is to appear, and meet
with the Director or the Director's designee, to participate in the
nuisance abatement conference.
(3)
That failure to appear, or failure to make satisfactory arrangements
for an alternative date and time, at the time, place and manner
designated in the notice may result in prosecution of a violation
of § 68-3 and the imposition of penalties, as prescribed by this
chapter.
(4)
B.
§ 68-3 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 68-5
48:139
§ 68-5. Nuisance abatement conference.
At the nuisance abatement conference, the Director and the owner and/or
occupant shall discuss the facts constituting the disorderly house nuisance
and shall attempt to agree on specific actions that the owner and/or
occupant can take to abate said disorderly house nuisance.
§ 68-6. Nuisance abatement agreement.
At the conclusion of the nuisance abatement conference, the Director
shall submit to the owner and/or occupant a proposed written nuisance
abatement agreement. If at the conclusion of the conference, the
Director needs more time to draft said proposed agreement, then a
follow-up meeting shall be scheduled with the owner and/or occupant,
within 10 days of the initial conference, for submittal and review of the
completed proposed nuisance abatement agreement.
A.
Any nuisance abatement agreement under this chapter shall include a
list of specific actions and specific schedule of deadlines for said actions
to abate the disorderly house nuisance. It may also include provisions
for a periodic reassessment of the agreement's effectiveness, and the
procedure for a modification of the agreement. A nuisance abatement
agreement or any written modification to said agreement may impose
conditions or requirements on the owner and/or occupant for a period
of up to 24 months from the date the original agreement is entered
into by the owner and/or occupant and the City. A nuisance abatement
agreement or any modification may impose one or more of the following
conditions or requirements on the owner and/or occupant:
Institution of eviction proceedings against identified individual(s)
from the dwelling in question.
(1)
Written notification from the owner and/or occupant to an
identified individual or individuals that they are prohibited from
entering onto the premises of the dwelling.
(2)
Utilization of written leases containing a provision or provisions
requiring eviction for criminal activity.
(3)
The completion of improvements upon the premises of the dwelling
which have the impact of mitigating crime including but not limited
to the erection of fences, installation of security devices upon the
entrances or increased lighting.
(4)
The posting of a cash bond in an amount determined by the
Director reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with the
specific conditions or requirements imposed by the nuisance
abatement agreement, including, but not limited to, the completion
of improvement under Subsection B(4). [Added 7-14-2008 by
Ord. No. 78422]
(5)
B.
§ 68-5 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 68-6
48:140
§ 68-7. Commencement of prosecution.
The Director may commence prosecution alleging a violation of this chapter
under the following circumstances:
§ 68-8. Action to abate and obtain other relief. [Amended 7-14-2008
by Ord. No. 784]
In addition to prosecution of the offenses defined in this chapter or to
pursuing any other remedies available under this Code, the Director may
prosecute an action for equitable relief, in the name of the City, to abate
the nuisance, to forfeit the cash bond or a portion thereof which may be
imposed under § 68-6B(5), and/or to enjoin any person who shall own, rent,
or occupy the dwelling in question from using or permitting its use in
violation of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 68-9. Violations and penalties.
Any other reasonable condition or requirement designed to abate
the disorderly house nuisance.
(6)
Once a proposed written nuisance abatement agreement or written
modification to nuisance abatement agreement has been submitted to
the owner and/or occupant, said owner and/or occupant shall have 48
hours to review it and enter into said agreement by signing it and
returning it to the Director.
C.
The owner and/or occupant commits a violation described in § 68-3 of
this chapter; or
A.
The owner and/or occupant does not attend a nuisance abatement
conference with the Director within the time period described
previously; or
B.
The owner and/or occupant fails or refuses to sign a proposed written
nuisance abatement agreement or proposed written modification to
said agreement within the prescribed time period set forth in § 68-6C;
or
C.
The owner and/or occupant subsequently fails or refuses to comply
with any conditions or requirements set forth in a nuisance abatement
agreement, including any prescribed deadlines for taking particular
actions.
D.
Any person who shall violate a provision of this chapter, or fail to
comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be
prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local laws. Each day
that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be
deemed separate offense. In addition to other remedies, any violation
A.
22.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection B(5) as Subsection
B(6).
§ 68-6 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 68-9

Chapter 73
ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
73:1

ARTICLE I
Plastic Bags
[Adopted 5-13-2019 by Ord. No. 911]
§ 73-1. Purpose.
§ 73-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT — Any commercial enterprise that provides
carry-out bags to its customers through its employees or independent
contractors associated with the business. The term includes sole
proprietorships, joint ventures, partnerships, corporations, or any other
legal entity, whether for profit or not for profit.
CUSTOMER — A person who purchases merchandise from a business
establishment.
SINGLE-USE PLASTIC CARRY-OUT BAG — A bag provided by a business
establishment to a customer typically at the point of sale for the purpose
of transporting purchases, which is made predominantly of plastic derived
from either petroleum or a biologically based source and including
compostable bags, but not including reusable carry-out bags.
§ 73-3. Prohibitions.
§ 73-4. Exemptions.
This Chapter shall not apply to:
A. This chapter is adopted to improve the environment of the City by
reducing the number of single-use plastic bags in the stream of
commerce.
B. Business establishments within the City are encouraged to provide
prominently displayed signage advising customers of the benefit of
reducing, reusing and recycling, and promoting the use of reusable
carry-out bags and recyclable paper carry-out bags by customers. All
business establishments are encouraged to make reusable carry-out
bags or recyclable paper bags available to customers.
A. No person may provide single-use plastic carry-out bags at any City
facility, City-sponsored event, or any event held on City property.
B. No business establishment within the City may provide single-use
plastic carry-out bags to its customers.
A. Laundry dry-cleaning bags, door-hanger bags, newspaper bags, or
packages of multiple bags intended for use for disposition of garbage,
pet waste, or yard waste.
§ 73-1 ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY § 73-4
73:3
§ 73-5. Violations and penalties.
B. Bags provided by pharmacists or veterinarians to contain prescription
drugs or other medical necessities, as required by the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA).
C. Bags used inside a business establishment to:
(1) Contain bulk items, such as produce, nuts, grains, candy, or small
hardware items;
(2) Contain or wrap frozen foods, meat, or fish, whether or not
prepackaged;
(3) Contain or wrap plant material flowers or potted plants to prevent
spoilage of the item or moisture damage to other purchases; or
(4) Contain unwrapped prepared foods or bakery goods.
D. Bags of any type that the customer brings to the business establishment
for his or her own use for carrying away from the store goods that are
not placed in a bag provided by the business establishment.
E. Bags used by restaurants for takeout by customers or for delivery of
food to residential customers.
F. Bags used by business establishments with fewer than 25 employees at
all of the business establishments owned by the same person or entity,
wherever such businesses may be located. The exemption set forth in
this subsection shall not apply to franchised establishments.
A. Any business establishment that violates or fails to comply with the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a municipal
infraction, punishable by a fine of $100 for a first violation; $200 for a
second violation within any twelve-month period; and $500 for each
additional violation within any twelve-month period. A transaction
involving multiple plastic bags distributed to a single customer shall
constitute one offense.
B. In addition to the penalties set forth in this section, repeated violations
of this chapter by a person who owns, manages, operates, is a business
agent of, or otherwise controls a business establishment may result in
the suspension or revocation of the business license issued to the
premises on which the violations occurred. No business license shall be
issued or renewed until all fines outstanding against the applicant for
violations of this chapter are paid in full.
C. In addition to the penalties provided in Subsection A of this section,
multiple violations of this chapter by a business establishment are
declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated by the City by
restraining order, preliminary and permanent injunction, or other
means provided for by law, and the City may take action to recover the
costs of the nuisance abatement.
§ 73-4 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 73-5
73:4

Chapter 78
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 21. Fees — See Ch. A175.
may be deemed a municipal infraction and prosecuted as such. The
penalty for violation shall be a fine of $400 for each offense, which may
be doubled in accordance with applicable law, and/or the issuance of an
abatement order.
Upon a finding of guilt under this chapter, the court may, in addition
to other remedies permitted by law, impose any or all of the following
conditions:
The completion of improvements upon the premises of the dwelling
which have the impact of mitigating crime and criminal activity,
including but not limited to the erection of fences, installation of
security devices or increased lighting;
(1)
Requirement of a written lease for occupants which includes
provisions requiring eviction for criminal activity;
(2)
(3) Submitting tenancy lists on a periodic basis to the City.
Imposition of a period of court supervision with the posting of a
cash bond of no less than the minimum fine and up to the amount
of the maximum fine for the period of court supervision in an
interest-bearing account conditioned on successful completion of
the conditions imposed by the court under the court supervision
and failure to complete successfully shall result in forfeiture of the
bond to the City;
(4)
The forfeiture of the cash bond or a portion thereof which may be
imposed under § 68-6B(5); and [Added 7-14-2008 by Ord. No.
78423]
(5)
Any other condition reasonably related to the objective of abating
the disorderly house nuisance.
(6)
B.
23.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection B(5) as Subsection
B(6).
§ 68-9 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 68-9
48:142
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted as Ch. 7, Art. I, of the 1972 Code, as amended through
1990]
§ 78-1. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person without proper authority so to do to use,
remove, damage, deface, tamper with or render inoperative any property or
equipment of the Fire Department, including the fire alarm system thereof,
or any fire hydrant of the City or water main supplying water to any fire
hydrant or to obstruct access by the Fire Department to any fire hydrant;
and it shall be unlawful for any person without proper authority so to do
to remove, damage, deface, tamper with, render inoperative or obstruct
access to any fire escape or other fire exit from any structure or any fire
extinguisher or sprinkler system in any structure.
§ 78-1 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 78-1
48:143

ARTICLE II
Fire Prevention Code
[Adopted as Ch. 7, Art. II, of the 1972 Code, as amended through
1990]
§ 78-2. Adoption of standards; copies on file; title; applicability.
For the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous
to life and property from fire or explosion, there is hereby adopted that
certain code known as the "Fire Prevention Code, Abbreviated Edition,
1965," recommended by the American Insurance Association, a copy of
which is and shall remain on file in the office of the City Clerk, and such
code is hereby incorporated in and made a part of this section as fully as
though it were set out at length herein; and the code adopted by this section
shall be known and may be cited as the "Fire Prevention Code of the City,"
and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the City and as to fire
hazard nuisances within 1/2 mile beyond the City.
§ 78-3. Definitions.
As used in this article and the Fire Prevention Code adopted herein, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CHIEF OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT — The executive officer, as defined in
this section.
EXECUTIVE OFFICER — The officer designated by the Mayor, with the
approval of the Common Council, to administer and enforce the provisions
of the Fire Prevention Code.
MUNICIPALITY — This City.
§ 78-4. Storage of dangerous materials.
The limits referred to in Section 53b of the Fire Prevention Code, in which
storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, the limits referred
to in Section 74a of that code, in which storage of Class I liquids in outside
aboveground tanks is prohibited, and the limits referred to in Section 114
of that code, in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted,
are hereby established as the entire City limits, except as may be provided
otherwise in the Zoning Ordinance.24
§ 78-5. Permits; fees.
The legislative body shall establish reasonable fees for permits required
by the Fire Prevention Code in the General Fee Ordinance.25 No permit
for which a fee is required by such ordinance shall be valid until
initialed by the City Clerk-Treasurer upon payment of such fee. A copy
A.
24.Editor's Note: See Ch. 164, Zoning and Subdivision of Land.
25.Editor’s Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
§ 78-2 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 78-5
48:145
§ 78-6. Modifications to requirements.
The executive officer shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the
Fire Prevention Code upon application, in writing, by the owner or lessee
of the property thereby affected or his duly authorized agent when there
are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the
code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety
secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification
when granted or allowed and the decision of the executive officer thereon
shall be entered upon the records of the Department, and a signed copy
shall be furnished to the applicant.
§ 78-7. Appeals.
Whenever the executive officer shall disapprove an application or refuse
to grant a permit applied for or when it is claimed that the provisions of
the Fire Prevention Code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning
of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant
may appeal from the decision of the executive officer to the legislative body
within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed.
§ 78-8. Violations and penalties.
of such schedule shall be maintained on file in the office of the executive
officer. [Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 791]
Permits required by the Fire Prevention Code shall be issued by the
executive officer and shall be valid for a period of one year from
the date of issue, unless a shorter period is specified in any permit,
provided that where a license is required in addition to a permit and
such license is renewable annually, such permit may be made valid for
an indefinite period.
B.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the Fire
Prevention Code or fail to comply therewith or who shall violate or
fail to comply with any order made thereunder or who shall build in
violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted
and approved thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder
and from which no appeal has been taken or who shall fail to comply
with such an order as affirmed or modified by the legislative body
or by a court of competent jurisdiction within the time fixed therein
shall severally, for each and every such violation and noncompliance,
respectively, be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be
punished as provided in § 1-18A, and the imposition of one penalty for
any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and
all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations
or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified,
each 10 days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute
a separate offense.
A.
§ 78-5 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 78-8
48:146
§ 78-9. Interpretation.
If, in the case, any provision of the Fire Prevention Code of the City is
found to conflict with any applicable provision of the State or County
Fire Prevention Code or any rule or regulation of the Fire Prevention
Commission or any statute, the provision which is more stringent or
imposes a higher standard shall govern.
The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
B.
§ 78-8 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 78-9
48:147
Chapter 80
FISHING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals and fowl — See Ch. 48.
Licenses — See Ch. 94.
Fees — See Ch. A175.
§ 80-1. Licenses, permits and procedures for Raw Water Reservoir.
[Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 791]
The Mayor and Common Council shall have the right to establish and
amend from time to time a licensing procedure for fishing at the Raw
Water Reservoir and a procedure to issue, suspend and revoke permits to
certain persons for such use and the right to establish rules and regulations
concerning the use of the reservoir and to establish and collect fees for such
permits as provided in the General Fee Ordinance.26
§ 80-2. Disposition of fees.
The fees generated from all permits for fishing at the Raw Water Reservoir
shall be divided equally between the Westminster City Police Department
and the City Water Department.
§ 80-3. Violations and penalties.
The penalties for violation of any provisions of the rules, regulations and
procedures established by resolutions of the Mayor and Common Council
pursuant to this chapter or the violation of any county, state or federal law
or regulation shall be those set forth in § 1-18A of the Code of the City of
Westminster, suspension or revocation of the permit to fish, a fine of $20
upon the first offense and $100 for each subsequent offense, or all of the
foregoing.
§ 80-4. Rules and regulations.
A true and complete copy of the current rules and regulations then in force
shall be maintained in the office of the Director of Public Works and the
office of the City Clerk and the City Police Department for inspection by the
public.
26.Editor’s Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
§ 78-9 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 80-4
48:148
Chapter 83
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning and Zoning Commission — See Ch.
7, Art. II.
Buildings — See Ch. 56.
Storm sewer systems environmental
management — See Ch. 135.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 136.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 139.
Water — See Ch. 160.
Zoning and subdivision of land — See Ch. 164.
Fee Schedule — See Ch. A175.
§ 80-4 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 80-4
48:149

ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 83-1. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in these
regulations shall be interpreted to have the meanings they have in common
usage and to give these regulations the most reasonable application.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A building or structure on the same lot with,
and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal
structure, used solely for parking of vehicles and limited storage.
AGREEMENT TO SUBMIT AN ELEVATION CERTIFICATE — A form on
which the applicant for a permit to construct a building or structure, to
construct certain horizontal additions, to place or replace a manufactured
home, or to substantially improve a building, structure, or manufactured
home agrees to have an elevation certificate prepared by a licensed
professional engineer or licensed professional surveyor, as specified by the
Floodplain Administrator, and to submit the certificate:
ALTERATION OF A WATERCOURSE — The widening, deepening or
relocating of a channel, including excavation or filling, but not including
construction of a road, bridge, culvert, dam, or in-stream pond, unless
the channel is proposed to be realigned or relocated as part of such
construction.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated Zone AO on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map, with a one-percent annual chance or greater of
flooding to an average depth of one feet to three feet, where a clearly
defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable,
and where velocity flow may be evident; such flooding is characterized by
ponding or sheet flow.
BASE BUILDING — The building to which an addition is being added.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year; the base flood also is referred to as the onepercent-
annual-chance one-hundred-year flood.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The water surface elevation of the base flood
in relation to the datum specified on the City's Flood Insurance Rate Map.
In areas of shallow flooding, the base flood elevation is the highest adjacent
natural grade elevation plus the depth number specified in feet on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, or at least four feet if the depth number is not
specified.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
Upon placement of the lowest floor and prior to further vertical
construction; and
A.
B. Prior to the final inspection and issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
§ 83-1 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 83-1
48:151
BUILDING CODE(S) — The effective Maryland Building Performance
Standards (COMAR 05.02.07), including the building code, residential code,
and existing building code.
COMMUNITY — A political subdivision of the state that has authority
to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations within its
jurisdictional boundaries.
CRITICAL AND ESSENTIAL FACILITIES — Buildings and other structures
that are intended to remain operational in the event of extreme
environmental loading from flood, wind, snow or earthquakes. (Note: See
Maryland Building Performance Standards, Section 1602 and Table 1604.5.)
Critical and essential facilities typically include hospitals, fire stations,
police stations, storage of critical records, facilities that handle or store
hazardous materials, and similar facilities.
DECLARATION OF LAND RESTRICTION (NONCONVERSION
AGREEMENT) — A form signed by the owner to agree not to convert or
modify, in any manner that is inconsistent with the terms of the permit
and these regulations, certain enclosures below the lowest floor of elevated
buildings and certain accessory structures. The form requires the owner to
record it on the property deed to inform future owners of the restrictions.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, placement
of manufactured homes, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
DIRECTOR — The City's Director of Public Works.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATE — FEMA form on which surveyed elevations
and other data pertinent to a property and a building are identified and
which shall be completed by a licensed professional land surveyor or a
licensed professional engineer, as specified by the Floodplain Administrator.
When used to document the height above grade of buildings in special
flood hazard areas for which base flood elevation data are not available, the
elevation certificate shall be completed in accordance with the instructions
issued by FEMA. (Note: FEMA Form 086-0-33 and instructions are available
online at http://www.fema.gov/library/viewRecord.do?id=1383.)
ENCLOSURE BELOW THE LOWEST FLOOR — An unfinished or floodresistant
enclosure that is located below an elevated building, is surrounded
by walls on all sides, and is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building
access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, provided that
such enclosure is built in accordance with the applicable design
requirements specified in these regulations. Also see "lowest floor."
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) — The federal
agency with the overall responsibility for administering the National Flood
Insurance Program.
FLOOD-DAMAGE-RESISTANT MATERIALS — Any construction material
that is capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with
floodwaters without sustaining any damage that requires more than
§ 83-1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 83-1
48:152
cosmetic repair. (Note: See NFIP Technical Bulletin No. 2, Flood-Damage-
Resistant Materials Requirements.)
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated special flood
hazard areas to indicate the magnitude and nature of flood hazards, to
designate applicable flood zones, and to delineate floodways, if applicable.
FIRMs that have been prepared in digital format or converted to digital
format are referred to as "digital FIRMs (DFIRMs)."
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — Flood Insurance Study for Carroll
County, Maryland And Incorporated Areas, dated October 2, 2015, or the
most recent revision thereof, which constitutes the official report in which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency has provided flood profiles,
floodway information, and water surface elevations.
FLOOD OPENING —
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water
from any source.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE — FEMA form that is to be completed,
signed and sealed by a licensed professional engineer or licensed architect
to certify that the design of floodproofing and proposed methods of
construction are in accordance with the applicable requirements of
§ 83-35B of these regulations. (Note: FEMA Form 086-0-34 is available
online at http://www.fema.gov/library/viewRecord.do?id=1600.)
FLOODPROOFING or FLOODPROOFED — Any combination of structural
and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to buildings or
structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or
improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their
contents, such that the buildings or structures are watertight with walls
NONENGINEERED FLOOD OPENING — An opening that is used to
meet the prescriptive requirement of one square inch of net open area
for every square foot of enclosed area.
A.
ENGINEERED FLOOD OPENING — An opening that is designed and
certified by a licensed professional engineer or licensed architect as
meeting certain performance characteristics, including providing
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters; this certification requirement
may be satisfied by an individual certification for a specific structure
or issuance of an evaluation report by the ICC Evaluation Service, Inc.
(Note: See NFIP Technical Bulletin No. 1, Openings in Foundation Walls
and Walls of Enclosures.)
B.
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
§ 83-1 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 83-1
48:153
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. [Note: State regulations at
COMAR 26.17.04.11(B)(7) do not allow new nonresidential buildings in
nontidal waters of the state to be floodproofed.]
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION — The base flood elevation plus two
feet of freeboard. Freeboard is a factor of safety that compensates for
uncertainty in factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than
the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such
as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams, climate
change, and the hydrologic effect of urbanization in a watershed.
FLOOD PROTECTION SETBACK — A distance, measured perpendicular
to the top of bank of a watercourse, that delineates an area to be left
undisturbed to minimize future flood damage and to recognize the potential
for bank erosion. Along nontidal waters of the state, the flood protection
setback is:
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to pass the base flood discharge
such that the cumulative increase in the water surface elevation of the base
flood discharge is no more than a designated height. When shown on a
FIRM, the floodway is referred to as the "designated floodway."
FLOOD ZONE — A designation for areas that are shown on Flood Insurance
Rate Maps:
One hundred feet if the watercourse has special flood hazard areas
shown on the FIRM, except where the setback extends beyond the
boundary of the flood hazard area; or
A.
Fifty feet if the watercourse does not have special flood hazard areas
shown on the FIRM.
B.
ZONE A — Special flood hazard areas subject to inundation by the onepercent-
annual-chance (one-hundred-year) flood; base flood elevations
are not determined.
A.
ZONE AE and ZONE A1-30 — Special flood hazard areas subject to
inundation by the one-percent-annual-chance (one-hundred-year) flood;
base flood elevations are determined; floodways may or may not be
determined.
B.
ZONE AH and ZONE AO — Areas of shallow flooding, with flood depths
of one foot to three feet (usually areas of ponding or sheet flow on
sloping terrain), with or without BFEs or designated flood depths.
C.
ZONE B and ZONE X (SHADED) — Areas subject to inundation by
the two-tenths-percent-annual-chance (five-hundred-year) flood; areas
subject to the one-percent-annual-chance (one-hundred-year) flood with
average depths of less than one foot or with contributing drainage area
D.
§ 83-1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 83-1
48:154
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water; the term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are
necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and
shipbuilding and ship-repair facilities, but does not include long-term
storage or related manufacturing facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed foundation of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC ENGINEERING ANALYSES — Analyses
performed by a licensed professional engineer, in accordance with standard
engineering practices that are accepted by MDE and FEMA, used to
determine the base flood, other frequency floods, flood elevations, floodway
information and boundaries, and flood profiles.
LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC) — An official FEMA determination, by
letter, that amends or revises an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or
Flood Insurance Study. Letters of map change include:
less than one square mile; and areas protected from the base flood by
levees.
ZONE C and ZONE X (UNSHADED) — Areas outside of zones
designated A, AE, A1-30, AO, VE, V1-30, B, and X (shaded).
E.
ZONE VE and ZONE V1-30 — Special flood hazard areas subject to
inundation by the one-percent-annual-chance (one-hundred-year) flood
and subject to high-velocity wave action (also see "coastal high-hazard
area").
F.
Individually listed on the National Register of Historic Places
maintained by the United States Department of the Interior or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district; or
B.
C. Individually listed on the Maryland Register of Historic Places.
LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA) — An amendment based on
technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a
designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current
effective Flood Insurance Rate Map and establishes that a specific
property or structure is not located in a special flood hazard area.
A.
LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR) — A revision based on technical
data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, floodplain
B.
§ 83-1 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 83-1
48:155
LICENSED — Possessing a license to practice issued by the Maryland Board
of Architects, Maryland Board of Professional Engineers, Maryland Board
of Professional Land Surveyors, or the Maryland Real Estate Appraisers and
Home Inspectors Commission.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement) of a building or structure; the floor of an enclosure below the
lowest floor is not the lowest floor, provided that the enclosure is
constructed in accordance with these regulations. The lowest floor of a
manufactured home is the bottom of the lowest horizontal supporting
member (longitudinal chassis frame beam).
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections that is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities
and not including a recreational vehicle.
MARKET VALUE — The price at which a property will change hands
between a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither party being under
compulsion to buy or sell and both having reasonable knowledge of relevant
facts. For the purposes of these regulations, the market value of a building
is determined by a licensed real estate appraiser or the most recent, full
phased-in assessment value of the building (improvement) determined by
the State Department of Assessments and Taxation.
MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT (MDE) — A principal
department of the state that is charged with, among other responsibilities,
the coordination of the National Flood Insurance Program in Maryland
and the administration of regulatory programs for development and
construction that occur within the waters of the state, including nontidal
wetlands, nontidal waters and floodplains, and state and private tidal
and floodway delineations, and planimetric features. A letter of map
revision based on fill (LOMR-F), is a determination that a structure or
parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation
and is, therefore, no longer exposed to flooding associated with the
base flood. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have
been permitted and placed in accordance with the City's floodplain
management regulations.
CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR) — A formal
review and comment as to whether a proposed flood-protection project
or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for
such project with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas.
A Conditional Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (CLOMR-F) is a
determination that a parcel of land or proposed structure that will
be elevated by fill would not be inundated by the base flood if fill is
placed on the parcel as proposed or the structure is built as proposed.
A CLOMR does not revise the effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or
Flood Insurance Study; upon submission and approval of certified asbuilt
documentation, a letter of map revision may be issued by FEMA to
revise the effective FIRM.
C.
§ 83-1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 83-1
48:156
wetlands (tidal wetlands). Unless otherwise specified, "MDE" refers to the
Department's Wetlands and Waterways Program.
MIXED-USE STRUCTURE — Any structure that is used or intended for use
for a mixture of nonresidential and residential uses in the same structure.
NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP) — The program
authorized by the United States Congress in 42 U.S.C. §§ 4001 - 4129. The
NFIP makes flood insurance coverage available in communities that agree
to adopt and enforce minimum regulatory requirements for development in
areas prone to flooding (see definition of "special flood hazard area").
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures, including additions and
improvements, and the placement of manufactured homes, for which the
start of construction commenced on or after December 1, 1977, the initial
effective date of the City of Westminster Flood Insurance Rate Map,
including any subsequent improvements, alterations, modifications, and
additions to such structures.
NFIP STATE COORDINATOR — The individual designated by the Maryland
Department of the Environment to coordinate the National Flood Insurance
Program and administer MDE's regulatory programs for development and
construction that occur within the waters of the state, including nontidal
wetlands, nontidal waters and floodplains, and tidal wetlands.
NONTIDAL WATERS OF THE STATE — Any stream or body of water within
the state that is subject to state regulation, including the one-hundred-yearfrequency
floodplain of free-flowing waters. COMAR 26:17.04 states that
"the landward boundaries of any tidal waters shall be deemed coterminous
with the wetlands boundary maps adopted pursuant to Environment Article,
§ 16-301. Annotated Code of Maryland." Therefore, the boundary between
the tidal and nontidal waters of the state is the tidal wetlands boundary.
PERSON — An individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership,
association, or any other entity, including state and local governments and
agencies.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle that is built on a single chassis,
400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection,
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck,
and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — The land in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
Special flood hazard areas are designated by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in Flood Insurance Studies and on Flood Insurance
Rate Maps as Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-30, and A99. The term includes areas
shown on other flood maps that are identified in § 83-5.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date the building permit was issued,
provided that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180
days of the permit date. The "actual start" means either the first placement
§ 83-1 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 83-1
48:157
of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any
work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary
forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
structures, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For substantial improvements, the "actual
start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a building
or structure whereby the cost of restoring the building or structure to
its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market
value of the building or structure before the damage occurred; also used as
"substantially damaged" structures. [Note: See "Substantial Improvement/
Substantial Damage Desk Reference" (FEMA P-758).]
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the building or structure
before the start of construction of the improvement. The term includes
structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE — A structure installed, used, or erected for a
period of less than 180 days.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the strict application of one or more
requirements of these regulations.
VIOLATION — Any construction or development in a special flood hazard
area that is being performed without an issued permit; the failure of a
building, structure, or other development for which a permit is issued
to be fully compliant with these regulations and the conditions of the
issued permit. A building, structure, or other development without the
Any project for improvement of a building or structure to correct
existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official prior to submission of an application for a permit and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
§ 83-1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 83-1
48:158
required design certifications, the elevation certificate, or other evidence of
compliance required is presumed to be a violation until such time as the
required documentation is provided.
WATERCOURSE — The channel, including channel banks and bed, of
nontidal waters of the state.
WATERS OF THE STATE — (See Environment Article, Title 5, Subtitle 1,
Annotated Code of Maryland.) Includes:
Both surface and underground waters within the boundaries of the
state subject to its jurisdiction;
A.
B. That portion of the Atlantic Ocean within the boundaries of the state;
C. The Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries;
All ponds, lakes, rivers, streams, public ditches, tax ditches, and public
drainage systems within the state, other than those designed and used
to collect, convey, or dispose of sanitary sewage; and
D.
The floodplain of free-flowing waters determined by MDE on the basis
of the one-hundred-year flood frequency.
E.
§ 83-1 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 83-1
48:159

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 83-2. Findings; compliance required.
§ 83-3. Statutory authorization.
It is the policy of the State, as set forth in the Land Use Article, Title
4, of the Annotated Code of Maryland, that the orderly development and
use of land and structures requires comprehensive regulation through the
implementation of planning and zoning control and that planning and
zoning controls shall be implemented by local government in order to,
among other purposes, secure the public safety, promote health and general
welfare, and promote the conservation of natural resources.
§ 83-4. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of these regulations to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare and to:
The Federal Emergency Management Agency has identified special
flood hazard areas within the boundaries of the City. Special flood
hazard areas are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss
of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce
and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood
protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which
adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
Structures that are inadequately elevated, improperly floodproofed,
or otherwise unprotected from flood damage also contribute to flood
losses.
A.
The Mayor and Common Council agreed to meet the requirements of
the National Flood Insurance Program, and the City was accepted for
participation in the program on December 1, 1977. As of that date,
all development and new construction, as defined herein, are to be
compliant with these regulations.
B.
A. Protect human life, health and welfare;
Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future;
B.
Minimize flooding of water supply and sanitary sewage disposal
systems;
C.
D. Maintain natural drainage;
Reduce financial burdens imposed on the City, its governmental units
and its residents, by discouraging unwise design and construction of
development in areas subject to flooding;
E.
§ 83-2 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 83-4
48:161
§ 83-5. Applicability.
These regulations shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the
jurisdiction of the City and identified in § 83-6.
§ 83-6. Basis for establishing special flood hazard areas and base
flood elevations.
Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
F.
G. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
Minimize damage to public facilities and other utilities, such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges;
H.
Reinforce that those who build in and occupy special flood hazard areas
should assume responsibility for their actions;
I.
Minimize the impact of development on adjacent properties within and
near flood-prone areas;
J.
Provide that the flood storage and conveyance functions of floodplains
are maintained;
K.
Minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial
functions of floodplains;
L.
Prevent floodplain uses that are either hazardous or environmentally
incompatible; and
M.
Meet community participation requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program as set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations
(CFR) at 44 CFR 59.22.
N.
For the purposes of these regulations, the minimum basis for
establishing special flood hazard areas and base flood elevations is the
FIS and the accompanying FIRMs and all subsequent amendments and
revisions to the FIRMs. The FIS and FIRMs are retained on file and
available to the public at the City's administrative offices.
A.
Where field-surveyed topography or digital topography indicates that
ground elevations are below the closest applicable base flood elevation,
even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard on the FIRM, the
area shall be considered as a special flood hazard area.
B.
To establish base flood elevations in special flood hazard areas that
do not have such elevations shown on the FIRM, the Floodplain
Administrator may provide the best available data for base flood
elevations, may require the applicant to obtain available information
from federal, state or other sources, or may require the applicant to
establish special flood hazard areas and base flood elevations as set
forth in §§ 83-4, 83-5 and 83-6 of these regulations.
C.
§ 83-4 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 83-7
48:162
§ 83-7. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of these regulations, all provisions
shall be:
§ 83-8. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by these regulations is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur, and flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. These regulations
do not imply that land outside of the special flood hazard areas or uses that
are permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage.
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the City; and
Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes. Where a provision of these regulations may be in conflict
with a state or federal law, such state or federal law shall take
precedence.
C.
§ 83-7 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 83-8
48:163

ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 83-9. Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
The Director is hereby appointed to administer and implement these
regulations and is referred to herein as the "Floodplain Administrator." The
Floodplain Administrator may;
§ 83-10. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include
but are not limited to:
Delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations to
qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and other
employees.
A.
Enter into a written agreement or written contract with another
Maryland community or private sector entity to administer specific
provisions of these regulations. Administration of any part of these
regulations by another entity shall not relieve the City of its
responsibilities pursuant to the participation requirements of the
National Flood Insurance Program as set forth in the Code of Federal
Regulations (CFR) at 44 CFR 59.22.
B.
Review applications for permits to determine whether proposed
activities will be located in flood hazard areas.
A.
Interpret floodplain boundaries and provide available base flood
elevation and flood hazard information.
B.
Review applications to determine whether proposed activities will be
reasonably safe from flooding and require new construction and
substantial improvements to meet the requirements of these
regulations.
C.
Review applications to determine whether all necessary permits have
been obtained from the federal, state or local agencies from which
prior or concurrent approval is required; in particular, permits from
MDE for any construction, reconstruction, repair, or alteration of a
dam, reservoir, or waterway obstruction (including bridges, culverts,
and structures), any alteration of a watercourse, or any change of
the course, current, or cross section of a stream or body of water,
including any change to the one-hundred-year frequency floodplain of
free-flowing nontidal waters of the state.
D.
Verify that applicants proposing an alteration of a watercourse have
notified adjacent communities and the NFIP State Coordinator and
have submitted copies of such notifications to FEMA.
E.
§ 83-9 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 83-10
48:165
Approve applications and issue permits to develop in flood hazard areas
if the provisions of these regulations have been met, or disapprove
applications if the provisions of these regulations have not been met.
F.
Inspect, or cause to be inspected, buildings, structures, and other
development for which permits have been issued to determine
compliance with these regulations or to determine if noncompliance
has occurred or violations have been committed.
G.
Review elevation certificates and require incomplete or deficient
certificates to be corrected.
H.
Submit to FEMA, or require applicants to submit to FEMA, data and
information necessary to maintain FIRMs, including hydrologic and
hydraulic engineering analyses prepared by or for the City, within
six months after such data and information becomes available if the
analyses indicate changes in base flood elevations or boundaries.
I.
Maintain and permanently keep records that are necessary for the
administration of these regulations, including:
Flood Insurance Studies, Flood Insurance Rate Maps (including
historic studies and maps and current effective studies and maps)
and letters of map change; and
(1)
Documentation supporting issuance and denial of permits,
elevation certificates, documentation of the elevation (in relation
to the datum on the FIRM) to which structures have been
floodproofed, other required design certifications, variances, and
records of enforcement actions taken to correct violations of these
regulations.
(2)
J.
Enforce the provisions of these regulations, investigate violations, issue
notices of violations or stop-work orders, and require permit holders to
take corrective action.
K.
Advise the Mayor and Common Council regarding the intent of these
regulations and, for each application for a variance, prepare a staff
report and recommendation.
L.
Administer the requirements related to proposed work on existing
buildings, including:
Making determinations as to whether buildings and structures that
are located in flood hazard areas and that are damaged by any
cause have been substantially damaged; and
(1)
Making reasonable efforts to notify owners of substantially
damaged structures of the need to obtain a permit to repair,
rehabilitate, or reconstruct and prohibit the noncompliant repair of
substantially damaged buildings, except for temporary emergency
protective measures necessary to secure a property or stabilize a
building or structure to prevent additional damage.
(2)
M.
§ 83-10 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 83-10
48:166
§ 83-11. Use and interpretation of FIRMs.
The Floodplain Administrator shall make interpretations, where needed, as
to the exact location of special flood hazard areas, floodplain boundaries,
and floodway boundaries. The following shall apply to the use and
interpretation of FIRMs and data:
Undertake, as determined appropriate by the Floodplain Administrator
due to the circumstances, other actions which may include but are
not limited to issuing press releases, public service announcements,
and other public information materials related to permit requests and
repair of damaged structures; coordinating with other federal, state,
and local agencies to assist with substantial damage determinations;
providing owners of damaged structures information related to the
proper repair of damaged structures in special flood hazard areas;
and assisting property owners with documentation necessary to file
claims for increased cost of compliance (ICC) coverage under NFIP
flood insurance policies.
N.
Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency when the corporate
boundaries of the City have been modified and:
Provide a map that clearly delineates the new corporate boundaries
or the new area for which the authority to regulate pursuant to
these regulations has either been assumed or relinquished through
annexation; and
(1)
If the FIRM for any annexed area includes special flood hazard
areas that have flood zones that have regulatory requirements that
are not set forth in these regulations, prepare amendments to
these regulations to adopt the FIRM and appropriate requirements
and submit the amendments to the governing body for adoption;
such adoption shall take place within six months of the date of
annexation, and a copy of the amended regulations shall be
provided to the NFIP State Coordinator and FEMA.
(2)
O.
Upon the request of FEMA, complete and submit a report concerning
participation in the NFIP which may request information regarding
the number of buildings in the SFHA, number of permits issued for
development in the SFHA, and number of variances issued for
development in the SFHA.
P.
Where field-surveyed topography indicates that ground elevations:
Are below the base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as
a special flood hazard area on a FIRM, the area shall be considered
as special flood hazard area and subject to the requirements of
these regulations;
(1)
Are above the base flood elevation, the area shall be regulated as
special flood hazard area unless the applicant obtains a letter of
(2)
A.
§ 83-10 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 83-11
48:167
§ 83-12. Permits required; expiration.
map change that removes the area from the special flood hazard
area.
In FEMA-identified special flood hazard areas where base flood
elevation and floodway data have not been identified and in areas
where FEMA has not identified special flood hazard areas, any other
flood hazard data available from a federal, state, or other source shall
be reviewed and reasonably used.
B.
Base flood elevations and designated floodway boundaries on FIRMs
and in FISs shall take precedence over base flood elevations and
floodway boundaries by any other sources if such sources show reduced
floodway widths and/or lower base flood elevations.
C.
Other sources of data shall be reasonably used if such sources show
increased base flood elevations and/or larger floodway areas than are
shown on FIRMs and in FISs.
D.
If a Preliminary Flood Insurance Rate Map and/or a Preliminary Flood
Insurance Study has been provided by FEMA:
Upon the issuance of a letter of final determination by FEMA, if the
preliminary flood hazard data is more restrictive than the effective
data, it shall be used and shall replace the flood hazard data
previously provided from FEMA for the purposes of administering
these regulations.
(1)
Prior to the issuance of a letter of final determination by FEMA,
the use of preliminary flood hazard data shall be deemed the best
available data pursuant to § 83-6C and used where no base flood
elevations and/or floodway areas are provided on the effective
FIRM.
(2)
Prior to issuance of a letter of final determination by FEMA, the use
of preliminary flood hazard data is permitted where the preliminary
base flood elevations, floodplain or floodway boundaries exceed the
base flood elevations and/or designated floodway widths in existing
flood hazard data provided by FEMA. Such preliminary data may
be subject to change and/or appeal to FEMA.
(3)
E.
It shall be unlawful for any person to begin any development or
construction which is wholly within, partially within, or in contact with
any flood hazard area established in § 83-6, including but not limited
to filling; grading; construction of new structures; the substantial
improvement of buildings or structures, including repair of substantial
damage; placement or replacement of manufactured homes, including
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage of
manufactured homes; erecting or installing a temporary structure; or
alteration of a watercourse, until a permit is obtained from the City. No
A.
§ 83-11 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 83-12
48:168
§ 83-13. Application required; contents.
Application for a permit shall be made by the owner of the property or the
owner's authorized agent (herein referred to as the "applicant") prior to
the start of any work. The application shall be on a form furnished for that
purpose.
such permit shall be issued until the requirements of these regulations
have been met.
In addition to the permit required in Subsection A, applicants for
permits in nontidal waters of the state are advised to contact MDE.
Unless waived by MDE, pursuant to COMAR 26.17.04, Construction
on Nontidal Waters and Floodplains, MDE regulates the one-hundredyear-
frequency floodplain of free-flowing waters, also referred to as
"nontidal waters of the state." To determine the one-hundred-yearfrequency
floodplain, hydrologic calculations are based on the ultimate
development of the watershed, assuming existing zoning. The resulting
flood hazard areas delineated using the results of such calculations may
be different from the special flood hazard areas established in § 83-6 of
these regulations. A permit from the City is still required in addition to
any state requirements.
B.
A permit is valid provided that the actual start of work is within 180
days of the date of permit issuance. Requests for extensions shall
be submitted in writing. The Floodplain Administrator may grant, in
writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180
days each.
C.
Application contents. At a minimum, applications shall include:
Site plans, drawn to scale, showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and existing and proposed topography of the area in
question, and the location of existing and proposed structures,
excavation, filling, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and
other proposed activities.
(1)
Elevation of the existing natural ground where buildings or
structures are proposed, referenced to the datum on the FIRM.
(2)
Delineation of flood hazard areas, designated floodway boundaries,
flood zones, base flood elevations, and flood-protection setbacks.
Base flood elevations shall be used to delineate the boundary of
flood hazard areas, and such delineations shall prevail over the
boundary of SFHAs shown on FIRMs.
(3)
Where floodways are not delineated or base flood elevations are
not shown on the FIRMs, the Floodplain Administrator has the
authority to require the applicant to use information provided by
the Floodplain Administrator, information that is available from
federal, state, or other sources, or to determine such information
using accepted engineering practices or methods approved by the
(4)
A.
§ 83-12 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 83-13
48:169
Floodplain Administrator. [Note: See "Managing Floodplain
Development in Approximate Zone A Areas: A Guide for Obtaining
and Developing Base (One-Hundred-Year) Flood Elevations" (FEMA
265).]
Determination of the base flood elevations, for development
proposals and subdivision proposals, each with at least five lots or
at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in special flood hazard
areas where base flood elevations are not shown on the FIRM; if
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses are submitted, such
analyses shall be performed in accordance with the requirements
and specifications of MDE and FEMA.
(5)
Hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses for proposals in
special flood hazard areas where FEMA has provided base flood
elevations but has not delineated a floodway; such analyses shall
demonstrate that the cumulative effect of proposed development,
when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood by more than one foot or a lower increase if required by
MDE.
(6)
For encroachments in floodways, an evaluation of alternatives to
such encroachments, including different uses of the site or portion
of the site within the floodway, and minimization of such
encroachment.
(7)
If fill is proposed to be placed for a purpose other than to elevate
structures, the applicant shall indicate the intended purpose for the
fill.
(8)
For proposed buildings and structures, including substantial
improvement and repair of substantial damage, and placement
and replacement of manufactured homes, including substantial
improvement and repair of substantial damage:
The proposed elevation of the lowest floor, including basement,
referenced to the datum on the FIRM, and a signed agreement
to submit an elevation certificate.
(a)
The signed declaration of land restriction (nonconversion
agreement) that shall be recorded on the property deed prior
to issuance of the certificate of occupancy, if the application
includes an enclosure below the lowest floor or a crawl/
underfloor space that is more than four feet in height.
(b)
A written evaluation of alternative methods considered to
elevate structures and manufactured homes, if the location is
in nontidal waters of the state and fill is proposed to achieve
the elevation required in § 83-32A or 83-33A.
(c)
(9)
§ 83-13 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 83-13
48:170
For accessory structures that are 250 square feet or larger in area
(footprint) and that are below the base flood elevation, a variance is
required as set forth in Article VI. If a variance is granted, a signed
declaration of land restriction (nonconversion agreement) shall be
recorded on the property deed prior to issuance of the certificate
of occupancy.
(10)
For temporary structures and temporary storage, specification of
the duration of the temporary use.
(11)
For proposed work on existing buildings, structures, and
manufactured homes, including any improvement, addition,
repairs, alterations, rehabilitation, or reconstruction, sufficient
information to determine if the work constitutes substantial
improvement or repair of substantial damage, including but not
limited to:
If the existing building or structure was constructed after
December 1, 1977, evidence that the work will not alter any
aspect of the building or structure that was required for
compliance with the floodplain management requirements in
effect at the time the building or structure was permitted.
(a)
If the proposed work is a horizontal addition, a description of
the addition and whether it will be independently supported or
structurally connected to the base building and the nature of
all other modifications to the base building, if any.
(b)
Documentation of the market value of the building or structure
before the improvement or, if the work is repair of damage,
before the damage occurred.
(c)
Documentation of the actual cash value of all proposed work,
including the actual cash value of all work necessary to repair
and restore damage to the before-damaged condition,
regardless of the amount of work that will be performed. The
value of work performed by the owner or volunteers shall
be valued at market labor rates; the value of donated or
discounted materials shall be valued at market rates.
(d)
(12)
Certifications and/or technical analyses prepared or conducted by
a licensed professional engineer or licensed architect, as
appropriate, including:
The determination of the base flood elevations or hydrologic
and hydraulic engineering analyses, prepared by a licensed
professional engineer, that are required by the Floodplain
Administrator or are required by these regulations in § 83-18
for certain subdivisions and development; § 83-31A for
development in designated floodways; § 83-31C for
development in flood hazard areas with base flood elevations
(a)
(13)
§ 83-13 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 83-13
48:171
§ 83-14. Review of application.
The Floodplain Administrator shall:
but no designated floodways; and § 83-31E for deliberate
alteration or relocation of watercourses.
The floodproofing certificate for nonresidential structures that
are floodproofed as required in § 83-33B.
(b)
Certification that engineered flood openings are designed to
meet the minimum requirements of § 83-32C(3) to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces.
(c)
For nonresidential structures that are proposed with floodproofing,
an operations and maintenance plan as specified in § 83-33B(3).
(14)
Such other material and information as may be requested by the
Floodplain Administrator and necessary to determine conformance
with these regulations.
(15)
New technical data.
The applicant may seek a letter of map change by submitting
new technical data to FEMA, such as base maps, topography, and
engineering analyses to support revision of floodplain and floodway
boundaries and/or base flood elevations. Such submissions shall be
prepared in a format acceptable to FEMA, and any fees shall be the
sole responsibility of the applicant. A copy of the submittal shall be
attached to the application for a permit.
(1)
If the applicant submits new technical data to support any change
in floodplain and designated floodway boundaries and/or base flood
elevations but has not sought a letter of map change from FEMA,
the applicant shall submit such data to FEMA as soon as
practicable, but not later than six months after the date such
information becomes available. Such submissions shall be prepared
in a format acceptable to FEMA, and any fees shall be the sole
responsibility of the applicant.
(2)
B.
Review applications for development in special flood hazard areas to
determine the completeness of information submitted. The applicant
shall be notified of incompleteness or additional information that is
required to support the application.
A.
Notify applicants that permits from MDE and the United States Army
Corps of Engineers and other state and federal authorities may be
required.
B.
Review all permit applications to assure that all necessary permits have
been received from the federal, state or local governmental agencies
from which prior approval is required. The applicant shall be
responsible for obtaining such permits, including permits issued by:
C.
§ 83-13 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 83-14
48:172
§ 83-15. Inspections.
The Floodplain Administrator shall make periodic inspections of
development permitted in special flood hazard areas at appropriate times
throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance. Such
inspections may include:
§ 83-16. Submissions required prior to final inspection.
Pursuant to the agreement to submit an elevation certificate submitted
with the application as required in § 83-13A(9), the permittee shall have
an elevation certificate prepared and submitted prior to final inspection
and issuance of a certificate of occupancy for elevated structures and
manufactured homes, including new structures and manufactured homes,
substantially improved structures and manufactured homes, and additions
to structures and manufactured homes.
The United States Army Corps of Engineers under Section 10 of the
Rivers and Harbors Act and Section 404 of the Clean Water Act;
(1)
MDE pursuant to COMAR 26.23 (Nontidal Wetlands) and Section
401 of the Clean Water Act; and
(2)
MDE for construction on nontidal waters of the state pursuant to
COMAR 26.17.04.
(3)
Review applications for compliance with these regulations after all
information required in § 83-13 of these regulations or identified and
required by the Floodplain Administrator has been received.
D.
Stake-out inspection, to determine location on the site relative to the
flood hazard area and designated floodway.
A.
Foundation inspection, upon placement of the lowest floor and prior to
further vertical construction, to collect information or certification of
the elevation of the lowest floor.
B.
Inspection of enclosures below the lowest floor, including crawl/
underfloor spaces, to determine compliance with applicable provisions.
C.
Utility inspection, upon installation of specified equipment and
appliances, to determine appropriate location with respect to the base
flood elevation.
D.
E. Final inspection prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
§ 83-14 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 83-16
48:173

ARTICLE IV
Requirements in All Flood Hazard Areas
§ 83-17. Applicability.
The general requirements of this article apply to all development proposed
within all special flood hazard areas identified in § 83-6.
§ 83-18. Subdivision proposals and development proposals.
§ 83-19. Protection of water supply and sanitary sewage systems.
In all flood zones:
Subdivision proposals and development proposals shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and are subject
to all applicable standards in these regulations.
(1)
Subdivision proposals and development proposals shall have
utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
(2)
Subdivision proposals and development proposals shall have
adequate drainage paths provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards and to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
(3)
Subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at
least five lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, that are
wholly or partially in flood hazard areas where base flood elevation
data are not provided by the Floodplain Administrator or available
from other sources, shall be supported by determinations of base
flood elevations as required in § 83-13 of these regulations.
(4)
Subdivision access roads shall have the driving surface at or above
the base flood elevation.
(5)
A.
In special flood hazard areas of nontidal waters of the state:
Subdivision proposals shall be laid out such that proposed building
pads are located outside of the special flood hazard area and any
portion of platted lots that includes land areas that are below
the base flood elevation shall be used for other purposes, deedrestricted,
or otherwise protected to preserve it as open space.
(1)
Subdivision access roads shall have the driving surface at or above
the base flood elevation.
(2)
B.
New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems.
A.
§ 83-17 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 83-19
48:175
§ 83-20. Buildings and structures.
New buildings and structures (including the placement and replacement of
manufactured homes) and substantial improvement of existing structures
(including manufactured homes) that are located, in whole or in part, in any
special flood hazard area shall:
New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into systems and
discharges from systems into floodwaters.
B.
On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
or contamination from them during conditions of flooding.
C.
Be designed (or modified) and constructed to safely support flood loads.
The construction shall provide a complete load path capable of
transferring all loads from their point of origin through the loadresisting
elements to the foundation. Structures shall be designed,
connected and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or permanent
lateral movement due to structural loads and stresses, including
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads and the effects of buoyancy, from
flooding equal to the flood-protection elevation or the elevation
required by these regulations or the building code, whichever is higher.
A.
B. Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
Use flood-damage-resistant materials below the elevation of the lowest
floor required in § 83-32A or § 83-33A.
C.
Have electrical systems, equipment and components, and mechanical,
heating, ventilating, air-conditioning, and plumbing appliances,
plumbing fixtures, duct systems, and other service equipment located
at or above the elevation of the lowest floor required in § 83-32A or
§ 83-33A. Electrical wiring systems are permitted to be located below
the elevation of the lowest floor, provided that they conform to the
provisions of the electrical part of the building code for wet locations.
If replaced as part of a substantial improvement, electrical systems,
equipment and components, and heating, ventilation, air-conditioning,
and plumbing appliances, plumbing fixtures, duct systems, and other
service equipment shall meet the requirements of this article.
D.
As an alternative to Subsection D, electrical systems, equipment and
components, and heating, ventilating, air-conditioning, and plumbing
appliances, plumbing fixtures, duct systems, and other service
equipment are permitted to be located below the elevation of the lowest
floor, provided that they are designed and installed to prevent water
from entering or accumulating within the components and to resist
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses, including the effects
of buoyancy, during the occurrence of flooding to that elevation.
E.
Have the electric panel board elevated at least three feet above the
BFE.
F.
§ 83-19 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 83-20
48:176
§ 83-21. Placement of fill.
§ 83-22. Historic structures.
Repair, alteration, addition, rehabilitation, or other improvement of historic
structures shall be subject to the requirements of these regulations if
the proposed work is determined to be a substantial improvement, unless
a determination is made that the proposed work will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure. The Floodplain
Administrator may require documentation of a structure's continued
eligibility and designation as an historic structure.
§ 83-23. Manufactured homes.
G. Comply with the specific requirements of Article V.
Comply with the requirements of the most restrictive designation if
located on a site that has more than one flood zone designation (A Zone,
designated floodway).
H.
Disposal of fill, including but not limited to earthen soils, rock, rubble,
construction debris, woody debris, and trash, shall not be permitted in
special flood hazard areas.
A.
Fill proposed to be placed to elevate structures in flood hazard areas
shall comply with the floodways requirements in § 83-31A, B and C and
the limitations of § 83-32B.
B.
A. New manufactured homes shall not be placed or installed in floodways.
For the purpose of these regulations, the lowest floor of a manufactured
home is the bottom of the lowest horizontal supporting member
(longitudinal chassis frame beam).
B.
New manufactured homes located outside of floodway, replacement
manufactured homes in any flood hazard areas, and substantial
improvement (including repair of substantial damage) of existing
manufactured homes in all flood hazard areas shall:
Be elevated on a permanent, reinforced foundation in accordance
with Article V;
(1)
Be installed in accordance with the anchor and tie-down
requirements of the building code or the manufacturer's written
installation instructions and specifications; and
(2)
Have enclosures below the lowest floor of the elevated
manufactured home, if any, including enclosures that are
surrounded by rigid skirting or other material that is attached to
the frame or foundation, that comply with the requirements of
Article V.
(3)
C.
§ 83-20 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 83-23
48:177
§ 83-24. Recreational vehicles.
Recreational vehicles shall:
§ 83-25. Critical and essential facilities.
Critical and essential facilities shall be elevated to the higher of the
elevation required by these regulations plus one foot, the elevation required
by the building code, or the elevation of the two-tenths-percent-chance
(five-hundred-year) flood.
§ 83-26. Temporary structures and temporary storage.
In addition to the application requirements of § 83-13, applications for the
placement or erection of temporary structures and the temporary storage
of any goods, materials, and equipment shall specify the duration of the
temporary use. Temporary structures and temporary storage in floodways
shall meet the limitations of § 83-31A of these regulations. In addition:
§ 83-27. Gas or liquid storage tanks.
[Note: See "Protecting Manufactured Homes from Floods and
Other Hazards: A Multi-Hazard Foundation and Installation Guide"
(FEMA P-85).]
A. Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in § 83-23;
B. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
C. Be on a site for less than 180 consecutive days.
Temporary structures shall:
Be designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic loads and
hydrostatic loads during conditions of the base flood;
(1)
Have electric service installed in compliance with the electric code;
and
(2)
Comply with all other requirements of the applicable state and
local permit authorities.
(3)
A.
B. Temporary storage shall not include hazardous materials.
Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the base flood.
A.
Aboveground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to a
supporting structure and elevated to or above the base flood elevation
or shall be anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic
B.
§ 83-23 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 83-27
48:178
§ 83-28. Functionally dependent uses.
Applications for functionally dependent uses that do not conform to the
requirements of these regulations shall be approved only by variances
issued pursuant to Article VI. If approved, functionally dependent uses shall
be protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood,
including measures to allow floodwaters to enter and exit, use of flooddamage-
resistant materials, and elevation of electric service and equipment
to the extent practical given the use of the building.
and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during
conditions of the base flood.
In flood hazard areas, tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall
be:
At or above the base flood elevation or fitted with covers designed
to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the
tanks during conditions of the base flood; and
(1)
Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy, during conditions of the base flood.
(2)
C.
§ 83-27 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 83-28
48:179

ARTICLE V
Additional Requirements in Flood Hazard Areas
§ 83-29. General requirements.
In addition to the general requirements of Article IV, the requirements of
this article shall:
§ 83-30. Flood-protection setbacks along nontidal waters.
Within areas defined by flood-protection setbacks along nontidal waters of
the state:
§ 83-31. Development that affects flood-carrying capacity of
nontidal waters of the state.
Apply in flood hazard areas, including special flood hazard areas along
nontidal waters of the state.
A.
Apply to all development, new construction, substantial improvements
(including repair of substantial damage), and placement, replacement,
and substantial improvement (including repair of substantial damage)
of manufactured homes.
B.
No new buildings, structures, or other development shall be permitted
unless the applicant demonstrates that the site cannot be developed
without such encroachment into the flood-protection setback and the
encroachment is the minimum necessary after consideration of varying
other siting standards such as side, front, and back lot line setbacks.
A.
Disturbance of natural vegetation shall be minimized, and any
disturbance allowed shall be vegetatively stabilized.
B.
C. Public works and temporary construction may be permitted.
Development in designated floodways.
For proposed development that will encroach into a designated
floodway, § 83-13A(7) requires the applicant to submit an
evaluation of alternatives to such encroachment, including
different uses of the site or the portion of the site within the
floodway, and minimization of such encroachment. This
requirement does not apply to fences that do not block the flow of
floodwaters or trap debris.
(1)
Proposed development in a designated floodway may be permitted
only if the applicant has been issued a permit by MDE; and
The applicant has developed hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering analyses and technical data, prepared by a
licensed professional engineer, reflecting such changes, and
the analyses, which shall be submitted to the Floodplain
(a)
(2)
A.
§ 83-29 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 83-31
48:181
Administrator, demonstrate that the proposed activity will not
result in any increase in the base flood elevation; or
If the analyses demonstrate that the proposed activities will
result in an increase in the base flood elevation, the applicant
has obtained a conditional letter of map revision and a letter
of map revision from FEMA upon completion of the project.
Submittal requirements and fees shall be the responsibility of
the applicant.
(b)
Development that includes the placement of fill in nontidal waters of
the state. For proposed development that includes the placement of fill
in nontidal waters of the state, other than development that is subject
to Subsection D, a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation is
required. Such excavations shall be designed to drain freely.
B.
Development in areas with base flood elevations but no designated
floodways. For development in special flood hazard areas of nontidal
waters of the state with base flood elevations but no designated
floodways:
The applicant shall develop hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
analyses and technical data reflecting the proposed activity and
shall submit such technical data to the Floodplain Administrator
as required in § 83-13A(6). The analyses shall be prepared by a
licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
conditional letter of map revision and a letter of map revision upon
completion of the project. Submittal requirements and fees shall be
the responsibility of the applicant.
(1)
The proposed development may be permitted if the applicant has
received a permit by MDE and if the analyses demonstrate that
the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined
with all other existing and potential flood hazard area
encroachments, will not increase the base flood elevation more
than one foot at any point.
(2)
C.
Construction of roads, bridges, culverts, dams and in-stream ponds.
Construction of roads, bridges, culverts, dams, and in-stream ponds in
nontidal waters of the state shall not be approved unless they comply
with this article and the applicant has received a permit from MDE.
D.
Alteration of a watercourse.
For any proposed development that involves alteration of a
watercourse not subject to Subsection C, unless waived by MDE,
the applicant shall develop hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
analyses and technical data reflecting such changes, including the
floodway analysis required in § 83-13A, and submit such technical
data to the Floodplain Administrator and to FEMA. The analyses
shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer in a format
required by MDE and by FEMA for a conditional letter of map
(1)
E.
§ 83-31 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 83-31
48:182
§ 83-32. Residential structures and residential portions of mixeduse
structures.
New residential structures and residential portions of mixed-use structures
and substantial improvement (including repair of substantial damage) of
existing residential structures and residential portions of mixed-use
structures shall comply with the applicable requirements of Article IV and
this article. See § 83-34 for requirements for horizontal additions.
revision and a letter of map revision upon completion of the project.
Submittal requirements and fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
Alteration of a watercourse may be permitted only upon
submission, by the applicant, of the following:
A description of the extent to which the watercourse will be
altered or relocated;
(a)
A certification by a licensed professional engineer that the
flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be
diminished;
(b)
Evidence that adjacent communities, the United States Army
Corps of Engineers, and MDE have been notified of the
proposal and evidence that such notifications have been
submitted to FEMA; and
(c)
Evidence that the applicant shall be responsible for providing
the necessary maintenance for the altered or relocated portion
of the watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity will not
be diminished. The Floodplain Administrator may require the
applicant to enter into an agreement with the City specifying
the maintenance responsibilities; if an agreement is required,
the permit shall be conditioned to require that the agreement
be recorded on the deed of the property, which shall be binding
on future owners.
(d)
(2)
Elevation requirements.
Lowest floors shall be elevated to or above the flood-protection
elevation.
(1)
In areas of shallow flooding (Zone AO), the lowest floor (including
basement) shall be elevated at least as high above the highest
adjacent grade as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM
plus two feet, or at least four feet if a depth number is not specified.
(2)
Enclosures below the lowest floor shall meet the requirements of
Subsection C.
(3)
A.
Limitations on use of fill to elevate structures. Unless otherwise
restricted by these regulations, especially by the limitations in
B.
§ 83-31 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 83-32
48:183
§ 83-31A, B and C, fill placed for the purpose of raising the ground level
to support a building or structure shall:
(1) Consist of earthen soil or rock materials only.
Extend laterally from the building footprint to provide for adequate
access as a function of use. The Floodplain Administrator may seek
advice from the State Fire Marshal's office and/or the local fire
services agency.
(2)
Comply with the requirements of the building code and be placed
and compacted to provide for stability under conditions of rising
and falling floodwaters and resistance to erosion, scour, and
settling.
(3)
Be sloped no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal, unless
approved by the Floodplain Administrator.
(4)
Be protected from erosion associated with expected velocities
during the occurrence of the base flood. Unless approved by the
Floodplain Administrator, fill slopes shall be protected by
vegetation if the expected velocity is less than five feet per second
and by other means if the expected velocity is five feet per second
or more.
(5)
Be designed with provisions for adequate drainage and no adverse
effect on adjacent properties.
(6)
Enclosures below the lowest floor.
Enclosures below the lowest floor shall be used solely for parking
of vehicles, building access, crawl/underfloor spaces, or limited
storage.
(1)
Enclosures below the lowest floor shall be constructed using flooddamage-
resistant materials.
(2)
Enclosures below the lowest floor shall be provided with flood
openings which shall meet the following criteria: (Note: See NFIP
Technical Bulletin No. 1, Openings in Foundation Walls and Walls
of Enclosures.)
There shall be a minimum of two flood openings on different
sides of each enclosed area; if a building has more than one
enclosure below the lowest floor, each such enclosure shall
have flood openings on exterior walls.
(a)
The total net area of all flood openings shall be at least one
square inch for each square foot of enclosed area
(nonengineered flood openings), or the flood openings shall be
engineered flood openings that are designed and certified by
a licensed professional engineer to automatically allow entry
and exit of floodwaters; the certification requirement may be
(b)
(3)
C.
§ 83-32 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 83-32
48:184
§ 83-33. Nonresidential structures and nonresidential portions of
mixed-use structures.
New nonresidential structures and nonresidential portions of mixed-use
structures and substantial improvement (including repair of substantial
damage) of existing nonresidential structures and nonresidential portions
of mixed-use structures shall comply with the applicable requirements of
Article IV and the requirements of this article. See § 83-34 for requirements
for horizontal additions.
satisfied by an individual certification or an evaluation report
issued by the ICC Evaluation Service, Inc.
The bottom of each flood opening shall be one foot or less
above the higher of the interior floor or grade, or the exterior
grade, immediately below the opening.
(c)
Any louvers, screens or other covers for the flood openings
shall allow the automatic flow of floodwaters into and out of
the enclosed area.
(d)
If installed in doors, flood openings that meet the requirements
of Subsection C(3)(a) through (d) are acceptable; however,
doors without installed flood openings do not meet the
requirements of this article.
(e)
Elevation requirements. Elevated structures shall:
Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the
flood-protection elevation; or
(1)
In areas of shallow flooding (Zone AO), have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated at least as high above the highest
adjacent grade as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM
plus two feet, or at least four feet if a depth number is not specified;
and
(2)
Have enclosures below the lowest floor, if any, that comply with the
requirements of § 83-32C; or
(3)
If proposed to be elevated on fill, meet the limitations on fill in
§ 83-32B.
(4)
A.
Floodproofing requirements.
Floodproofing of new nonresidential buildings is not allowed in
nontidal waters of the state [COMAR 26.17.04.11(B)(7)].
(1)
Floodproofing for substantial improvement of nonresidential
buildings is allowed in nontidal waters of the state.
(2)
(3) If floodproofing is proposed, structures shall:
B.
§ 83-32 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 83-33
48:185
§ 83-34. Horizontal additions.
Be designed to be dry-floodproofed such that the building or
structure is watertight with walls and floors substantially
impermeable to the passage of water to the level of the floodprotection
elevation plus one foot; or
(a)
If located in an area of shallow flooding (Zone AO), be dryfloodproofed
at least as high above the highest adjacent grade
as the depth number specified on the FIRM plus three feet, or
at least five feet if a depth number is not specified; and
(b)
Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;
(c)
Have floodproofing measures that are designed taking into
consideration the nature of flood-related hazards; frequency,
depth and duration of flooding; rate of rise and fall of
floodwater; soil characteristics; flood-borne debris; at least
12 hours of flood warning time from a credible source; and
time necessary to implement any measures that require human
intervention;
(d)
Have at least one door above the applicable flood elevation that
allows human ingress and egress during conditions of flooding;
(e)
Have an operations and maintenance plan that is filed with
local emergency management officials and that specifies the
owner/occupant's responsibilities to monitor flood potential;
the location of any shields, doors, closures, tools, or other
goods that are required for implementation; maintenance of
such goods; methods of installation; and periodic inspection;
and
(f)
Be certified by a licensed professional engineer or licensed
architect, through execution of a floodproofing certificate that
states that the design and methods of construction meet the
requirements of this article. The floodproofing certificate shall
be submitted with the construction drawings as required in
§ 83-13A(13).
(g)
A horizontal addition proposed for a building or structure that was
constructed after the date specified in § 83-2 shall comply with the
applicable requirements of Article IV and this article.
A.
In nontidal waters of the state that are subject to the regulatory
authority of MDE, all horizontal additions shall comply with the
applicable requirements of Article IV and this article and:
If the addition is structurally connected to the base building, the
requirements of Subsection C apply.
(1)
B.
§ 83-33 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 83-34
48:186
§ 83-35. Accessory structures.
If the addition has an independent foundation and is not
structurally connected to the base building and the common wall
with the base building is modified by no more than a doorway, the
base building is not required to be brought into compliance.
(2)
For horizontal additions that are structurally connected to the base
building:
If the addition combined with other proposed repairs, alterations,
or modifications of the base building constitutes substantial
improvement, the base building and the addition shall comply with
the applicable requirements of Article IV and this article.
(1)
If the addition constitutes substantial improvement, the base
building and the addition shall comply with all of the applicable
requirements of Article IV and this article.
(2)
C.
For horizontal additions with independent foundations that are not
structurally connected to the base building and the common wall with
the base building is modified by no more than a doorway, the base
building is not required to be brought into compliance.
D.
A horizontal addition to a building or structure that is not substantial
improvement, and is not located in nontidal waters of the state, is not
required to comply with this section.
[Note: See "Substantial Improvement/Substantial Damage Desk
Reference" (FEMA P-758).]
E.
Accessory structures shall be limited to not more than 250 square feet
in total floor area.
A.
Accessory structures shall comply with the elevation requirements and
other requirements of § 83-32, the floodproofing requirements of
§ 83-33B, or shall:
(1) Be usable only for parking of vehicles or limited storage;
Be constructed with flood-damage-resistant materials below the
base flood elevation;
(2)
Be constructed and placed to offer the minimum resistance to the
flow of floodwaters;
(3)
(4) Be anchored to prevent flotation;
Have electrical service and mechanical equipment elevated to or
above the base flood elevation; and
(5)
(6) Have flood openings that meet the requirements of § 83-32C.
B.
§ 83-34 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 83-35
48:187

ARTICLE VI
Variances
§ 83-36. General provisions.
§ 83-37. Application for variance.
The Mayor and Common Council shall have the power to consider
and authorize or deny variances from the strict application of the
requirements of these regulations. A variance shall be approved only
if it is determined to not be contrary to the public interest and where,
owing to special conditions of the lot or parcel, by a literal enforcement
of the provisions of these regulations, an unnecessary hardship would
result.
A.
Upon consideration of the purposes of these regulations, the individual
circumstances, and the considerations and limitations of this article,
the Mayor and Common Council may attach such conditions to
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of these
regulations.
B.
The Mayor and Common Council shall notify, in writing, any applicant
to whom a variance is granted to construct or substantially improve a
building or structure with its lowest floor below the elevation required
by these regulations that the variance is to the floodplain management
requirements of these regulations only and that the cost of federal flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk, with rates up
to $25 per $100 of insurance coverage.
C.
A record of all variance actions, including justification for issuance,
shall be maintained pursuant to § 83-10J of these regulations.
D.
The owner of property, or the owner's authorized agent, for which a
variance is sought shall submit an application for a variance to the
Floodplain Administrator.
A.
At a minimum, the application shall contain the following information:
the name, address, and telephone number of the applicant and property
owner; a legal description of the property; a parcel map; a description
of the existing use; a description of the proposed use; a site map
showing the location of flood hazard areas, designated floodway
boundaries, flood zones, base flood elevations, and flood-protection
setbacks; a description of the variance sought; and the reason for the
variance request. Variance applications shall specifically address each
of the considerations in § 83-38.
B.
If the application is for a variance to allow the lowest floor of a building
or structure below the applicable minimum elevation required by these
regulations, the application shall include a statement signed by the
owner that, if granted, the conditions of the variance shall be recorded
on the deed of the property.
C.
§ 83-36 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 83-38
48:189
§ 83-38. Considerations for variances.
§ 83-39. Limitations for granting variances.
The Mayor and Common Council shall make an affirmative decision on a
variance request only upon:
The Floodplain Administrator shall request comments on variance
applications from MDE (NFIP State Coordinator) and shall provide such
comments to the Mayor and Common Council.
A.
In considering variance applications, the Mayor and Common Council
shall consider and make findings of fact on all evaluations, all relevant
factors, requirements specified in other sections of these regulations,
and the following factors:
The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
(1)
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
The susceptibility of the proposed development and its contents (if
applicable) to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the
individual owner.
(3)
The importance of the services to the City provided by the proposed
development.
(4)
The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to, or are subject to less, flooding or erosion
damage.
(5)
The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable, or if the facility is a functionally dependent use.
(6)
The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development.
(7)
The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and hazard mitigation plan for that area.
(8)
The safety of access to the property in times of flood for passenger
vehicles and emergency vehicles.
(9)
The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site.
(10)
The costs of providing government services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and
streets and bridges.
(11)
(12)The comments provided by MDE (NFIP State Coordinator).
B.
§ 83-38 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 83-39
48:190
A showing of good and sufficient cause. Good and sufficient cause
deals solely with the physical characteristics of the property and cannot
be based on the character of the improvement, the personal
characteristics of the owner/inhabitants, or local provision that
regulate standards other than health and public safety.
A.
A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the property.
Increased cost or inconvenience of meeting the requirements of these
regulations does not constitute an exceptional hardship to the
applicant.
B.
A determination that the granting of a variance for development within
any designated floodway, or flood hazard area with base flood
elevations but no designated floodway, will not result in increased flood
heights beyond those which are allowed in these regulations.
C.
A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
additional threats to public safety; create extraordinary public expense,
nuisances, fraud or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing
local laws.
D.
A determination that the building, structure or other development is
protected by methods to minimize flood damages.
E.
A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary to afford
relief, considering the flood hazard.
F.
§ 83-39 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 83-39
48:191

ARTICLE VII
Enforcement
§ 83-40. Compliance required.
§ 83-41. Notice of violation and stop-work order.
If the Floodplain Administrator determines that there has been a violation of
any provision of these regulations, the Floodplain Administrator shall give
notice of such violation to the owner, the owner's authorized agent, and the
person responsible for such violation and may issue a stop-work order. The
notice of violation or stop-work order shall be in writing and shall:
§ 83-42. Violations and penalties.
No building, structure or development shall hereafter be located,
erected, constructed, reconstructed, improved, repaired, extended,
converted, enlarged or altered without full compliance with these
regulations and all other applicable regulations.
A.
Failure to obtain a permit shall be a violation of these regulations and
shall be subject to penalties in accordance with § 83-42.
B.
Permits issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by
the Floodplain Administrator authorize only the specific activities set
forth in such approved plans and applications or amendments thereto.
Use, arrangement, or construction of such specific activities that are
contrary to that authorization shall be deemed a violation of these
regulations.
C.
Include a list of violations, referring to the section or sections of these
regulations that have been violated;
A.
Order remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the
provisions of these regulations;
B.
C. Specify a reasonable period of time to correct the violation;
D. Advise the recipients of the right to appeal; and
E. Be served in person; or
Be posted in a conspicuous place in or on the property and sent by
registered or certified mail to the last known mailing address,
residence, or place of business of the recipients.
F.
Any person who shall violate a provision of this chapter, or fail to
comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be
prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local law. Each day
that a violation continues shall be a separate offense. In addition to
other remedies, any violation may be deemed a municipal infraction
and prosecuted as such. The penalty for violation shall be a fine of $400
for each offense, which may be doubled in accordance with applicable
A.
§ 83-40 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 83-42
48:193
law. The total civil penalty may not exceed $10,000. The penalties
provided herein are in addition to those provided in § 5-805 of the
Environment Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of or noncompliance
with this chapter shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance or
permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct
or remedy such violations and noncompliances within a reasonable
time.
B.
Any structure constructed or reconstructed, enlarged, altered, or
relocated in noncompliance with this chapter shall be declared by the
City to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
C.
Additionally, the City may institute injunctive, mandamus or other
appropriate action or proceedings at law or equity for the enforcement
of this chapter or to correct violations of this chapter, and any court of
competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders,
temporary or permanent, injunctions or mandamus or other
appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
D.
§ 83-42 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 83-42
48:194
ARTICLE VIII
Recordkeeping
§ 83-43. Recordkeeping.
A record of all approvals, disapprovals, and variances granted under
the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained by the Director.
A.
The Director shall maintain a record of all floodplain permits granted
under this chapter.
B.
All records shall be available for inspection upon request and shall
contain all documents needed to support any permit action.
C.
§ 83-43 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 83-43
48:195

ARTICLE IX
Fees
§ 83-44. Fees.
Administrative fees may be charged at the time of application as determined
from time to time by resolution of the Mayor and Common Council. Said fees
shall be commensurate with those costs incurred in the processing, review
and evaluation of a permit application for development in the floodplain
district. Such costs may include but are not limited to consultant fees for
certification of the as-built condition of structures, floodplain delineations,
environmental impact characterizations, staff assignments, attorneys' fees
and other related costs. In that connection, the City may engage and/or
hire agents, consultants, registered engineers, attorneys and others with
regard to the requirements of this chapter and may assess the charges
and expenses associated therewith to the applicant as a part of the
administrative fees.
§ 83-44 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 83-44
48:197
Chapter 90
(RESERVED)
Chapter 94
LICENSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Charter provisions — See § 29 of the City
Charter.
§ 83-44 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 83-44
48:198
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted as Ch. 10, Art. I, of the 1972 Code, as amended through
1990]
§ 94-1. Issuing agent; payment of fees.
All licenses and permits required by this chapter shall be issued by the City
Clerk; and all license and permit fees imposed by this chapter shall be paid
to the City Treasurer prior to the issuance of the licenses or permits for
which such fees are payable.
§ 94-2. Applications.
Applications for licenses and permits required by this chapter shall be in
writing, on forms provided by the City Clerk, signed by the applicant, and
containing such information as the City Clerk may require to enable him to
determine whether the license or permit sought by the applicant should be
issued, and the following information shall be included in each application:
§ 94-3. Form; terms and conditions.
All licenses and permits required by this chapter shall be in writing, on
forms prepared by the City Clerk and approved by the governing body. All
licenses and permits shall be granted subject to compliance by the grantor
with all applicable provisions of law, the City Charter, this Code and other
ordinance, and if additional terms or conditions are imposed, they shall be
stated in the license or permit.
§ 94-4. Transferability.
Licenses and permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid only for
the persons to whom issued and, where applicable, for their agents and
employees.
§ 94-5. Term; prorating of fees. [Amended 12-8-2008 by Ord. No.
799]
Except as may be provided otherwise, all licenses and permits issued
pursuant to this chapter shall be for one year, from the first day of July in
The applicant's name and permanent residence address and residence
address within the City, if any and if different from his permanent
residence address.
A.
The applicant's permanent business address and the place within the
City at which he will conduct the business, trade, occupation or activity
for which the license or permit would authorize, if issued.
B.
The type of license or permit applied for, and a concise summary of the
activities proposed to be conducted by authority thereof.
C.
§ 94-1 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 94-5
48:199
the year of issuance until the next succeeding 30th day of June and shall
be issued originally and subject to renewal upon payment of the prescribed
fees as provided in the General Fee Ordinance.27
§ 94-6. Display.
Persons having a fixed place of business shall maintain their licenses or
permits on conspicuous display therein; and persons having no fixed place
of business shall carry their licenses or permits on their person at all
times while acting under authority thereof and shall display them to any
prospective customer or City officer upon request.
§ 94-7. Revocation.
The City Clerk may revoke any license or permit issued by him for any
reason which would have denied the issuance thereof, for any violation of
the terms or conditions thereof or for violation of any provision of law, the
City Charter, this Code or other ordinance relating thereto or regulating
the business, trade, occupation or activity authorized thereby, provided that
revocation of any license or permit by the City Clerk shall be subject to the
privilege of appeal to the legislative body and a public hearing thereon upon
filing notice of such appeal by the person aggrieved with the City Clerk
within 10 days from the date of such revocation.
27.Editor’s Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
§ 94-5 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 94-7
48:200
ARTICLE II
Activities Requiring Licenses
[Adopted as Ch. 10, Art. II, of the 1972 Code, as amended through
1990]
§ 94-8. Circus parades.28 [Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 791]
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a circus parade to proceed upon
any street of the City without having procured a City permit so to do, the
fee for which shall be as established in the General Fee Ordinance.29
§ 94-9. Circuses and other entertainments.
§ 94-10. Distribution of handbills. [Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord.
No. 791]
No person or any member of a firm nor any person acting in the capacity of
an officer, servant, agent or clerk of any corporation or firm shall at any time
distribute or cause to be distributed by hand within the limits of the City
any handbills, circulars, pamphlets or letters, excepting the delivery of the
United States mail, without first having procured a license thereupon and
paying to the City Clerk a fee as provided in the General Fee Ordinance;30
and in such distribution, no such handbill, circular, pamphlet or letter shall
be placed in any mailbox or letter slot and no more than one handbill,
circular, pamphlet or letter shall be distributed or left at any one mailing
address.
§ 94-11. Peddling and soliciting. [Amended 10-28-1991 by Ord. No.
537]
It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit within the City any circus,
puppet show or other exhibition or sideshow without having procured a
City license so to do.
A.
Fees for such licenses shall be as established in the General Fee
Ordinance. [Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 791]
B.
Applications for licenses required by this section shall be referred by
the City Clerk to the legislative body for action thereon.
C.
This section shall not be construed to require a license for any circus,
sideshow or similar exhibition given by citizens of this City.
D.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hawk, peddle or sell any goods,
wares or merchandise of any descriptions upon the streets or parking
areas of the City or from any rooms or halls in motels, hotels and other
lodging houses on a transient basis or to go from house to house to
A.
28.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 109, Picketing and Parades.
29.Editor’s Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
30.Editor’s Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
§ 94-8 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 94-11
48:201
sell any goods, wares or merchandise, either by sample or otherwise,
without having procured a license to do so, the fee for which shall be
established in the General Fee Ordinance.31 A license shall be required
for each and every person to hawk, peddle or sell under this section.
[Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 791]
Subsection A of this section shall not apply to the following:
Any persons selling fresh farm or garden products raised by the
seller.
(1)
(2) Sales made under judicial process.
(3) Sales made by auctioneers.
Sales made by any duly qualified nonprofit corporation,
organization or society for charitable, religious or civic purposes.
(4)
Mere solicitation orders for the future delivery of goods, wares or
merchandise in interstate commerce.
(5)
Sales at residential premises pursuant to an invitation by an owner
or occupant of the residential premises.
(6)
B.
31.Editor’s Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
§ 94-11 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 94-11
48:202
Chapter 100
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Charter provisions — See § 27 of the City
Charter.
Animals and fowl — See Ch. 48.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 106.
§ 94-11 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 94-11
48:203

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 100-1. Intent; enforcement. [Amended 10-12-1998 by Ord. No.
632]
Various nuisances are defined and prohibited in other chapters of this Code,
and it is the intent of the legislative body in enacting this chapter to make
it supplemental to those other chapters in which nuisances are defined and
prohibited; and the provisions of this chapter relating to the abatement
of nuisances shall be regarded as alternative methods and procedures for
the abatement of nuisances in those instances where other methods and
procedures for abatement are provided. This chapter shall be administered
and enforced by the Director of Planning and Public Works or other official
designated by the Mayor and Common Council.
§ 100-2. Prohibition; territorial applicability.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, harbor, commit or maintain or
to suffer to be caused, harbored, committed or maintained any nuisance, as
defined by the statute or common law of this state or as defined by this Code
or other ordinance of the City, at any place within the City or at any place
within the area surrounding the City and within 1/2 mile of the City limits.
§ 100-3. Partial enumeration of nuisances.
The following acts when committed or conditions when existing within
the City or within the area surrounding the City and within 1/2 mile
of the City limits are hereby defined and declared to be nuisances:
[Amended 10-12-1998 by Ord. No. 632]
An act done or committed or aided or assisted to be done or
committed by any person or any substance, being or thing kept,
maintained, placed or found in or upon any public or private place
which is injurious or dangerous to the public health or safety.
(1)
All buildings, bridges or other structures of whatever character
kept or maintained or which are permitted by any person owning
or having control thereof to be kept or maintained in a condition
unsafe, dangerous, unhealthy, injurious or annoying to the public,
including but not limited to the emission of dust, fumes, gas,
smoke, odor, noise, vibration or other noxious disturbances.
(2)
All trees and other appendages of or to realty kept or maintained
or which are permitted by any person owning or having control
thereof to be kept or maintained in a condition unsafe, dangerous,
unhealthy, injurious or annoying to the public.
(3)
All ponds or pools of stagnant water and all foul or dirty water
or liquid when discharged through any drain, pipe or spout or
(4)
A.
§ 100-1 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 100-3
48:205
§ 100-4. Property maintenance.32
No person owning or in possession of any lot, house, building or enclosure
shall allow or suffer to exist in or upon such premises any stagnant water,
animal or vegetable matter or other substance liable to become putrid,
offensive, annoying or unhealthy. Person owning or in possession of any
real estate shall provide proper and adequate drainage therefor so that no
offensive, baneful or disagreeable liquids shall flow or seep into any street.
Any violation of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
thrown into or upon any street, public place or lot to the injury or
annoyance of the public.
All obstructions caused or permitted on any street or sidewalk to
the danger or annoyance of the public, and all stones, rubbish, dirt,
filth, slops, vegetable matter or other article thrown or placed by
any person on or in any street, sidewalk or other public place which
in any way may cause injury or annoyance of the public.
(5)
All sidewalks, gutters or curbstones permitted to remain in an
unsafe condition or out of repair.
(6)
All stables, cattle yards, hog, sheep or cow pens or yards for poultry
permitted by the owner thereof or the person responsible therefor
to be in such a condition as to become offensive, annoying or
injurious to the public.
(7)
All houses or buildings used for special storage of powder,
dynamite or other explosive substances, except those maintained
pursuant to a permit issued by competent authority.
(8)
All abandoned or discarded iceboxes, refrigerators or freezer
cabinets which are uncrated and have a door or lock which cannot
be released for opening from the inside thereof and which are
placed outside of a building or dwelling in a place accessible to
children.
(9)
The nuisances described in this section shall not be construed as
exclusive, and any act of commission or omission and any condition
which constitutes a nuisance by statute or common law of the state,
when committed, omitted or existing within the City or within the area
surrounding the City and within 1/2 mile of the City limits, is hereby
declared to constitute a nuisance.
B.
32.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 119, Property Maintenance.
§ 100-3 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 100-4
48:206
ARTICLE II
Abatement
§ 100-5. Inspections. [Amended 10-12-1998 by Ord. No. 632;
12-6-2007 by Ord. No. 773]
It shall be the duty of the Director of Planning or other official designated
to cause inspections to be made from time to time of all portions of the City
and the area surrounding the City and within 1/2 mile of the City limits to
determine whether any condition exists or activity is being practiced which
constitutes a nuisance; and he shall cause an investigation to be made upon
complaint made by any responsible person.
§ 100-6. Right of entry. [Amended 10-12-1998 by Ord. No. 632;
12-6-2007 by Ord. No. 773]
The Director of Planning or other official designated shall have right to
enter upon private premises for the purposes specified in § 100-5 upon
compliance with all applicable provisions of law. Unless it appears probable
that advance warning would defeat the purpose of such entry, occupants of
premises to be entered shall be given reasonable notice in advance, and,
in any case, it shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant to prevent such
entry which is sought to be made in compliance with law.
§ 100-7. Notice to cease and desist. [Amended 10-12-1998 by Ord.
No. 632; 12-6-2007 by Ord. No. 773]
If at any time the Director of Planning or other official designated shall find
that an activity or practice which constitutes a nuisance is occurring within
the City or within the area surrounding the City and within 1/2 mile of the
City limits, he shall promptly and by the most expeditious means notify the
violator to cease and desist forthwith.
§ 100-8. Notice to abate. [Amended 10-12-1998 by Ord. No. 632]
If at any time the Director of Planning or other official designated shall
find that a condition which constitutes a nuisance exists within the City
or within the area surrounding the City and within 1/2 mile of the City
limits, he shall give notice, in writing, to the owner, occupant or person
in charge of the premises upon which such condition exists, stating
therein the condition which constitutes a nuisance and directing such
addressee to remedy the condition within the time stated in such notice,
which shall be not more than 10 days; and it shall be unlawful for any
such owner, occupant or person in charge to fail to comply with the
terms of such notice. [Amended 12-6-2007 by Ord. No. 773]
A.
Recourse of City when notice to abate nuisance is ignored.
Upon the failure of any person to whom notice has been given
pursuant to Subsection A to comply with the terms of such notice
or with the terms imposed by the legislative body on appeal, as
(1)
B.
§ 100-5 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 100-8
48:207
§ 100-9. Additional remedies.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit any police officer from
arresting any person for committing or maintaining a nuisance when such
arrest is made pursuant to law.
the case may be, the Director of Planning and Public Works or
other official designated shall forthwith direct the appropriate City
officer to remedy the condition which is the subject of such notice,
and the expense incurred by the City in so doing shall be charged
to the addressee of such notice, to be collected as City taxes; and
such expenses shall constitute a lien upon the premises where such
condition occurred, to be collected as City taxes are collected if not
otherwise first paid to the City.
Abatement by the City of any condition which constitutes a
nuisance and reimbursement to the City of expenses incurred
thereby shall not bar prosecution for maintenance of a nuisance.
(2)
§ 100-8 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 100-9
48:208
ARTICLE III
Enforcement
§ 100-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-12-1998 by Ord.
No. 632]
Any violation of this chapter is declared to be an infraction. The penalty
for violation shall be $100 for each initial offense and $200 for each repeat
offense.
§ 100-10 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 100-10
48:209
Chapter 103
PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
§ 103-1. Purpose; objectives.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the safety and welfare of the
citizens of the City of Westminster by regulating pawnshops and
secondhand dealers in order to prevent the disposition of stolen property, to
identify stolen property, and to return stolen property to its owners.
§ 103-2. Definitions.
In this chapter the following terms have the meanings indicated. Any term
not defined in this chapter shall have the meaning as defined in any chapter
of the Code. Any term not defined in the Code in any chapter shall have its
generally accepted meaning.
ANTIQUE DEALER — A person whose primary retail trade is buying and
selling objects made in, or typical of, an earlier period of time that either
have special value because of their age or are examples of works of art or
handicrafts.[Amended 2-10-2014 by Ord. No. 848]
DEPARTMENT — The Police Department of the City of Westminster.
ITEM — Tangible personal property including, but not limited to, a
household appliance, fur, musical instrument, personal computer, compact
disc player, digital video disc player, power tool, camera, firearm, radio,
television set, MP3 player, cellular telephone, personal digital assistant
(PDA), video game system, video game accessory or component, or audio or
stereo equipment.
PAWNBROKER — A person who engages in pawnbroker transactions.
PAWNBROKER OR SECONDHAND DEALER ESTABLISHMENT — A person
with a fixed place of business where pawnbroker or secondhand dealer
transactions occur. A pawnbroker or secondhand dealer establishment
includes both the person and its fixed place of business.
PAWNBROKER TRANSACTION — Engaging in the act of:
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership, business trust, limited
liability company, or any other type of business entity.
SECONDHAND DEALER — A person who, or a machine or kiosk or other
electronic or mechanical device that, engages in secondhand dealer
Lending money on the deposit or pledge of tangible personal property
or other valuable things other than secondhand precious metal objects,
coins, or numismatic items; or
A.
Purchasing tangible personal property or other valuable things, other
than secondhand precious metal objects, coins, or numismatic items, on
the condition of reselling the property to the seller at a stipulated price.
B.
§ 100-10 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 103-2
48:210
transactions. "Secondhand dealer" does not include:[Amended 2-10-2014
by Ord. No. 848]
SECONDHAND DEALER TRANSACTION — The receipt by a secondhand
dealer, as defined in this section, of used (post-consumer) tangible personal
property, other than secondhand precious metal objects, coins, or
numismatic items, and offering or holding or retaining with the intent to
offer the tangible personal property to the public for sale, trade, barter, or
other consideration, or to transfer the tangible personal property to a third
party for such purpose, whether such sale or trade to or barter or other
exchange with the public occurs within City limits or elsewhere.[Amended
2-10-2014 by Ord. No. 848]
USED or POST-CONSUMER — Tangible personal property that has been
previously purchased at retail, whether or not the box or packaging has
been opened or broken, by any person or entity, except tangible personal
property accepted for return by the original retail seller in accordance with
the seller's ordinary and customary return policies.[Added 2-10-2014 by
Ord. No. 848]
§ 103-3. Operating requirements.
A charitable, religious, or nonprofit organization, if the exchange of
items for consideration is incidental to the organization's primary
activity;
A.
B. An antique show, trade show, convention, or auction;
C. A flea market;
A person whose primary retail trade is new and unused video game
components, video game systems, video games, or video game
accessories;
D.
E. An antique dealer; or
Whether on consignment or otherwise, a seller or reseller of used (postconsumer)
clothing or used (post-consumer) nonelectronic sporting
equipment.
F.
A pawnbroker or secondhand dealer establishment may be open to the
public only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. and shall not
conduct pawnbroker or secondhand dealer transactions with the public
at any other time. A pawnbroker or secondhand dealer may submit
a written request to the Department to be open different hours for
holidays or special events, which request shall be promptly reviewed.
A.
A pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall not conduct business through
the use of a drive-up window or other practice, service, or device that
enables an individual to conduct business from a motor vehicle without
leaving the motor vehicle.
B.
§ 103-2 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 103-4
48:211
§ 103-4. Trading with minors.
A pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall not engage in pawnbroker or
secondhand dealer transactions with an individual who is under the age of
18.
§ 103-5. Recordkeeping requirements.
A pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall maintain a record of each
item purchased, bartered, exchanged, or received in the course of
business, including a record of the disposition of the item.
A.
The record shall be signed by the seller and the pawnbroker or
secondhand dealer or an agent or employee of the pawnbroker or
secondhand dealer and shall include:
(1) The date, time, and place of the transaction;
The name and address of the principal, if the transaction is
conducted by an agent;
(2)
A comprehensive description of the item, including any visible
identification, such as initials, name of manufacturer, model and
serial number, owner applied identification numbers, and whether
the item appears to be new or in its original box or packaging;
(3)
(4) The consideration received;
For each individual from whom the pawnbroker or secondhand
dealer acquires an item:
The name, address, telephone number, date of birth, and
driver's license number of the individual; or
(a)
Identification information about the individual that:
Identifies the individual from at least two forms of
identification, which may include an age of majority card,
military identification, or passport; and
[1]
Provides a physical description of the individual, including
the gender, race, any distinguishing features, and
approximate age, height, weight, and hair and eye color of
the individual.
[2]
(b)
(5)
B.
The pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall:
Maintain the original record for at least three years from the date
of the transaction;
(1)
Retain information from the record in an electronic data storage
medium specified by the Department; and
(2)
C.
§ 103-4 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 103-5
48:212
§ 103-6. Holding periods.
§ 103-7. Release of stolen property.
A pawnbroker or secondhand dealer is subject to the provisions of the
Business Regulation Article, § 12-401, of the Annotated Code of Maryland in
regard to the release of stolen property to the Department.
§ 103-8. Inspections; right of entry.
Submit a copy of the record information to the Department by
electronically transmitting the record by 10:00 a.m. on the next
business day after the transaction.
(3)
A pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall hold each item purchased
or received in the course of business for 10 calendar days after
electronically submitting a copy of the record of the transaction to the
Department.
A.
A pawnbroker or secondhand dealer may submit to the Department a
written request for a shorter holding period for a specific item.
Within 96 hours after receiving the request, the Department shall
approve or deny the request.
(1)
If the Department does not respond to the request within 120
hours, the request is deemed to be approved.
(2)
B.
During the holding period for an item, the pawnbroker or secondhand
dealer:
(1) Shall tag the item in accordance with Department requirements;
Shall store the item in a secure location on the premises that is
separate from other items;
(2)
Shall not remove the item from the pawnbroker or secondhand
dealer's licensed location of business; and
(3)
Shall not offer the item for sale until the ten-day holding period has
expired.
(4)
C.
The holding period required by this section does not apply to a pawned
item that is redeemed with the original pawn ticket.
D.
A pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall allow an authorized member
of the Department to enter the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer
establishment at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this
chapter.
A.
If a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer refuses to allow entry, the
Department may seek a court order allowing entry.
B.
§ 103-5 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 103-8
48:213
§ 103-9. Notice of violation.
§ 103-10. Civil penalties.
§ 103-11. Criminal penalties.
A person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, is subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000
or imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both.
§ 103-12. Severability.
If any part of this chapter is held invalid, the invalidity shall not affect the
other parts.
An authorized member of the Department shall have the right to enter a
building, structure, or premises without the prior consent of the owner
or occupant where there is evidence that a violation of this chapter
exists which threatens or may threaten the public health and safety for
the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. The authorized
member of the Department shall produce proof of identity prior to
entry.
C.
This section does not prohibit the Department from seeking a search
warrant for the investigation of any criminal violation, including a
violation of this chapter.
D.
Except as provided in Subsection C of this section, if a violation of this
chapter is found, the Department shall inform the City Attorney, and the
City Attorney shall provide a written notice that describes the violation,
specifies the action necessary to correct the violation, and sets forth the
time to correct the violation.
A.
The City Attorney shall serve a notice of violation by certified mail,
restricted delivery or by personal service. If service cannot be obtained
by certified mail, restricted delivery or personal service, the notice may
be posted in a conspicuous location on the pawnbroker or secondhand
dealer establishment.
B.
A notice of violation shall not be required if the pawnbroker or
secondhand dealer violates the same provision of this chapter for which
it had received one notice of violation within a twelve-month period.
C.
The City Attorney may institute any action at law or equity, including
injunction or mandamus, to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
A.
Alternatively, and in addition to and concurrent with all other remedies,
the City Attorney may enforce the provisions of this chapter with civil
penalties.
B.
Each day that a violation continues is a separate offense, subject to a
fine not exceeding $1,000 per day for each offense.
C.
§ 103-8 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 103-12
48:214
Chapter 106
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Charter provisions — See § 27 of the City
Charter.
Violations and penalties — See Ch. 1, § 1-18.
Civil emergencies — See Ch. 10.
Disorderly house nuisances — See Ch. 68.
Nuisances — See Ch. 100.
Picketing and parades — See Ch. 109.
§ 103-12 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 103-12
48:215

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 106-1. General prohibitions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to attempt to commit any act
which is prohibited by this Code or other ordinance or by any rule,
regulation, order or notice duly promulgated or given pursuant to
authority thereof; and it shall be unlawful for any person to aid or abet
the commission or attempted commission of any act which is prohibited
by this Code or other ordinance or by any rule, regulation, order or
notice duly promulgated or given pursuant to authority thereof.
A.
It shall be unlawful for any person to attempt to avoid the doing of
any act which is required by this Code or other ordinance or by any
rule, regulation, order or notice duly promulgated or given pursuant to
authority thereof; and it shall be unlawful for any person to aid or abet
the avoidance or attempted avoidance of any act which is required by
this Code or other ordinance or by any rule, regulation, order or notice
duly promulgated or given pursuant to authority thereof.
B.
§ 106-1 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 106-1
48:217

ARTICLE II
Curfew
§ 106-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHILD — Any person under the age of 16 years.
CHILDREN — Persons under the age of 16 years.
§ 106-3. Imposition; exceptions; signal.
§ 106-4. Parental responsibility.
It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having the
legal custody of any child to allow or permit such child to go or be in or
upon any street, park or other public place within the City during the period
prohibited in § 106-3, except as therein provided.
§ 106-5. Violations and penalties.
Any child found in and upon any of the streets, parks or other public places
within the City in violation of § 106-3 shall be taken into custody by the
City police and delivered to his parent, guardian or person having the legal
custody of such child and a report thereof made to the Chief of Police,
who shall make a record thereof in a book kept for that purpose, and if
such parent, guardian or person having the legal custody of such child
shall again allow him to be in or upon said streets, parks or other public
places in violation of § 106-3 such parent, guardian or person having the
legal custody of such child so offending shall, upon conviction, be punished
as provided in § 1-18A, and a like penalty shall be imposed on any person
aiding or abetting in the violation of the intent and purpose of §§ 106-3 and
106-4.
§ 106-6. Effect of multiple violations.
Any child who shall violate the provisions of § 106-3 more than three times
shall be reported by the Chief of Police to the City Attorney for such action
It shall be unlawful for any child to be in or upon or to enter or remain
in or upon any street, park or other public place within the City at any
time during the period from 10:00 p.m. until 1/2 hour before sunrise of
the next succeeding day, unless such child is accompanied by a parent,
guardian or other person having the legal custody of such child.
A.
As a warning, a bell, siren or other warning shall be sounded at 9:45
p.m. each day, to be known as the "curfew signal," after which all
children shall be required to be at home or off the streets, parks or
other public places, except as herein provided for.
B.
§ 106-2 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 106-6
48:219
as he may deem proper under the provisions of § 92 of Article 26 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, 1957.33
§ 106-7. Determination of age.
City police officers, in taking children into custody under the provisions of
§ 106-5, shall use their discretion in determining age, and in doubtful cases
may require positive proof, and until such proof is furnished the officer's
judgment shall prevail.
33.Editor's Note: Said section was apparently deleted during revision of the Annotated Code
of Maryland. For current statutory provisions regarding juvenile causes, see § 3-801 et
seq. of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
§ 106-6 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 106-7
48:220
ARTICLE III
City Officers, Employees and Property
§ 106-8. Interference with officers and employees.34
No person shall carelessly or willfully interfere with, hinder or obstruct any
officer or employee of the City who is engaged in, en route to or returning
from, the performance of official duty, whether such interference, hindrance
or obstruction be by threat, assault or otherwise.
§ 106-9. Impersonating officers or employees.
No person shall falsely represent himself to be an officer or employee of
the City or without proper authority wear or display any uniform, insignia
or credential which identifies any City officer or employee; nor shall any
person without proper authority assume to act as an officer or employee of
the City, whether to gain access to premises, obtain information, perpetrate
a fraud or for any other purpose, provided, that nothing in this section shall
be construed to prevent a private citizen from making a lawful citizen's
arrest for felony or breach of the peace committed in his presence.
§ 106-10. Conduct by and due to officers and employees.
§ 106-11. Tampering with City property.35
No person shall, without proper authority, knowingly use, tamper with,
render inoperative, destroy, damage, remove, deface, molest or otherwise
interfere with any books, records, furniture, equipment, gear, apparatus,
City officers and employees shall be courteous in their official
transactions with the public, and they shall conduct themselves in the
performance of their official duties so as to not knowingly deprive
any person, at the time and under the circumstances then and there
existing, of any lawful right or benefit to which such person may be
entitled. Any person who feels aggrieved by the conduct of any City
officer or employee in violation of this subsection is hereby invited
to bring such matter to the attention of such officer's or employee's
department head or to the Mayor, without prejudice to any other
recourse to which such aggrieved person may be entitled.
A.
Members of the public, in turn, should be courteous in their
transactions with City officers and employees, and it shall be unlawful
for any person to knowingly taunt, deride, jeer or otherwise debase or
insult, whether by act, word or gesture, any City officer or employee
at any time or place while such City officer or employee is lawfully
engaged in the performance of official duty.
B.
34.Editor's Note: See also § 21-2, Compliance with fire personnel, of Ch. 21, Fire Department,
Art. I, General Provisions.
35.Editor's Note: See also § 78-1, Prohibited acts, of Ch. 78, Fire Prevention, Art. I, General
Provisions.
§ 106-8 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 106-11
48:221
tools or other items of personal property belonging to, leased to or used by
the City or any agency thereof.
§ 106-12. Damaging and trespassing on City property.
No person shall, without proper authority, knowingly trespass upon or
damage, deface, molest or otherwise interfere with any real property
belonging to, leased to or used by the City or any agency thereof.
§ 106-12.1. Violation of park banning notice. [Added 6-9-2008 by
Ord. No. 779]
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon or remain upon any
City park in violation of any banning notice issued to said person by an
authorized City representative for violation of the rules and regulations of
the Department of Recreation and Parks. Any person convicted of violating
the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500 or
imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both, for each and every
violation. Additionally, the Mayor and Common Council may institute
injunctive, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding at law
or equity for the enforcement of this section or to correct violations of
it, and any court of competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue
restraining orders, temporary or permanent, injunctions or mandamus or
other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
§ 106-11 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 106-12.1
48:222
ARTICLE IV
Weapons
§ 106-13. Concealment.
It shall be unlawful for any person, except while on his own premises, to
carry concealed upon his person any firearms, razor, metallic knuckles, dirk,
switchblade knife or other weapon or instrument commonly used for the
purpose of infliction of personal injury, provided that this section shall not
apply to law enforcement officers while engaged in the exercise of their
duties as such officers, nor shall it apply to persons duly licensed pursuant
to law to carry concealed firearms. Any weapon or instrument found on any
person in violation of this section shall be subject to confiscation by the
Westminster City Police Department.
§ 106-14. Discharge. [Amended 2-27-1995 by Ord. No. 594]
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm, air rifle, slingshot
or other weapon or instrument which discharges a projectile capable of
inflicting bodily injury except in the lawful defense of person or property
and except in the performance of a lawful duty, provided that this section
shall not apply to the use of blank ammunition at athletic events, military
funerals and other functions at which the use of blank ammunition is
appropriate, nor shall it apply to the use of ball ammunition or arrows on
authorized target ranges when such activity is conducted under competent
supervision, nor shall it apply to the discharge or use of firearms or archery
equipment in accordance with generally accepted range safety procedures
at and within any indoor shooting range which has been duly authorized
by the grant of a special exception under § 164-54 of the Westminster City
Code. Any weapon or instrument so discharged in violation of this section
shall be subject to confiscation by the Westminster City Police Department.
§ 106-15. (Reserved)36
36.Editor's Note: Former § 106-15, Stun guns, was repealed 6-12-2017 by Ord. No. 880.
§ 106-13 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 106-15
48:223

ARTICLE V
Miscellaneous Offenses
[Amended 2-10-2003 by Ord. No. 696; 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 808;
4-23-2012 by Ord. No. 832]
§ 106-16. Disorderly conduct.
The term "disorderly conduct" shall mean:
Violent or rowdy behavior that endangers the life, limb, health or
property of another or puts another person in reasonable fear of
such injury to his or her person or property.
(1)
Acts of violence, angry threats and/or abusive conduct that deters
or is intended to deter another person from engaging in lawful
conduct or pursuit of a lawful occupation.
(2)
Actions that cause, provoke or may foreseeably tend to cause or
provoke a fight, brawl or other riotous conduct that endangers the
life, limb, health or property of another.
(3)
Assembling or congregating with another person or persons for the
purpose of causing, provoking or engaging in any fight or brawl.
(4)
Jostling or roughly crowding or pushing any person in any public
place, when such conduct is avoidable in the exercise of due care.
(5)
Frequenting any public place with intent to obtain money from
another by a fraudulent scheme, trick, artifice or device.
(6)
Assembling with another person or persons or in crowds for
unlawful purposes, including but not limited to the intent to engage
in gaming, or to engage in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick
to obtain any valuable thing, or to do bodily harm to another.
(7)
Intentionally breaking jars, bottles or other glass items in or upon
the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public ways of the City or
upon public property.
(8)
Being present within a dwelling or place of business while gaming
or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or unlawful
drugs is conducted, allowed or tolerated.
(9)
Congregating with another or others in or on any public way so as
to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refusing to
clear such public way when ordered to do so by a law enforcement
officer; provided, however, that persons congregating in or on a
public way pursuant to a valid permit issued pursuant to Chapter
109 of the City Code shall not be deemed to be loitering.
(10)
A.
B. A person may not engage in disorderly conduct.
§ 106-16 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 106-16
48:225
§ 106-17. Disturbing the peace.
§ 106-18. Alcoholic beverage offenses.
A violation of this section shall be a municipal infraction punishable by
a fine of $150.
C.
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb the peace by:
Uttering, in a public place, including in or on the premises of any
place of business open to the general public, any lewd or obscene
words or epithets in the presence or hearing of another to whom
such conduct is offensive or unwelcome;
(1)
Shouting or making other vocalizations, projecting amplified
sound, or creating other loud and raucous noise between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Saturday or Sunday or on a state or
federal holiday or between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on
other days that is:
Audible beyond the property line if generated on private
property;
(a)
Audible for a distance of more than 10 feet if generated on
public property.
(b)
Intended to disturb any service in a place of worship or any
public meeting or of the assemblage of people to witness a
lawful public speech or performance.
(c)
(2)
A.
Noise generated by police, fire, emergency medical, or other
governmental emergency personnel, or public utility workers, and noise
generated by private persons for the purpose of protecting persons or
property from injury or damage shall not be deemed to be disturbing
the peace.
B.
A violation of Subsection A of this section shall be a municipal infraction
punishable by a fine of $150.
C.
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage
as defined in Article 2B, § 1-102(a), of the Annotated Code of Maryland,
or to possess an open receptacle containing any such alcoholic
beverage, upon any of the streets, highways, sidewalks or public places
of the City, or upon any private property without the consent of the
property owner or a tenant of the property owner.
A.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A of this section, the
consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages is permitted
pursuant to a valid permit or license issued by the Carroll County
Liquor Board:
(1) On City-owned property during City-authorized events; or
B.
§ 106-16 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 106-18
48:226
§ 106-19. Loitering.
With the consent of the Carroll County Arts Council, Inc., on
premises leased by said organization and located at 91 West Main
Street, Westminster, Maryland, so long as said lease is in effect.
(2)
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of
not more than $100 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both
fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court.
C.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
LOITER — To stand around or remain, including to remain within a
motor vehicle, or to collect, gather, congregate, or to be a member of
a group or a crowd of people, in any public place or place open to the
public, and to:
PLACE OPEN TO THE PUBLIC — Any place to which members of
the general public ordinarily have free access and any place to which
members of the general public are invited, including but not limited
to a privately owned place of business open to the general public; a
public parking lot, a private commercial parking lot; a place of worship,
cemetery, or place of amusement and entertainment, whether or not a
charge of admission or entry thereto is made; and the elevator, lobby,
halls, corridors, and areas open to the public of any store, office, or
apartment building.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public street, road, or highway, alley, lane,
sidewalk, crosswalk, or other public way, or any public resort, place of
amusement, park, playground, public building or grounds appurtenant
thereto, public parking lot, or any vacant lot.
Interfere with, impede, or hinder the free passage of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic;
(1)
Interfere with, obstruct, harass, curse at, or do or threaten to do
physical harm to any person; or
(2)
By words, acts, or other conduct:
(a) Cause a breach of the peace;
Engage in disorderly conduct, as that term is defined in
§ 106-16 of this chapter;
(b)
Disturb the peace, as that term is defined in § 106-17 of this
chapter; or
(c)
Engage in any conduct that violates local or state criminal
laws.
(d)
(3)
A.
§ 106-18 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 106-19
48:227
§ 106-20. Panhandling.
Prohibited conduct. It shall be unlawful for a person who is loitering to
fail to obey the direction of a uniformed or otherwise properly identified
police officer to cease such conduct or to move on; provided, however,
that nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit orderly picketing
or other lawful assembly, and provided further that a person shall be
deemed to have complied with an order to move on if such person
removes himself or herself to a location:
(1) Upon private property;
Within a structure in which he has permission or a lawful right to
be and remain; or
(2)
At least 1,500 linear feet from the location from which he or she
has been ordered to move.
(3)
B.
Penalties. Any person violating Subsection B of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject
to a fine of not more than $100 or imprisonment for not more than
90 days, or both fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court;
provided, however, that no person shall be charged with a violation of
this section unless and until the charging officer has first warned the
person of the violation and the person has failed or refused to stop the
violation.
C.
As used in this section, the term "panhandling" means any solicitation,
made in person upon any sidewalk, public place or park in the City,
in which a person requests an immediate donation of money or other
gratuity from another person and includes but is not limited to seeking
donations:
By vocal appeal or in exchange for observing a musical, singing, or
other street performance; or
(1)
Where the person being solicited receives an item of little or no
monetary value in exchange for a donation, under circumstances
where a reasonable person would understand that the transaction
is, in substance, a donation.
(2)
A.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A of this section, the
term "panhandling" shall not include passively standing or sitting, or
performing music, singing or engaging in other street performance
with a sign or other indication that a donation is being sought, without
any vocal request other than in response to an inquiry by another
person.
B.
It shall be unlawful to engage in an act of panhandling on any day after
sunset or before sunrise.
C.
§ 106-19 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 106-20
48:228
§ 106-21. Urinating or defecating in public prohibited.
It shall be unlawful at all times to engage in an act of panhandling when
either the panhandler or the person being solicited is located:
(1) At a bus stop;
In any public transportation vehicle or public transportation
facility;
(2)
(3) In a vehicle that is parked or stopped on a public street or alley;
(4) In a sidewalk cafe; or
Within 20 feet in any direction from an automatic teller machine or
entrance to a bank.
(5)
D.
It shall be unlawful at all times to engage in an act of panhandling in an
aggressive manner, including any of the following actions:
Touching the solicited person without the solicited person's
consent.
(1)
Soliciting a person while such person is standing in line or waiting
to be admitted to a commercial establishment;
(2)
Blocking the path or the vehicle of a person being solicited or the
entrance to any building or vehicle;
(3)
Following behind, ahead or alongside a person who walks away
from the panhandler after being solicited;
(4)
Using profane or abusive language, either during the solicitation or
following a refusal to make a donation, or making any statement,
gesture, or other communication which would cause a reasonable
person to be fearful or feel compelled; or
(5)
(6) Panhandling in a group of two or more persons.
E.
Each act of panhandling prohibited by this section shall constitute
a public nuisance, and each individual solicitation of each individual
person shall constitute a separate violation.
F.
A violation of Subsection B, C, or D of this section shall constitute a
municipal infraction subject to a fine of $150.
G.
No person shall urinate or defecate in, from or upon any street,
highway, sidewalk, alley, plaza, park, public building, public property,
private parking lot, or in any place open to the public or exposed
to public view. This section shall not apply to urination or defecation
utilizing appropriate fixtures in any rest room or other facility designed
for the sanitary disposal of human waste.
A.
§ 106-20 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 106-21
48:229
Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable
by a fine of $250 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding six
months, or both.
B.
§ 106-21 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 106-21
48:230
Chapter 109
PICKETING AND PARADES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Permit for circus parades — See Ch. 94, Art.
II.
Nuisances — See Ch. 100.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 106.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 139.
§ 106-21 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 106-21
48:231

ARTICLE I
Picketing
§ 109-1. Permit required.
No persons shall boycott, picket, molest or interfere with any other person
who is acting in a lawful manner by standing, sitting, lying or congregating
with others in any manner in any public place, street or sidewalk or any
portion thereof within the City; nor shall any person obstruct any entrance
of any building, storeroom, factory or other place of business by parading in
or around such premises for the purpose of preventing the full lawful use of
such entrance by any person desiring to use the entrance or for the purpose
of picketing or boycotting the premises, provided that the Mayor is hereby
authorized to issue permits to persons applying therefor, subject to the
limitations and regulations of this article, for permit holders to peacefully
picket theaters, restaurants, stores, factories or other places of business.
§ 109-2. Procedure for obtaining permit.
The Mayor shall issue permits to persons applying therefor to peacefully
picket any place, as hereinafter designated in this article, upon the
following terms and conditions and no others:
§ 109-3. Conditions of permit.
Applications shall be made, in writing, for a permit to picket.
Said application shall be filed at least 10 business days prior to the
beginning of the period for which the application is sought.
(1)
The application shall state the name and address of the applicant
and shall be accompanied by such identification as may be required
to verify the identity of the applicant.
(2)
Such application shall state the connection of the applicant with
the labor dispute or strike or with the subject of the protest or
controversy.
(3)
A.
In case of a labor dispute or strike, such applicant must have been
employed by the owner or operator of the place sought to be picketed
when the strike or labor dispute arose.
B.
Each picket permit shall be for a certain designated place and the area
to be picketed shall be designated therein in detail, and such permit
shall be good for the area described only.
A.
Each picket permit shall be issued for use during certain hours to be
designated therein, so that not more than the number of pickets as
authorized by this article may be present at any one time, and such
permit shall be valid for such periods as are designated only and shall
not be transferable.
B.
§ 109-1 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 109-3
48:233
§ 109-4. Number of permits limited.
§ 109-5. Restrictions on actions.
§ 109-6. Revocation of permit.
Picket permits may be revoked at any time by the Mayor for any disorderly
conduct or participation in any unlawful act upon the part of the holder
thereof or for interference in any manner with any person using the area
picketed for any lawful purpose or for any conduct tending to a breach of
the public peace.
§ 109-7. Interference prohibited.
No persons shall hinder, molest, insult or harass any picket lawfully
picketing pursuant to a permit issued under the provisions of this article.
The provisions of this article shall be deemed to be a part of each picket
permit, whether or not so stated in the permit.
C.
Not more than six picket permits shall be issued for each gate or
entrance to any building, storeroom, factory or other place of business
for use during any prescribed period.
A.
Not more than one picket permit shall be issued for each public
entrance to any retail, wholesale or other business place or theater, for
use during any prescribed period.
B.
Each person holding a picket permit shall, while picketing, constantly
pace to and fro upon the sidewalks as near the curb as may be
practicable at all times within the area designated by the permit, and
if no sidewalk is available, such permit shall designate the limits within
which such picket shall walk.
A.
No picket shall carry any instrument, device or weapon of any kind
except a sign or banner, the dimensions of which shall not exceed
a width of 24 inches or a height of 36 inches and shall not contain
any scurrilous or obscene words, language or illustration calculated to
arouse public hatred or anger or tending to any breach of the public
peace.
B.
§ 109-3 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 109-7
48:234
ARTICLE II
Parades and Demonstrations
[Amended 10-26-1992 by Ord. No. 567; 5-8-1995 by Ord. No. 597;
7-28-2003 by Ord. No. 704]
§ 109-8. Findings.
The legislative body finds that it is necessary for the good government and
the peace, health and welfare of the City and the inhabitants thereof, as
well as to maintain law and order, to prohibit parades and demonstrations
of more than 25 persons within the City unless a City permit to use the
City streets, sidewalks and public places for such purposes has first been
granted.
§ 109-9. Permit required; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to organize, direct, lead or participate
in any parade or demonstration upon any street or sidewalk or upon or
in any public place within the City of more than 25 persons unless a City
permit has been granted to hold such parade or demonstration, provided
that this article shall not apply to parades, processions or convoys of any
component of the Armed Forces of the United States or this state or to any
governmental organization or to any funeral procession.
§ 109-10. Procedure for requesting permit. [Amended 11-24-2008
by Ord. No. 791]
Any person desiring to promote, organize, direct or lead a parade or
demonstration upon any street or sidewalk or upon or in any public place of
more than 25 persons within the City shall file an application for a parade
or demonstration permit with the City Clerk and pay a fee as provided in
the General Fee Ordinance.37 An application for a parade permit shall be
filed at least 14 days and an application for a demonstration permit shall be
filed at least two days prior to the date or period for which the permit is
sought with a provision that an application for a demonstration permit for
exigent circumstances will be filed and acted upon within 24 hours, and in
such application shall be set forth:
The date and hour for the assembling of the participants in such parade
or demonstration and the expected duration thereof.
A.
The streets, sidewalks and public places over and upon which the
parade or demonstration is to take place.
B.
Whether the parade or demonstration is to be conducted on foot or
with animals or vehicles, or any combination thereof, and the number
of persons, vehicles and animals expected to participate.
C.
D. The purpose of the parade or demonstration.
37.Editor’s Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
§ 109-8 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 109-10
48:235
§ 109-11. Issuance or denial of permit. [Amended 1-23-2006 by Ord.
No. 741]
§ 109-12. Contents of permit.
38The name and address of the person who shall be in charge of such
parade or demonstration.
E.
Upon the filing of an application for a permit, the City Clerk shall
promptly transmit copies to the Chief of Police, the Director of
Recreation and Parks, the Director of Public Works and the Director
of Planning. The City Clerk will review and act upon applications in a
content and viewpoint neutral manner. The City Clerk may not deny an
application based upon political, social or religious grounds or based
upon the content of the speech or views to be expressed. [Amended
12-6-2007 by Ord. No. 773]
A.
The City Clerk may deny an application on any of the following grounds:
(1) The application is not fully completed and executed;
The application contains a material falsehood or
misrepresentation;
(2)
A fully executed prior application for a permit for the same time
and place has been received, and a permit has been or will be
granted to a prior applicant authorizing a parade or demonstration
which does not reasonably permit multiple occupancy of the
particular public place, street, or sidewalk;
(3)
The use or activity intended by the applicant will present an
unreasonable danger to the health or safety of the applicant or
other users of the public place, street or sidewalk;
(4)
The use or activity intended by the applicant is prohibited by any
applicable federal, state, county or City law.
(5)
B.
Upon the issuance of a permit, the City Clerk shall provide a copy to
the Chief of Police, the Director of Recreation and Parks, the Director
of Public Works and the Director of the Department of Planning.
[Amended 12-6-2007 by Ord. No. 773]
C.
In each permit the City Clerk shall specify (as applicable or necessary):
(1) The assembly area and time therefor;
(2) The starting time;
A.
38.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection E, which required that the names and addresses of the
sponsors and the organization or organizations of which participants are members be
included on the application, was repealed 7-13-2009 by Ord. No. 805. This ordinance also
redesignated former Subsection F as Subsection E and repealed former Subsection G,
which provided for the inclusion on the application of such other information as the City
Clerk may deem reasonably necessary.
§ 109-10 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 109-12
48:236
§ 109-13. Conditions of permit.
(3) The minimum and maximum speeds;
(4) The route of the parade;
What portions of streets or sidewalks to be traversed may be
occupied by such parade or demonstration;
(5)
The maximum number of platoons or units and the maximum and
minimum intervals of space to be maintained between the units of
such a parade;
(6)
(7) The maximum length of such parade in miles or fractions thereof;
(8) The disbanding area, and disbanding time;
The number of persons required to monitor the parade or
demonstration;
(9)
(10)The number and type of vehicles, if any;
The material and maximum size of any sign, banner, placard or
carrying device therefor;
(11)
The materials used in the construction of floats used in any parade
shall be of fire-retardant materials and shall be subject to such
requirements concerning fire safety;
(12)
That the applicant advise all participants in the parade or
demonstration, either orally or by written notice, of the terms
and conditions of the permit, prior to the commencement of such
parade or demonstration;
(13)
That the amplification of sound permitted to be emitted from sound
trucks, or bull horns, be fixed, not variable, and be in accordance
with law;
(14)
That the parade continue to move at a fixed rate of speed and that
any willful delay or willful stopping of said parade, except when
reasonably required for the safe and orderly conduct of the parade,
shall constitute a violation of the permit; and
(15)
Such other requirements as are found by the City Clerk to be
reasonably necessary for the protection of persons or property.
(16)
All conditions of the permit shall be complied with so far as reasonably
practicable.
B.
In granting a permit pursuant to this article, the City Clerk may include
therein such prohibitions, conditions, restrictions and limitations as the
City Clerk may consider necessary, under the general police powers of
the City, to safeguard the good government and the health and welfare
of the City and its inhabitants and for the preservation of law and
A.
§ 109-12 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 109-13
48:237
§ 109-14. Appeals.
Upon a denial of an application made pursuant to § 109-10, an applicant
may appeal from the determination of the City Clerk within 30 days to the
Circuit Court for Carroll County. Such appeal shall be taken in accordance
with § 7-201 et seq. of the Maryland Rules of Procedure. The City will
cooperate with judicial review on an expedited basis.
§ 109-15. Revocation of permit.
A permit issued for a parade or demonstration is revocable by the City
Clerk upon a ground for which an application would be subject to denial
under § 109-11B. Any such revocation prior to the conduct of a parade or
demonstration shall be in writing.
§ 109-15.1. Restrictions on actions.
§ 109-15.2. Dispersal.
Parades and demonstrations held pursuant to a permit issued under the
provisions of this article which become a riot, rout or unlawful assembly
shall be dispersed forthwith by the City police, and paraders and
demonstrators who are commanded by any police officer to disperse shall
promptly obey such command and peacefully disengage themselves from
such parade or demonstration and leave the scene thereof, and persons who
fail to obey such command shall be subject to immediate arrest.
order and acceptable traffic conditions within the City, and it shall be
unlawful for any person covered by the permit to violate or fail to
comply with any such prohibition, condition, restriction or limitation.
The provisions of this article shall be deemed to be a part of each
parade or demonstration permit, whether or not so stated in the permit.
B.
No person parading or demonstrating pursuant to a permit issued
under the provisions of this article shall carry any dangerous weapons,
provided that the City Clerk may, in the exercise of sound discretion,
include in such permit such variations from this subsection as the
City Clerk may consider appropriate for members of color guards, drill
teams, lodges and other persons by whom the display of weapons upon
the occasion of such parade or demonstration would not arouse anxiety
on the part of spectators or constitute a threat to the maintenance of
law and order and the preservation of the public peace.
A.
No person parading or demonstrating pursuant to a permit issued
under the provisions of this article shall cause or suffer to be caused
any vicious or apparently vicious animal to participate in or accompany
such parade or demonstration, provided that the City Clerk may, in
the exercise of sound discretion, include in such permit such variations
from this subsection as it may consider appropriate for circus parades
and similar events.
B.
§ 109-13 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 109-15.2
48:238
ARTICLE III
Enforcement
§ 109-16. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of this chapter is declared to be an infraction. The penalty
for violation shall be $25 for each initial offense and $50 for each repeat
offense.
§ 109-16 ANIMALS AND FOWL § 109-16
48:239
Chapter 112
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Intergovernmental relations — See Ch. 24.
Buildings — See Ch. 56.
Sewers and sewage — See Ch. 124.
Chapter 119
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Charter provisions on redevelopment and
urban renewal — See Article 2 of the City
Charter.
Buildings — See Ch. 56.
Disorderly house nuisances — See Ch. 68.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 78.
Nuisances — See Ch. 100.
Sewers and sewage — See Ch. 124.
Solid waste — See Ch. 130.
Urban renewal — See Ch. 150.
Fee Schedule — See Ch. A175.
§ 119-1. Adoption of standards by reference. [Amended 11-11-2013
by Ord. No. 847]
The 2012 Edition of the International Property Maintenance Code, as
amended from time to time, as published by the International Code Council,
Inc., which is kept and maintained by the Code Official, shall be and is
hereby adopted as the City of Westminster Property Maintenance Code
(sometimes hereinafter referred to as the "Property Maintenance Code").
All of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
Property Maintenance Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a
part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 119-2 of this chapter.
§ 119-2. Amendments. [Amended 11-11-2013 by Ord. No. 847]
The following sections of the International Property Maintenance Code are
hereby amended and revised as set forth in this section. Unless otherwise
noted, the sections enumerated below are intended to replace in their
entirety the corresponding sections of the 2012 International Property
Maintenance Code.39
39.Editor's Note: Revisions to the International Property Maintenance Code are included as
an attachment to this chapter.
§ 109-16 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 119-3
112:240
§ 119-3. Copies on file.
The Code Official of the City of Westminster shall maintain two copies of the
Property Maintenance Code on file in the City Office.
§ 119-4. Licensing and inspection of rental dwellings. [Added
2-11-2013 by Ord. No. 839]
Rental license. It shall be unlawful for any person to rent, let or lease
any dwelling, dwelling unit or portion thereof within the City, including
rooming houses ("rental dwelling"), without first obtaining a license
to do so as hereinafter provided. A dwelling or dwelling unit shall be
subject to the prohibition contained in this subsection if it is occupied
by any person other than the property owner in exchange for any
compensation or monetary remuneration.
A.
Resident agent. If no owner of record resides at the property address or
within 50 miles of the property, the owner(s) of record shall designate
on the application for the rental license the name, address, and
telephone number of a local agent residing within 50 miles of the
City who is authorized by the property owner(s) to receive notices,
telephone calls in the event of an emergency, and correspondence
regarding violations pertaining to the property, other than citations
or other legal process. The property owners shall ensure that the
information required by this subsection is current at all times.
B.
License application. The owner of record of a rental dwelling shall make
written application to the City for a rental unit license on or before June
1, 2013, upon such form or forms as the City shall from time to time
designate. Such application shall be submitted to the City together with
a nonrefundable rental license fee as established from time to time by
the Mayor and Common Council in the City's General Fee Ordinance.40
A person who initially rents, lets or leases any rental dwelling after
June 1, 2013, shall make written application to the City for a rental unit
license prior to allowing such property to be occupied by a tenant.
C.
Length of validity of license; fees. [Amended 5-23-2016 by Ord. No.
864]
Rental unit licenses issued on or before July 1, 2017, shall be
valid for a period of one year, commencing June 1, and terminating
on the last day of May following the issuance of the license. Any
license issued after March 1 of any year shall only be valid through
the last day of May following its issuance, except that rental
licenses issued for the period on or after June 1, 2016, but before
July 1, 2017, shall be valid through June 30, 2017.
(1)
D.
40.Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
§ 119-3 PLUMBING § 119-4
112:241
Rental unit licenses issued on or after July 1, 2017, shall be valid
through June 30 of the City's fiscal year in which the license was
issued.
(2)
The rental license fee shall not be prorated based upon submission
of an application after the beginning of any rental licensing year.
Rental unit licenses shall be renewed annually at the fees specified
in the City of Westminster General Fee Ordinance.41
(3)
Inspections. All rental dwellings shall be subject to inspection to
determine whether they are in conformance with the Property
Maintenance Code in the event of a complaint filed with the City
concerning an alleged violation of said code. For purposes of this
section, a complaint includes any statement made by an individual or a
federal, state, county or City department, agency or code enforcement
official, received by the City in any manner, including but not limited
to via telephone or mail, including electronic mail. Upon receipt of a
complaint, the Code Official or his designee shall inspect the premises.
Subject to the right of the owner or occupant to require the City
to obtain a judicial warrant as set forth in Subsection G below, the
Code Official or his designee is hereby authorized, upon presentation
of proper credentials, to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable
times all rental dwellings and premises in response to a complaint or
to conduct an inspection if the Code Official believes that a violation of
City Code Chapter 119 has occurred.
E.
Reinspection. Whenever the Code Official or his designee observes a
violation, he shall reinspect the premises to confirm that the violation
has been corrected.
F.
Administrative warrant. Permission for inspections and reinspections is
a condition of any license, and the owner or occupant of every rental
dwelling or the person in charge thereof shall give the Code Official or
his designee unfettered access to such rental dwelling and its premises
at all reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection, examination
and survey. Failure to allow entry for an inspection or reinspection
will result in the City seeking an administrative warrant. Failure of the
owner to allow entry or the owner requiring any tenant to deny entry
for such inspection upon an administrative warrant shall constitute a
municipal infraction subject to a fine as set forth in 119 Attachment 1,
Section 106, Violations, and shall further constitute sufficient reason
for the denial or revocation of the rental license.
G.
Onus to provide access. Every occupant of a rental dwelling shall
give the owner thereof or his/her agent or employee access to any
part of such dwelling or its premises at all reasonable times for the
purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
H.
41.Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
§ 119-4 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 119-4
112:242
§ 119-5. Notice of violation; penalties.
Revocation or denial of license/injunction. A license may be revoked or
denied by the Code Official if the owner, after notice from the City, fails
to correct violations of City Code Chapter 119. Revocation or denial of
a license shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for, such other
penalties as may be provided for said violations elsewhere in this Code.
A license also may be revoked or denied if the City determines that
the applicant for the license provided false or misleading information in
his/her application. If a license is revoked or denied, the owner of the
property in question shall immediately provide tenants notice that they
must vacate the property within 60 days of the notice and any security
deposit shall be returned to the tenants in accordance with the Real
Property Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
I.
Display of licenses. Licenses issued under this section shall be
produced by a landlord on the demand of a tenant or prospective
tenant and shall be available at reasonable times for examination by an
authorized agent of the City.
J.
Appeals. Appeals of a notice of violation or an action or determination
of the Code Official other than the issuance of a municipal infraction
citation may be appealed to the Board of Housing Appeals as set forth
in Attachment 1 to this chapter, Section 301.2.2. see City Code § 119-2.
K.
Whenever the Code Official or his designee determines that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provision of this chapter, he shall give notice of such alleged violation
to the person or persons responsible therefor, as hereinafter provided.
Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Include a statement of the reason(s) it has been issued.
Include a statement of the remedial action necessary to effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the time frame
within which such action(s) must be taken.
(3)
(4) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires.
State that the violation must be fully corrected within the time
frame stated therein, and state that, in the event that the owner
and/or occupant, as the case may be, fails to do so within the
time frame provided, a citation shall be delivered to him/her in
accordance with the provisions of the City Code advising him/her
of the imposition of a fine.
(5)
Contain a statement that the notice constitutes the only notice the
person will receive regarding a violation of the applicable section
for the twelve-month period following the date that the notice is
issued and that a citation shall issue immediately for any repeat
(6)
A.
§ 119-4 PLUMBING § 119-5
112:243
§ 119-6. Property maintenance habitual offender.
violation during that twelve-month period. In the event that there
is a repeat violation on the same property during the twelve-month
period following the first violation, the fines for the repeat violation
shall be as set forth in 119 Attachment 1, Section 106, Violations.
Be served upon the owner or his/her agent or the occupant, as the
case may require, provided that such notice shall be deemed to be
properly served upon such owner or agent or upon such occupant
if a copy thereof is served upon such person personally, or if a copy
thereof is sent by regular mail to his/her last known address, or
if a copy thereof is posted in a conspicuous place in or about the
dwelling affected by the notice, or if the owner and/or occupant, as
the case may be, is served with such notice by any other method
authorized or required under the laws of this state.
(7)
Violations of § 119-4 are municipal infractions subject to the fines and
penalties set forth in 119 Attachment 1, Section 106, violations.
B.
In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this section and
those of the International Property Maintenance Code, the provisions
of this section shall govern.
C.
This section applies to owners of rental dwelling units in the City who
violate provisions of the Property Maintenance Code repetitively in a
twelve-month period.
A.
As used in this section "habitual offender" means any person owning
a rental dwelling unit who has paid a fine assessed by the City or is
found guilty of violating the provisions of City Code Chapter 119 on
three separate occasions within a twelve-month period.
Once a person is deemed to be an habitual offender, he or she will
retain the status of habitual offender until such time as 12 months
from the last fine paid or finding of guilt entered passes without
another fine being paid or finding of guilt.
(1)
A person who has been deemed an habitual offender may not lose
such designation by transferring the property regarding which he
or she has been deemed an habitual offender to an individual,
partnership, corporation or any other entity in which the habitual
offender has any interest.
(2)
B.
After an owner of a rental dwelling unit becomes an habitual offender,
all fines levied under City Code Chapter 119 for that dwelling unit shall
be tripled until the habitual offender designation is removed, provided
that the maximum fine shall not exceed the maximum fine allowed
under Maryland Annotated Code, Art. 23A.
C.
§ 119-5 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 119-6
112:244
Chapter 124
SEWERS AND SEWAGE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Charter provisions — See § 27.1 of the City
Charter.
Buildings — See Ch. 56.
Plumbing — See Ch. 112.
Special capital benefit assessment — See Ch.
133.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 136.
Water — See Ch. 160.
The rental license fee for a rental dwelling unit that is the subject of the
habitual offender designation shall be as set forth in the General Fee
Ordinance.4243
D.
42.Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
43.Editor's Note: Former § 119-7, Rental licensing program expiration date, which
immediately followed, was repealed 5-23-2016 by Ord. No. 864.
§ 119-6 PLUMBING § 119-6
112:245

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 124-1. Definitions and word usage.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of
terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
BOD (denoting "biochemical oxygen demand") — The quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter in five
days at 20º C., expressed in milligrams per liter, as determined in
accordance with the latest issue of Standard Methods or by a method
acceptable to and approved by the State Department of Health and
other agencies having jurisdiction.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to
the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner
face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal; also called "house connection."
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer intended to receive both wastewater
and storm- or surface water.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Planning and Public Works of the
City of Westminster.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Public Works or the Director's
designee.[Amended 12-6-2007 by Ord. No. 773]
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it
will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable
fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere
with the collection system.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes and residue from the preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of food
products and produce.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any waste or combination of waste that poses
substantial danger to human beings, plants and animals. Specifically,
a waste shall be considered hazardous if it poses one or more of the
following characteristics: ignitability, corrosivity, reactivity, toxicity and
radioactivity.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Waterborne solids, liquids or gaseous wastes
resulting from, discharged, permitted to flow or escaping from any
industrial, manufacturing or food processing operation or processes
or from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of
these with water or domestic sewage as distinct from normal domestic
sewage.
A.
§ 124-1 PLUMBING § 124-1
112:247
INTERFERENCE —
LEACHATE — Wastewater produced by the percolation of water
through a municipal solid waste landfill.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet, including storm sewers, into a
watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water.
PARTS PER MILLION — A weight-to-weight ratio; in wastewater, parts
per million value multiplied by the factor of 8.345 shall be equivalent to
pounds per million gallons of water; or a weight-to-volume ratio; as one
milligram per liter is equal to one part per million in wastewater.
PASS-THROUGH — Discharge of pollutants through the wastewater
treatment works into waters of the state in quantities or concentrations
which cause a violation of any requirement of the wastewater treatment
works discharge permit and/or violation of any other state or federal
regulation.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, company, association,
society, corporation, group or entity.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration
expressed in moles per liter. It shall be determined by one of the
procedures outlined in Standard Methods.
PRETREATMENT — Treatment of wastewaters from sources before
introduction into the wastewater treatment works.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
An inhibition or disruption of the wastewater treatment works or
wastewater treatment plant operations or its processes or sludge
processes use or disposal which causes either a violation of any
requirement of the wastewater treatment works discharge permit
or prevents sewage sludge use or disposal by the wastewater
treatment works in accordance with any and all applicable
statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued under them
including:
(a) Section 405 of the Clean Water Act.
The Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II,
commonly referred to as the "Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act (RCRA)" and any state regulation contained in
any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to
Subtitle D of the SWDA.)
(b)
(c) The Clean Air Act.
(d) The Toxic Substances Control Act.
(1)
Damage to sewer systems and threats to wastewater treatment
works' workers and public health, safety and comfort.
(2)
§ 124-1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 124-1
112:248
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2
inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
POTW — Publicly owned treatment plant.
PUBLIC SEWER — A common sewer controlled by a governmental
agency or public utility.
QUALIFIED ANALYST —
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions, together with minor quantities of ground, storm and
surface waters that are not admitted intentionally.
SEPTAGE — The liquid and solid material produced in individual on-site
wastewater disposal systems, principally septic tanks and cesspools.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit which carries wastewater or drainage
water.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM — See "wastewater facilities."
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER —
Any person holding an undergraduate degree in chemistry or in a
closely allied field (e.g., biology, sanitary engineering); or
(1)
Any other person who has demonstrated competency in
wastewater analysis by having analyzed satisfactorily a minimum
of three reference wastewater samples as supplied upon request by
the approving authority.
(2)
Any industrial user who:
(a) Is subject to national categorical standards; or
Discharges total flows equal to greater than 25,000 gallons per
day (gpd); or
(b)
Contributes a process waste stream that makes up 5% or more
of the hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW; or
(c)
Is found by the City, state or EPA to have significant impact,
either slightly or in combination with other contributing
industries, to the POTW, the quality of the sludge, the POTW's
effluent quality or air emissions generated by the system.
(d)
(1)
Upon finding an industrial user meeting the above criteria of this
definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the
POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement, the City may at any time, on its own initiative or
in response to a petition received from an industrial user, and in
accordance with 40 CFR 403, determine that such industrial user
is not a significant industrial user.
(2)
§ 124-1 PLUMBING § 124-1
112:249
SLUDGE — Solid or semisolid materials removed from the liquid
wastewater stream or wastewater or water treatment plant.
SLUG — Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration
of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds, for any period
of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average
twenty-four-hour concentration or flow during normal operation or
which shall adversely affect the collection system and/or performance
of the wastewater treatment works.
STANDARD METHODS — The examination and analytical procedures
set forth in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Wastewater, as prepared, approved and published jointly
by the American Public Health Association and the American Water
Works Association.
STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed "storm sewer") — A sewer or drain
for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water or unpolluted
water from any source.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS) — Total suspended matter that either floats
on the surface of or is in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids
and which is removable by laboratory filtering under standard
laboratory procedure as described in Standard Methods.
TOTAL KJEDAHL NITROGEN (TKN) — The sum of free ammonia and
organic nitrogen compounds as determined in Standard Methods.
WASTEWATER — The spent water of a community. From the standpoint
of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and
stormwater that may be present.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES — The structures, equipment and processes
required to collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes
and discharge the effluent and treat, utilize or dispose of sludges
resulting from collection and treatment of these wastes.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS — An arrangement of devices and
structures for treating wastewater and sludge.
WATERCOURSE — A natural or artificial channel in which flow of water
occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
B. The term "shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
§ 124-1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 124-1
112:250
ARTICLE II
Use of Public Sewers
§ 124-2. Use of public sewers required.
§ 124-3. Building sewers and connections.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to
be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property
within the service area of the City's public sewer system or in any
area under the jurisdiction of the City any human or animal excrement,
garbage or other objectionable waste.
A.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any watercourse within the service
area of the City's public sewer system or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the City any wastewater or other polluted waters, except
where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
B.
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage within the service area of
the City's public sewer system or in any area under the jurisdiction of
the City.
C.
The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within
the service area of the City's public sewer system, as defined by the
County Water and Sewer Master Plan, is hereby required at the owner's
own expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and shall connect
such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after the date of official
notice to do so.
D.
All privies, privy vaults, cesspools, septic tanks and drains on properties
connected with a sanitary sewer shall be abandoned as soon as
possible, and in no case later than 30 days after the connection of such
properties to such sanitary sewer, and left in such way that they cannot
again be used or injuriously affect the public health; and all wells that
are found by the City or any public health authority having jurisdiction
to be polluted or a menace to health shall likewise be abandoned and
closed.
E.
Privies, privy vaults, cesspools, septic tanks, drains and polluted wells
abandoned and closed pursuant to this section shall be subject to
inspection by the Director and by any public health authority having
jurisdiction, and the owner of the property upon which any such
abandoned and closed facility is located shall take such remedial action
as may be prescribed by such inspector to assure that such closed and
abandoned facility will not constitute a hazard to the public health or
safety.
F.
§ 124-2 PLUMBING § 124-3
112:251
No authorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the City.
A.
There shall be three classes of sewer permits: for residential use, for
commercial use and for service to establishments producing industrial
wastewater. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the City. The permit
application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the City.
B.
All costs and expense incidental to the installation and connection
of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall
indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
C.
Each mobile home and/or trailer unit used for residential or commercial
purposes and having domestic water and/or sanitary facilities therein
shall be considered a separate and independent building and, as such,
shall have its own separate and independent building drain and
building sewer.
D.
Where existing building sewers connected to a public sanitary sewer
or public storm sewer are to be abandoned by reason of demolition
of buildings and structures or for any other reason, they shall be
disconnected and permanently sealed at the curbline or at the public
sewer as directed by the approving authority. Existing building sewers
may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are
found, on examination and test by the City, to meet all the requirements
of this chapter.
E.
The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of a building
sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the
requirements of the Carroll County Plumbing Code and/or all other
applicable rules and regulations of the City. In the absence of code
provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set
forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing
Materials and Water Environment Federation Manual of Practice No. 9
shall apply.
F.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an
approved means and discharged to the building sewer. Exceptions to
this requirement shall be requested in writing and approved by the
Plumbing Inspector of the City.
G.
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff
H.
§ 124-3 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 124-3
112:252
§ 124-3.1. Application for service. [Added 2-11-2002 by Ord. No.
678]
or groundwater to a building drain or building sewer which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
The connection of the building drain to the building sewer or the
building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements
of the Carroll County Plumbing Code and/or all other applicable rules
and regulations of the City or the procedure set forth in appropriate
specifications of the American Society for Testing Materials and Water
Environment Federation Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections
shall be made gastight and watertight. All connections of building
sewers to the public sewer shall be performed by persons authorized by
the City. The prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by
the City before installation.
I.
The owner of any improved property shall maintain and repair the
building drain and lateral at the owner's own expense and shall remove
all trees, tree roots and other obstructions of the building drain and
lateral. Where such maintenance or repairs are neglected by the owner,
the City may, 10 days after mailing written notice to the owner, make
or cause to be made such maintenance or repairs as may be necessary
and charge the owner of said improved property for the cost thereof.
J.
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the City when
the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection and testing shall be made in the presence of and
under the supervision of the City or its representatives, who shall be
notified 24 hours before time of backfilling.
K.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the City.
L.
All applications for a permit for sewer service must be made, in writing,
on a form provided by the City. Applications for service must be made
by the property owner or the owner’s agent or representative and shall
be accompanied by a fee as provided in the Utility Fee Ordinance.44
[Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 793]
A.
No contract for service will be entered into by the City with any
applicant until all arrears and charges due by the applicant at any
premises now or heretofore occupied by him shall have been paid or
satisfactory arrangements made in regard thereto.
B.
44.Editor’s Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. II, Utility Fees.
§ 124-3 PLUMBING § 124-3.1
112:253
§ 124-4. Use of public sewers.
An accepted application by the City shall constitute a contract between
the City and applicant, obligating the applicant to pay to the City its
rates as established or as may be established from time to time. The
applicant also shall comply with the City's rules and regulations.
C.
Applications for service installations will be accepted subject to there
being an existing and adequate main in a street or right-of-way abutting
the premises to be served. The contract shall in no way obligate the City
to extend its mains to service the premises under consideration.
D.
When a prospective customer has made application for a new service or
has applied for the reinstatement of an existing service, it is assumed
that the piping and fixtures which the service will supply are in order
to receive the same, and the City will not be liable in any case for any
accident, breaks or leakage arising in any way in connection with the
supply of sewer service or failure to supply the same or the freezing
of water pipes or fixtures of the customer nor for any damage to the
property which may result from the usage or nonusage of the sewer
service supplied to the premises.
E.
After review of the completed application and the payment of all fees
and charges required under this chapter and the Utility Fee Ordinance,
the City may accept the application, provided that the property to be
served is identified as S-1 or S-3 on the Carroll County Master Plan
for Water and Sewerage. Additionally, the development of the property
must be consistent with the current City/county agreement unless the
Mayor and Common Council grants a waiver for good cause45 for which
the applicant shall pay a fee as provided in the Utility Fee Ordinance.46
[Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 793]
F.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters
to any sanitary sewer.
A.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a
natural outlet approved by the City. Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process water may be discharged to a storm sewer or
natural outlet on approval of the City and upon acquiring a national
point discharge elimination system permit (NPDES permit).
B.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described substances, materials, waters or wastes to any
public sewers:
C.
45.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 678 provided that the Director of the Department of
Planning and Public Works shall adopt regulations for the consideration of "good cause"
waivers pursuant to this subsection.
46.Editor’s Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. II, Utility Fees.
§ 124-3.1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 124-4
112:254
Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, engine oil, fuel additives,
paint products, organic solvents or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid or gas.
(1)
Any waters or wastes containing toxic, poisonous or in any way
harmful solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity which, either
singly or by interaction with other wastes, pass through or interfere
with the wastewater treatment works.
(2)
Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.5 or higher than 8.5
or having any other corrosive or scale-forming property capable of
causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel
of the wastewater facilities and wastewater treatment works or
hindering and/or reducing the normal microbiological action,
sludge treatment, utilization and/or disposal capabilities of or by
the wastewater treatment works.
(3)
Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such characteristics
as to be capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers
or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage
works, such as but not limited to ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw,
shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, styrofoam, foam
rubber, sanitary napkins, wood, unground garbage, whole blood,
paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, bones, paper dishes,
cups, milk containers, bentonite, lye, building materials, rubber,
leather, porcelain, china, ceramic wastes, lime slurry, lime,
residues, slops, chemical residues, paint residues, bulk solids, etc.,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
(4)
Any waters or wastes prohibited by any permit issued by the City,
county, state and federal government agencies.
(5)
The following described substances, materials, waters or wastes shall
be limited to concentrations or quantities which will not harm either
the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment, will not have
an adverse effect on the receiving stream and/or will not otherwise
endanger lives, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. The
Director may set limitations lower than the limitations established in
the following if, in the Director's opinion, such action is necessary.
The Director will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of
subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials
of construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment process
employed, the capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, the degree
of treatability of the waste in the wastewater treatment plant and
other pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions on materials
or characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary
sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the Director of
the Department of Public Works are as follows:
Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 104º F. (40º
C.) or less than 32º F.
(1)
D.
§ 124-4 PLUMBING § 124-4
112:255
Wastewater containing more than 100 milligrams per liter of oil
of an animal or vegetable origin or 25 milligrams per liter of
petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils or other oil of mineral
origin.
(2)
Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fat or
grease.
(3)
Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. (see § 124-1).
Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from
homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering
establishments or similar places where garbage originates from the
preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on
the premises or when served by caterers.
(4)
Any waters or wastes containing substances that are limited by
the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. Standards may
be set by the City when the national standard is determined to be
insufficient to protect the wastewater facility from adverse effects
or when the national standard has not been promulgated. Upon
promulgation of National Categorical Pretreatment Standards for
a particular subcategory, the national standards, if more stringent
than the limitations imposed by the City for sources in the
subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed
by the City. The Director of the Department of Public Works shall
so notify all affected industrial waste dischargers, who shall
thereafter be subject to the reporting requirements of 40 CFR 403.
(5)
Any waters or wastes containing phenols or any other taste- or
odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding
limits which may be established by the City as necessary to meet
the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies of
jurisdiction.
(6)
Any radioactive substances and/or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the City in
compliance with applicable state and federal regulations.
(7)
Quantities of flow, concentration, or both, which constitute a "slug"
as defined herein.
(8)
Waters and wastes containing substances not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes
employed or which are amenable to treatment only to such degree
that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the
requirements of any and all agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters or over treatment, utilization and
disposal of sludges produced at the wastewater treatment works.
(9)
Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or
wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form
suspended solids which interfere with the collection system or
(10)
§ 124-4 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 124-4
112:256
create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment
processes.
Any waters or wastes containing at any time total solids (as
determined by methods described in Standard Methods) greater
than 1,250 milligrams per liter or of such character and quantity
that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such
materials in the sewerage facility.
(11)
Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions.
(12)
Any waters or wastes having an average daily chlorine demand (as
determined by methods described in Standard Methods) in excess
of 12 milligrams per liter at a detention time of 20 minutes.
(13)
Industrial wastewater having an average daily five-day BOD (as
determined by methods described in Standard Methods) greater
than 220 milligrams per liter.
(14)
Industrial wastewater having an average daily content of
suspended solids greater than 250 milligrams per liter.
(15)
Industrial waste slugs having an average daily flow greater than
5% of the average daily sewage flow at the wastewater treatment
works.
(16)
(17)Septage. Septage must be taken to the County Septage Facility.
(18)Leachate. Leachate must be taken to the County Septage Facility.
(19)Hazardous waste.
(20)Sludge. Sludge must be taken to the County Septage Facility.
Any waters or wastes which contain wax, grease or oil, plastic or
any other substance that will solidify or become discernibly viscous
at temperatures between 32º F. and 150º F.
(21)
Any garbage that has not been properly comminuted or shredded.
If properly comminuted or shredded, then it may be accepted
under provisions established in this chapter.
(22)
Any wastes or waters containing suspended or dissolved solids of
such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is
required to handle such materials at the wastewater treatment
works.
(23)
(24)Any cyanide greater than one part per million, as CN.
(25)Any hexavalent chromium greater than one part per million.
§ 124-4 PLUMBING § 124-4
112:257
Except in quantities or concentrations or with provisions as
stipulated in this section, no person shall discharge waters or
wastes to the sanitary sewer containing free or emulsified oil and
grease exceeding, on analysis, an average of 100 parts per million
(i.e., 833 pounds per million gallons) of either or both or
combinations of free or emulsified oil and grease, if, in the opinion
of the Director, it appears probable that such wastes:
Can deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such manner as
to clog the sewers.
(a)
(b) Can overload skimming and grease-handling equipment.
Are not amenable to bacterial action and will, therefore, pass
to receiving waters without being affected by normal sewage
treatment processes.
(c)
Can have deleterious effects on the treatment process due to
the excessive quantities.
(d)
(26)
Cyanides or cyanogen compounds capable of liberating
hydrocyanic gas on acidification in excess of one-half per million by
weight as CN in the wastes from any outlet into the public sewers.
(27)
Materials which exert or cause:
Unusual concentrations of solids or compositions; as, for
example, in total suspended solids of inert nature, such as
fuller's earth, or in total dissolved solids, such as sodium
chloride or sodium sulfate.
(a)
(b) Excessive discoloration.
Unusual biochemical oxygen demand or an immediate oxygen
demand.
(c)
(28)
(29)High hydrogen sulfide content.
Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup
flashpoint of less than 140º F. (60º C.) using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.
(30)
Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral
oil origin, in all amounts that will cause interference or passthrough.
(31)
Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems.
(32)
Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the Director in accordance with this chapter.
(33)
§ 124-4 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 124-4
112:258
Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate,
deionized water, noncontact cooling water and unpolluted
wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the Director.
(34)
Sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes or industrial wastewater.
(35)
Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the Director in
a wastewater discharge permit.
(36)
Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test.
(37)
Detergents, surface-active agents or other substances which may
cause excessive foaming in the POTW.
(38)
Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other
product of the POTW such as residues, sludges or scums, to be
unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the
reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to
the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge
use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under
Section 405 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known
as the "Clean Water Act," as amended, any criteria, guidelines or
regulations affecting sludge or disposal developed pursuant to the
Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance
Control Act or state criteria applicable to the sludge management
method being used.
(39)
Specific pollutant limitations. No person shall discharge
wastewater containing in excess of:
Substance
Total Amount
(mg/l)
BOD5* 220*
TKN* 20*
TP (total phosphorus) 5.0*
TSS* 250
TPH (total petroleum
hydrocarbons)*
Total oil and grease 100*
Arsenic 5.0*
Cadmium 0.3*
Chromium 0.50*
Copper 3.0*
Lead 0.5
(40)
§ 124-4 PLUMBING § 124-4
112:259
Substance
Total Amount
(mg/l)
Mercury 10
Nickel 4.0*
Silver 0.03*
Zinc 4.8*
NOTES:
* The Director may impose alternative mass limitations on user(s)
not meeting applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or
in other cases as necessary, where the imposition of mass and/or
concentration limitations are considered appropriate. Alternative
limitations shall be based on plant design and available plant
capacity.
Effect of discharge.
If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the
substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in
Subsection D and which, in the judgment of the City, may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or
receiving waters or sludge management or which otherwise create
a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the City may, upon
giving official notice to the discharger:
(a) Reject the wastes;
Require pretreatment according to the pretreatment standards
as adopted by the City to an acceptable condition for discharge
to the public sewers;
(b)
(c) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge;
Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer
charges under the provisions of Subsection L; and/or
(d)
Require immediate discontinuance of the waste discharge until
such time as it meets the requirements of these regulations.
(e)
(1)
Any person so notified shall immediately stop or eliminate the
discharge. In the event that the discharger shall fail to comply with
the notice, the approving authority shall take such actions as are
deemed reasonably necessary to prevent or minimize damage to
the sewerage system or danger to persons or property, including,
where in the opinion of the approving authority the danger is clear,
present and substantial, immediate severance of the discharger's
sewer connection to the sewerage system.
(2)
E.
§ 124-4 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 124-4
112:260
If the City permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows,
the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the City and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, regulations and
laws.
(3)
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the City, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing floatable grease in excessive amounts or any flammable
wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
City and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the
owners shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by
appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records
of the dates and means of disposal which are subject to review by the
City. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed
by the owner's personnel must be performed by currently licensed
waste disposal firms.
F.
Where pretreatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided for any
waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation by the owner at the owner's own expense.
G.
When required by the City, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
structure, together with necessary meters and other appurtenances
in the control structure to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be
accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance
with plans approved by the City. The structure shall be installed by
the owner at the owner's own expense and shall be maintained by the
owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
H.
The City may require a user of sewer services to provide information
needed to determine compliance with this chapter. The City may review
and copy records to obtain the required information. These
requirements may include:
Wastewater discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time
period.
(1)
(2) Chemical analyses of wastewaters.
Information on raw materials, processes and products affecting
wastewater volume and quality.
(3)
Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent or
other material important to sewer use control.
(4)
I.
§ 124-4 PLUMBING § 124-4
112:261
§ 124-5. Discharge to storm sewers prohibited.
Discharge of wastewater into storm sewers shall not be permitted.
A plot plan of sewers of the user's property showing sewer and
pretreatment facility locations.
(5)
(6) Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities.
Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials
through spills to the municipal sewer.
(7)
Any other information required by the flow measurement,
sampling, analysis and monitoring standards as adopted by the City
Council.
(8)
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of water
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods
and shall be determined by or under the direct supervision of a qualified
analyst at the control structure provided and upon suitable samples
taken at said control structure. In the event that no special structure
has been required, the control structure shall be considered to be the
nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which
the building sewer is connected. Sampling methods, locations, times,
durations and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis
by the Director of the Department of Public Works.
J.
Sample collection.
Except as modified in Subsection K(2) below, the user must collect
wastewater samples using flow-proportional composite collection
techniques. In the event that flow-proportional sampling is
infeasible, the Director may authorize the use of time-proportional
sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user
demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of
the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be
required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits.
(1)
Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols,
sulfides and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using
grab collection techniques.
(2)
K.
No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the City and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength
or character may be accepted by the City for treatment, subject to
payment therefor, by the industrial concern. Any National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards or state standards will not be waived by a
special agreement.
L.
§ 124-4 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 124-6
112:262
§ 124-6. State requirements.
The state pretreatment standards and requirements found in COMAR, Title
26, as it currently exists or as it may be subsequently amended, are hereby
incorporated.
§ 124-7. City's right of revision.
The City reserves the right to establish more stringent limitations or
requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system if deemed
necessary to comply with the objectives of this chapter.
§ 124-8. Excessive discharge.
No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt
to dilute or blend a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in
the federal categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutantspecific
limitation developed by the City or state.
§ 124-9. Accidental discharges.
Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited
materials or other substances regulated by this chapter. Facilities to prevent
accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and
maintained at the owner's or user's own costs and expense. Detailed plans
showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall
be submitted to the City for review and shall be approved by the City before
construction of the facility. No user who commences contribution to the
wastewater treatment works after the effective date of this chapter shall be
permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge
procedures have been approved by the City. Review and approval of such
plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from
the responsibility to modify the user's facility at the user's own expense
as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter. In the case of an
accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately
telephone and notify the Director of the incident. The notifications shall
include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume and
corrective actions.
§ 124-10. Written notice.
Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to
the Director a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge
and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future
occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense,
loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage
to the wastewater treatment works, fish kills or any other damage to person
or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil
penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other
applicable law.
§ 124-6 PLUMBING § 124-11
112:263
§ 124-11. Notice to employees.
A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other
prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a
dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may
cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the
emergency notification procedure. A copy of the notice and emergency
notification procedure shall be provided to the Director upon adoption and
as they may be modified from time to time.
§ 124-11 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 124-11
112:264
ARTICLE III
Industrial Wastewater
§ 124-12. Industrial waste discharge permit.
At least 60 days prior to discharging or continuing the discharge of
any industrial waste to the sewerage system, the owner of the property
from which such discharge is proposed to be made shall apply to the
City, in writing, for a permit to make such discharge.
A.
Application.
Application shall be made on discharge permit application forms
furnished by the City, which forms shall contain all pertinent data,
including but not limited to the estimated quantity of flow, the
character of the waste, the maximum rate of discharge and the
pretreatment facilities, together with any other information
considered pertinent in the judgment of the City and other
approving authorities. This information must include:
(a) Name, address and location (if different from the address).
SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended (if
applicable).
(b)
Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including, but
not limited to, those mentioned in § 124-4D of this chapter
as determined by a certified analytical laboratory; sampling
and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures
established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act and contained in 40 CFR
Part 136, as amended.
(c)
(d) Time and duration of contribution.
Average daily and three-minute peak wastewater flow rates,
including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any.
(e)
Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and
details to show all sewers, sewer connections and
appurtenances by the size, location and elevation.
(f)
Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including all materials which are or could be
discharged.
(g)
Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants
in the discharge which are limited by any city, state or federal
pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or
not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent
basis and, if not, whether additional operation and
maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is
(h)
(1)
B.
§ 124-12 PLUMBING § 124-12
112:265
required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment
standards.
If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to
meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by
which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment
standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule:
The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the
form of date for the commencement and completion of
major events leading to the construction and operation
of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet
the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an
engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final
plans, executing contract for major components,
commencing construction, completing construction, etc.).
[1]
No increment referred to in Subsection B(1)(i)[1] shall
exceed nine months.
[2]
Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule
and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a
progress report to the Director, including, as a minimum,
whether or not it complied with the increment of progress
to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which
it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the
reason for delay and the steps being taken by the user to
return the construction to the schedule established. In no
event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the operations manager.
[3]
(i)
Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes
and rate of production.
(j)
Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day).
(k)
Number and type of employees, and hours of operation of plant
and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment
system.
(l)
Any other information as may be deemed by the City to be
necessary to evaluate the permit application.
(m)
The City will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may
require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of
the data furnished, the City may issue a wastewater contribution
permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein.
(2)
§ 124-12 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 124-12
112:266
Wastewater discharge permit contents. A wastewater discharge permit
shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by
the Director to prevent pass-through or interference, protect the
quality of the waterbody receiving the treatment plant's effluent,
protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and
disposal and protect against damage to the wastewater treatment
works. Wastewater discharge permits must contain:
A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration,
which in no event shall exceed five years;
(1)
A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable without prior notification to the City and
provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of
the existing wastewater discharge permit;
(2)
Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics;
(3)
Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and
recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an
identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location,
sampling frequency and sample type based on federal, state and
local law; and
(4)
A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation
of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for
compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state or
local law.
(5)
C.
A fee shall be charged for issuance of a discharge permit as provided in
the Utility Fee Ordinance.47 [Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 793]
D.
A permit may be issued for a period of less than a year or may be
stated to expire on a specific date. The discharger shall apply for
permit reissuance a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the
discharger's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit
shall be subject to modification by the City during the term of the
permit as discharge limitations or requirements as identified in § 124-4
are modified or other just cause exists. The discharger shall be
informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior
to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the
permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
E.
Within nine months of the promulgation of a National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard, the industrial waste discharge permit of
dischargers subject to such standards shall be revised to require and
impose conditions to ensure compliance with such standard within the
time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a discharger, subject
F.
47.Editor’s Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. II, Utility Fees.
§ 124-12 PLUMBING § 124-12
112:267
to a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, has not previously
submitted an application for an industrial waste discharge permit as
required by this section, the discharger shall apply for an industrial
waste discharge permit within 180 days after the promulgation of the
applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. In addition,
a discharger with an existing industrial waste discharge permit shall
submit to the approving authority within 180 days after the
promulgation of an applicable National Categorical Pretreatment
Standard, on forms to be provided by him, the information required
by 40 CFR 403 and the compliance schedule required by 40 CFR 103.
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new discharger, following
commencement of discharge to the sewage system, any discharger
of industrial waste subject to pretreatment standards shall submit a
report to the approving authority, upon forms to be provided by him,
containing the information required by 40 CFR 403 and thereafter,
semiannually in the months of June and December, the report required
by 40 CFR 403.
Industrial waste discharge permits will contain as applicable the
following special permit conditions:
(1) Any exception to the discharge standards set forth in § 124-4.
Limits on the average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulations and equalization.
(2)
Requirements for the installation and maintenance of inspection
and sampling facilities.
(3)
(4) Compliance schedules.
(5) Requirements for the submission of discharge reports.
Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating
to wastewater discharge as specified by the approving authority
and affording access by the City thereto for reviewing and copying
the plant records.
(6)
Requirements for the notification of the City of any new
introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change
in volume or character of the wastewater constituents being
introduced into the wastewater treatment system.
(7)
(8) Requirements for the notification of slug discharges.
Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the approving authority
to ensure compliance with this chapter.
(9)
G.
Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling
performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the
Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user
shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of
H.
§ 124-12 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 124-12
112:268
the repeat analysis to the Director within 30 days after becoming aware
of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the Director
monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the Director
samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives
the results of this sampling.
Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste.
Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall
notify the wastewater treatment works, the Director, the EPA
Regional Waste Management Division Director and state hazardous
waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the wastewater
treatment works of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of,
would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such
notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set
forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number and
the type of discharge (continuous, batch or other). If the user
discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar
month to the wastewater treatment works, the notification also
shall contain the following information to the extent that such
information is known and readily available to the user: an
identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the
wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such
constituents in the waste stream discharged during that calendar
month and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste
stream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months.
All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the
discharge commences. Any notification under this subsection
needs to be submitted only once for each hazardous waste
discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be
submitted. The notification requirement in this section does not
apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of
this chapter.
(1)
Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of Subsection A,
above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more
than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e).
Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes
in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes
as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time
notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges
more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require
additional notification.
(2)
In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing
any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must
notify the Director, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste
Division Director and state hazardous waste authorities of the
(3)
I.
§ 124-12 PLUMBING § 124-12
112:269
§ 124-13. Industrial waste.
§ 124-14. Confidential information.
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections
shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without
restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate
to the satisfaction of the City that the release of such information would
divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to
protection, such as trade secrets of the user. When requested by the person
furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade
secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the
public but shall be made available upon written request to governmental
agencies for uses related to this chapter, the national pollutant discharge
elimination system (NPDES) permit, state disposal system permit and/or
the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a
report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial
review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the
discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of
such regulations.
In the case of any notification made under this section, the user
shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume
and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has
determined to be economically practical.
(4)
This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance
not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit
issued thereunder or any applicable federal or state law.
(5)
Ten days prior to the first day of March, June, September and
December, each significant industrial user shall file with the City a
report on the quality and quantity of their discharge. The report forms
shall be supplied by the City.
A.
All significant industrial users shall provide the certification statement
shown below with all reports submitted to the City: "I certify under
penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared
under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and
evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person
or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly
responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is,
to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete.
I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false
information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for
knowing violations." This statement shall accompany all reports
requested by the City or required by 40 CFR 403 and shall be signed by
an authorized representative user of the owner.
B.
§ 124-12 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 124-14
112:270
report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized
as confidential information.
§ 124-15. Accidental discharge/slug control plans.
§ 124-16. Bypass not violating applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements.
At least once every two years, the Director shall evaluate whether each
significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control
plan. The Director may require any user to develop, submit for approval
and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the Director may develop
such a plan for any user.
A.
An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum,
the following:
Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges.
(1)
(2) Description of stored chemicals.
Procedures for immediately notifying the Director of any accidental
or slug discharge.
(3)
Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to,
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer
of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant
site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures
or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants,
including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
(4)
B.
An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it
also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These
bypasses are not subject to the provision of Subsections A and B of this
section.
A.
Notice.
If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it
shall submit prior notice to the Director, if possible at least 10 days
before the date of the bypass.
(1)
An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated
bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the
control authority within 24 hours of the time the industrial user
becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be
provided within five days of the time the industrial user becomes
aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a
(2)
B.
§ 124-14 PLUMBING § 124-16
112:271
§ 124-17. Upset provision and notification.
description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass,
including exact dates and times and, if the bypass has not been
corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps
taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of
the bypass. The Director may waive the written report on a caseby-
case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours.
Prohibition of bypass.
Bypass is prohibited, and the Director may take enforcement action
against an industrial user for a bypass unless:
Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury
or severe property damage;
(a)
There were not feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as
the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated
wastes or maintenance during normal periods of equipment
downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup
equipment should have been installed in the exercise of
reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which
occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or
preventive maintenance; and
(b)
The industrial user submitted notices as required under
Subsection B of this section.
(c)
(1)
The Director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering
its adverse effects, if the control authority determines that it will
meet the three conditions listed in Subsection C(1) of this section.
(2)
C.
An "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is
unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical
pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable
control of the industrial user. An upset does not include noncompliance
to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive
maintenance or careless or improper operation.
A.
An upset can be used as an affirmative defense to an action brought
for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards, provided
that the industrial user meets certain conditions. An industrial user who
wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset must demonstrate,
through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other
relevant evidence, that:
An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause or
causes;
(1)
B.
§ 124-16 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 124-17
112:272
§ 124-18. Extra jurisdictional industrial users.
The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation
and maintenance procedures;
(2)
The industrial user has submitted the following information to
the City within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (If this
information is provided orally, a written submission must follow
within five days.):
A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance.
(a)
The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is
expected to continue.
(b)
Steps being taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent
reoccurrence of the noncompliance.
(c)
(3)
In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to
establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
(4)
Industrial users will have the opportunity for judicial determination
on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.
(5)
The industrial user shall control production or all discharges to
the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical
pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss or failure of its
treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative
method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the
situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
(6)
New significant industrial users located beyond the corporate limits of
the City shall submit such application to the City 90 days prior to any
proposed discharge into the wastewater treatment works.
A.
The City may enter into an agreement with the neighboring jurisdiction
in which the significant industrial user is located to provide for the
implementation and enforcement of pretreatment program
requirements against said industrial user.
B.
In the event that another municipality contributes all or a portion of its
wastewater to the wastewater treatment works, the City may require
such municipality to apply for and obtain a municipal wastewater
contribution permit.
A municipal wastewater contribution permit application shall
include:
(1)
C.
§ 124-17 PLUMBING § 124-18
112:273
§ 124-19. Special agreements with industrial users.
No provisions contained in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent any
special agreement or arrangement between the City and any person
whereby wastewater of unusual strength or characteristic may be accepted
by the City for treatment which will not violate or cause the City and/or the
user to violate federal or state pretreatment requirements or standards or
to violate discharge standards and which will not be harmful to the system.
Under no circumstances shall federal or state pretreatment requirements
or standards be waived.
A description of the quality and volume of the wastewater at
the point where it enters the wastewater treatment works.
(a)
An inventory of all industrial users discharging to the
municipality.
(b)
(c) Such other information as may be required by the Director.
A municipal wastewater contribution permit shall contain the
following conditions:
A requirement for the municipal user to adopt a sewer use
ordinance which is at least as stringent as this chapter and
local limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in
this chapter.
(a)
A requirement for the municipal user to submit a revised
industrial user inventory on at least an annual basis.
(b)
A requirement for the municipal user to:
Conduct pretreatment implementation activities, including
industrial user permit issuance, inspection and sampling
and enforcement; or
[1]
Authorize the Director to take or conduct such activities
on its behalf.
[2]
(c)
A requirement for the municipal user to provide the City with
access to all information that the municipal user obtains as
part of its pretreatment activities.
(d)
Limits on the nature, quality and volume of the municipal
user's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the
POTW.
(e)
(f) Requirements for monitoring the municipal user's discharge.
(2)
Violation of the terms and conditions of the municipal user's
wastewater discharge permit subjects the municipal user to the
sanctions set out in § 124-36.
(3)
§ 124-18 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 124-19
112:274
ARTICLE IV
Miscellaneous Regulations
§ 124-20. Swimming pool drainage.
Drain lines from all swimming pools in the City may be connected to
storm sewers, and filter backwash lines shall be discharged to the sanitary
sewerage system as follows:
§ 124-21. Removal, transportation and disposal of septage, leachate
and industrial wastes.
Sand filter backwash shall be discharged to the sanitary sewer, subject
to the provisions set forth in § 124-4F.
A.
Diatomaceous earth filter backwash shall be connected to the sanitary
sewer through settling tanks with three months' storage capacity of
spent diatomaceous earth, which tanks shall be readily accessible for
removing solid waste for disposal.
B.
This section is intended for any owner using a tank truck or any
equipment in the transportation and disposal of septage, leachate and
industrial wastewaters. The equipment and tank truck shall conform to
the following requirements:
(1) The container shall be watertight.
Tanks, containers or other equipment shall be so constructed that
every position of the interior and exterior can be easily cleaned and
shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
(2)
Piping, valves and permanent or flexible connections shall be
accessible and easily disconnected for cleaning purposes.
(3)
The inlet opening or the opening to every container shall be so
constructed that the material will not spill outside during filling,
transfer or transport.
(4)
The outlet connections shall be so constructed that no material will
leak out, run out to other than the point of discharge and shall be
of a design and type suitable for the material handled and capable
of controlling the flow or discharge without spillage, undue spray
or flooding immediate surroundings while in use.
(5)
No connection shall be made at any time between a tap or outlet
furnishing potable water on any premises and any container or
equipment holding material by any means other than an open
connection.
(6)
A.
The septage, leachate or wastes discharged by the tank trucks at
the wastewater treatment works shall not contain industrial waste,
chemicals or other matter, with or without pretreatment, that does not
conform to the requirements of § 124-4 of this chapter.
B.
§ 124-20 PLUMBING § 124-21
112:275
Any septage, leachate and industrial waste to be discharged from tank
trucks within the City shall be disposed at the location designated by
the City at the City's wastewater treatment works at the time or times
and at a rate or rates of discharge fixed by the City.
C.
Any hauler, operator, person or persons cleaning cesspools, septic
tanks, privies or any other container governed by this section shall be
licensed by the appropriate jurisdiction before cleaning such containers
and hauling the material to the designated place of disposal within the
City.
D.
§ 124-21 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 124-21
112:276
ARTICLE V
Allocations and Extensions
§ 124-22. Allocation plan. [Amended 4-13-2015 by Ord. No. 853;
3-26-2018 by Ord. No. 890]
§ 124-23. Sewer extensions.
The Mayor and Common Council is authorized to establish, by
resolution, an allocation policy regarding the issuance of additional
sewer connections.
A.
The Mayor and Common Council is also authorized to establish, by
resolution, a contingency plan to prohibit, restrict and allocate the
issuance of sewer connections in the event of major operational
problems at the wastewater treatment plant, the achievement of
maximum plant capacity or as a result of state directive.
B.
No sewer connection shall be approved which is not in accordance with
any allocation policy adopted by the Mayor and Common Council.
C.
Notwithstanding anything contained in this section to the contrary,
wastewater allocation for any development application submitted for
approval shall be subject to the additional procedures and regulations
set forth in Subsection K of § 164-193 and Subsection J of § 164-211 of
this Code.
D.
The City shall be solely responsible for any and all sewer extensions. No
extension will be made except upon the written request of a property
owner which shall be accompanied by a fee as provided in the Utility
Fee Ordinance.48 [Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 793]
A.
The owner or owners applying for such sewer extension shall be
responsible for the cost of making such an extension. Title to the sewer
will be vested in the City, and the sewer shall at all times remain the
sole property of the City and shall not be trespassed upon or interfered
with in any respect. This property shall be maintained by the City and
may be used as the City deems fit.
B.
When sewer facilities are to be constructed, the owner will furnish
plans for review by the City and all other agencies having jurisdiction.
These plans will denote location, profile and any other pertinent details
required by agencies having jurisdiction. The City will also require a
public works agreement spelling out the conditions by which a sewer
will be extended.
C.
Before an extension of a sewer is made by the City, the owner or
applicant shall post security for the estimated cost of the sewer
extension. Final adjustments will be made upon the receipt of all bills
and expenses that may be incurred in the extension of a sewer. Any
D.
48.Editor’s Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. II, Utility Fees.
§ 124-22 PLUMBING § 124-23
112:277
surplus security will be returned to the owner. Any deficit held by the
City will be billed to the owner upon final accounting.
The City will not be required to make any reimbursement to the owner
for additional connections to such sewers or enter into any type of buyback
agreements.
E.
The Mayor and Common Council shall adopt and, from time to time,
amend the imposition of fees as it deems necessary for the preparation,
review and approval of construction drawings, plans and other related
documents for all sewer extensions. Said fee shall be based upon the
costs of providing such services and shall be in addition to the costs for
which the owner is responsible under Subsection B.
F.
§ 124-23 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 124-23
112:278
ARTICLE VI
Special Assessments
§ 124-24. Basic schedule of charges. [Amended 1-27-2003 by Ord.
No. 693; 6-14-2004 by Ord. No. 715; 12-6-2007 by Ord. No. 773;
11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 793]
From and after the effective date of this section, in any instance in
which the City shall furnish sewage service to any building, dwelling,
apartment, living unit or other building or structure, as herein set forth,
a special benefit assessment is hereby levied and imposed, payable
prior to the issuance of a building permit, upon the owner of such
property or properties to be served in the amount or amounts as
provided in the Utility Fee Ordinance.49
A.
In any instance in which an existing structure is altered to convert to
additional dwelling units, commercial units or business offices, there
shall be imposed a special benefit assessment as provided in the Utility
Fee Ordinance. However, in no event shall the cumulative assessment
for said alterations exceed 75% of the assessment for new construction.
B.
In any instance in which an industrial or commercial structure is
altered to add additional square footage, there shall be imposed a
special benefit assessment in accordance with the schedules as
provided in the Utility Fee Ordinance. Expansion of existing structures
shall be allowed credit for previously paid special benefit assessments
in all types of uses, except dwellings and dwelling units and planned
unit development.
C.
In any instance in which a school or college expands existing structures
or constructs new buildings for nonresident use, there shall be imposed
a special benefit assessment in accordance with the schedule section
of the Utility Fee Ordinance entitled “Industrial Warehousing.” In the
instance where a school or college adds or expands its residential
buildings, a benefit assessment shall be imposed in accordance with the
section of the Utility Fee Ordinance entitled “Dwellings and Dwelling
Units,” or, in the event of construction of dormitories, the schedule
entitled “Schools and Colleges, Including Dormitories” shall be
applicable.
D.
In any instance in which a continuing-care facility licensed by the
State Department of Aging provides three levels of care for individuals
60 years of age or older, “independent living,” “assisted living,” and
“comprehensive care” as those terms are defined by Maryland law, and
also owns and maintains substantial on-site infrastructure, there shall
be imposed a special benefit assessment in the following amounts. For
independent-living units (single-family dwelling units or apartments or
multifamily units) there shall be imposed a special benefit assessment
in the amount of 65% of the amount of assessment set forth for said
E.
49.Editor’s Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. II, Utility Fees.
§ 124-24 PLUMBING § 124-24
112:279
§ 124-25. Notice; penalty.
§ 124-26. Avondale Sewer Service Area.
uses in the Utility Fee Ordinance. For assisted-living units and/or
comprehensive-care units the amount of assessment shall be the same
as set forth in the Utility Fee Ordinance for hospitals, care homes and
nursing homes.
In situations where no specified category is provided for in this section,
the Director of Planning shall determine the applicable special benefit
assessment to be charged, but in no case shall such charges exceed
those existing in the Utility Fee Ordinance.
F.
The Director of Planning may waive or modify special benefit
assessments for the construction or rehabilitation of lower-income
housing units as authorized under § 21-101 of Article 24 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland.
G.
It shall be the duty of the Director to notify, in writing, each property
owner whose property reasonably can be served by a newly installed
sewer line and who is not connected thereto that such owner shall have
a period of one year in which to connect to such sewer and to pay the
applicable special benefit assessment therefor, without the imposition
of any penalty.
A.
It shall be the duty of the Director to notify, in writing, each property
owner whose property reasonably can be served by a then-existing
sewer line and who is not connected thereto that such owner shall have
a period of six months in which to connect to such sewer and to pay the
connection charge and applicable special benefit assessment therefor
without the imposition of any penalty.
B.
After the expiration of one year from the date of the notice provided
for in Subsection A of this section or upon the expiration of six months
from the date of notice provided for in Subsection B of this section, any
property owner so notified who has not then paid the connection charge
and special benefit assessment applicable to his property shall pay a
penalty of 1% of such charge or assessment, or both, for each month or
fraction thereof that such charge or assessment remains unpaid.
C.
From and after July 1, 1976, in any instance in which the City shall
supply sewer service to any building, dwelling, apartment, living unit
or structure located on any industrially zoned land as approved or as
may be approved from time to time by the County Planning Commission
and as shown on approved Zoning Maps and recorded among the land
records of the county or any lands lying within the area delineated
on a plat prepared by J.B. Ferguson Engineering, Inc., and designated
"Exhibit A, Avondale Sewer Service Area, City of Westminster, Carroll
County, Maryland," which plat is hereby adopted by reference, a special
benefit assessment is hereby levied and imposed upon the owner of
A.
§ 124-24 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 124-26
112:280
§ 124-27. Air Business Center Drainage Area.
such property to be served, payable prior to the issuance of a building
permit of an amount double the special benefit assessments or charges
provided in § 124-24 of this chapter.
Special acreage assessment charges. From and after July 1, 1976,
in any instance in which the City shall supply sewer service to any
building, dwelling, apartment, living unit or other structure lying within
the area delineated on a plat prepared by J.B. Ferguson Engineering,
Inc., and designated “Exhibit A, Service Area, City of Westminster,
Carroll County, Maryland,” which plat is hereby adopted by reference,
a special acreage assessment is hereby levied upon the owner of the
land so served, in addition to all other charges and assessments levied
thereon, as provided in the Utility Fee Ordinance.50 [Amended
11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 793]
B.
The Director of Finance of the City is hereby directed to account
separately for all sums received from the double special benefit
assessment, as provided in Subsection A, and the special acreage
assessment, as provided in Subsection B, over and above all other
charges or assessments provided in this chapter. At such time as the
excess sums collected under Subsections A and B shall equal the cost
of all transmission lines, mains, pumping stations, land rights,
appurtenances and other costs and expenses, exclusive of
administrative services, incurred by the City for the purpose of
extending sewer service to the area delineated on the plat, hereby
adopted by reference, or to the buildings, dwellings, apartment units or
other structures erected thereupon, then the provisions of Subsections
A and B shall be and become void and of no further effect. Any
residential dwelling existing on April 5, 1976, located within the
specially designated service area, shall be exempt from the special acre
assessment charges in Subsection B and the Utility Fee Ordinance.
[Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 793]
C.
From and after April 30, 1980, in any instance in which the City shall
supply sewer service to any building, dwelling, apartment, living unit
or structure located on any industrially zoned land, as approved or as
may be approved from time to time by the Carroll County Planning
Commission and as shown on approved Zoning Maps and recorded
among the land records of Carroll County or any lands lying within the
area delineated "Limits of Drainage Area" on a plat attached hereto and
made a part hereof as Exhibit A, prepared by the Bureau of Planning
and Engineering, Department of Public Works, dated January 1980, and
entitled "Drainage Area Map for Air Business Center Sewage System,"
a special benefit assessment is hereby levied and imposed upon the
owner or owners of such property or properties to be served, payable
prior to the issuance of a building permit, of an amount calculated to be
A.
50.Editor’s Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. II, Utility Fees.
§ 124-26 PLUMBING § 124-27
112:281
150% the normal benefit assessments or charges provided in § 124-24
of this chapter, such charge to be in lieu of the standard special benefit
charge.
Special acreage assessment charges. From and after April 30, 1980,
in any instance in which the City shall supply sewer service to any
building, dwelling, apartment, living unit or other structure lying within
the area delineated “Limits of Drainage Area” on a plat attached hereto
and made a part hereof as “Exhibit A” prepared by the Bureau of
Planning and Engineering, Department of Public Works, dated January
1980, and entitled “Drainage Area Map for Air Business Center Sewage
System,” a special acreage assessment is hereby levied upon the owner
or owners of the land so served, in addition to all other charges and
assessments levied thereon, as provided in the Utility Fee Ordinance.
[Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 79351]
B.
The City has entered into a public works agreement dated March 24,
1980, with the Commissioners of Carroll County, (hereinafter referred
to as the "county"), which public works agreement is on file with the
Director of Public Works of the City, providing for, among other things,
credits to the City against the loan due the county for construction costs
of the project in consideration of satisfaction or partial satisfaction of
the charges established in Subsections A and B hereof for certain lands
within the drainage area for the Air Business Center Sewage System,
which public works agreement is hereby ratified and adopted herein.
C.
Accounting and termination.
The Director of Finance of the City is hereby directed to account
separately for all sums received from the Air Business Center
drainage area special benefit assessment charge, as provided in
Subsection A, and the special acreage assessment, as provided in
Subsection B, over and above all other charges or assessments
provided in this chapter. At such time as the sums collected under
Subsections A and B shall equal the City's cost of purchase of
all transmission lines, mains, pumping stations, land rights,
appurtenances and other costs and expenses, exclusive of
administrative services, incurred by the City for the extension of
sewer service to the area delineated on the plat attached hereto
or to the buildings, dwellings, apartment units or other structures
erected thereupon, then the provisions of Subsections A and B shall
become void and of no further effect.
(1)
Payments by the City to the county of special assessments as
provided for in the aforesaid public works agreement dated March
24, 1980, shall be limited only to monies received by the City from
the special assessments collected under provisions of Subsections
A, B and the Utility Fee Ordinance. [Amended 11-24-2008 by
Ord. No. 793]
(2)
D.
51.Editor’s Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. II, Utility Fees.
§ 124-27 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 124-27
112:282
ARTICLE VII
Charges
§ 124-28. Connection charges.
§ 124-29. Sewer charges.
A charge shall be made for all sewer connections to the City’s sewer
system as provided in the Utility Fee Ordinance. [Amended
11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 793]
A.
In any instance in which any owner or developer of land shall extend
any of the City's sewer mains, the connection charge will be waived
if the owner or developer installs the service line as part of the main
extension contract. A public works agreement shall be executed
between the City and the owner or developer, with all costs of main
extensions and service connections to be paid by the owner or
developer.
B.
The charge shall be collected at the time the building sewer permit
application is filed.
C.
On and after July 1, 2009, a charge, rate or fee is hereby established
to be paid by the owners of all buildings, dwellings, apartments, living
units or other structures, which charge, rate or fee shall be based
upon the amount of metered water used or consumed during each
quarter year in or about such buildings, apartments, living units or
other structures, as provided in the Utility Fee Ordinance.52 [Amended
5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 753; 4-13-2009 by Ord. No. 801]
A.
The source of water for every building, dwelling, apartment, living unit
or other structure discharging waste, water, sewage or other liquid or
fluid substances into the City's sanitary sewer system shall be metered.
B.
The owner of any building, dwelling, apartment, living unit or other
structure who can reasonably demonstrate that he uses a substantial
amount of water that is not discharged into the City's sanitary sewage
system shall have the privilege of applying to the City for permission to
install a separate water meter to measure the water not discharged into
the sanitary sewer system. For all such water, the owner shall not be
charged a sewer rate as established in Subsection A and the Utility Fee
Ordinance. All costs and expenses relating to the installation of such a
separate water meter shall be paid by the property owner. [Amended
4-13-2009 by Ord. No. 801]
C.
The charge, rate, fee or assessment levied or imposed by Subsection
A and the Utility Fee Ordinance may be collected in the same manner
as provided for the collection of taxes imposed by the City upon the
assessable property therein. If any charge, rate or fee is not paid within
D.
52.Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. II, Utility Fees.
§ 124-28 PLUMBING § 124-29
112:283
§ 124-30. Additional charges. [Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No.
793]
The Mayor and Common Council may adopt in the Utility Fee Ordinance
charges and fees which may include:
30 days from the date of billing, a penalty of 5% shall be charged,
and the City shall have the right to disconnect water service to the
property after five days' written notice. [Amended 4-13-2009 by Ord.
No. 801]
The City shall review the sewer charges annually and revise them
periodically, if necessary, to meet operation and maintenance expenses.
The City shall maintain all the records as are necessary to document
compliance with the federal regulations.
E.
Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the City's
pretreatment program.
A.
B. Fees for monitoring inspections and surveillance procedures.
C. Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction.
D. Fees for permit applications.
E. Fees for filing appeals.
Surcharge fees to be charged to user(s) discharging wastewater with
average daily pollutant concentrations exceeding one or more of the
specific pollutant levels set forth below:
Substance
Amount
(mg/l)
BOD5 220
TKN 20
TSS 250
TP 5
F.
Other fees as the City may deem necessary to carry out the requirement
contained herein.
G.
§ 124-29 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 124-30
112:284
ARTICLE VIII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 124-31. Protection from damage.
It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously, willfully or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any
violation of this section is declared to be a misdemeanor and shall, upon
conviction, be punishable by a fine of $1,000 or by imprisonment for not
more than six months, or both.
§ 124-31.1. Toilet replacement rebate. [Added 7-27-2009 by Ord.
No. 806]
§ 124-32. Powers and authority of inspectors.
Findings, intent and authority.
The Mayor and Common Council of Westminster operates a water
production, supply and distribution system and a wastewater
collection treatment system serving the City of Westminster and
certain surrounding areas. It is and has constantly been the City’s
policy and intent to encourage water conservation by the users of
its systems.
(1)
The Mayor and Common Council of Westminster finds that the
efficient use of water, energy, water distribution, and wastewater
collection systems is in the best interest of the City and the users
of its systems, as well as in the well-being of the environment
generally.
(2)
Article XI-E of the Maryland Constitution, Articles 23A and the
Environment Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland and
Section 15, et seq. of the City’s Charter authorize the Mayor and
Common Council of Westminster to enact ordinances for the
protection and promotion of public safety, health, morals and
welfare.
(3)
A.
In order to promote resource conservation, the Mayor and Common
Council of Westminster hereby adopts a program to provide incentives
in the form of rebates to encourage replacement of inefficient toilets in
existing facilities. The Director of Public Works shall adopt the criteria
and regulations regarding the administration of this program which
shall be approved by resolution of the Mayor and Common Council of
Westminster.
B.
The Director and other duly authorized employees or representatives
of the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection,
A.
§ 124-31 PLUMBING § 124-32
112:285
§ 124-33. Suspension of service.
In any instance in which the owner of any building, dwelling, apartment,
living unit or other structure desires to suspend his water and sewer
services for a period exceeding 60 days, he may do so by written application
made at least five days prior to the cutoff date. In the event of such
suspension of service, the owner will be charged a turnoff fee in accordance
with the appropriate section of Chapter 160, Water.
§ 124-34. Annual financial statement.
The Director of Finance shall prepare annually and submit to the Mayor
and Common Council a statement showing all income derived by the City
from the sewer rates and charges herein levied and imposed, together
with a statement of all costs and expenses incurred by or attributable to
the operation of the City's sewerage system, which statements shall be
reviewed by the Mayor and Common Council for the purpose of determining
observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
The Director or other duly authorized employees are authorized to
obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct
bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater
collection system. The industry may withhold information considered
confidential. The industry must establish that the revelation to the
public of the information in question might result in an advantage to
competitors.
B.
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred
to in Subsection A above, the Director or duly authorized employees
or representatives of the City shall observe all safety rules applicable
to the premises established by the company, and the company shall
be held harmless for injury or death to the City employees or
representatives, and the City shall indemnify the company against loss
or damage to its property by City employees or representatives and
against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property
damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging
and sampling operations, except as such may be caused by negligence
or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in
§ 124-4H.
C.
The Director and other duly authorized employees or representatives
of the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter all private properties through which the City holds
a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to,
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and
maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said
easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated
easement pertaining to the private properties involved.
D.
§ 124-32 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 124-34
112:286
what revision, if any, to the rates and charges herein levied and imposed
may be required.
§ 124-35. Falsifying information.
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false statements,
representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or
other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter,
or wastewater contribution permit, or to falsify, tamper with or knowingly
render inaccurately any monitoring device or method required under this
chapter. Any violation of this section is declared to be a misdemeanor and
shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine of $1,000 or by imprisonment
for not more than six months, or by both.
§ 124-36. Violations and penalties.
Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, except
§§ 124-31 and 124-35, shall be served by the City with written notice
stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit
for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the
period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
In the event that the violation has caused or can potentially cause
physical damage to the sewerage works and/or degradation of the
treatment plant effluent to the degree that it does not meet the current
requirements of appropriate state or federal regulatory agencies, the
City shall require immediate correction of the violation or denial of
service until satisfactory corrections are made.
A.
Civil penalties. The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter,
except §§ 124-31 and 124-35, is declared to be a municipal infraction
punishable by a fine of $500 per day if the violation is a first offense
and a fine of $1,000 per day if the violation is a repeat offense. If the
assessed fine is not paid within the period set forth in the citation and
no notice of intention to stand trial for the offense is filed, the City may
double the fine, not to exceed a total amount of $1,000, pursuant to
provisions of Article 23A of the Annotated Code of Maryland. Each day
a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
B.
Criminal prosecution.
Any user that willfully violates any provision of this chapter, any
orders or wastewater discharge permits, issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment requirements shall, upon a conviction, be guilty
of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 per
violation per day or imprisonment for not more than six months, or
both.
(1)
Any user that willfully introduces any substance into the
wastewater treatment works which causes personal injury or
property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of at least $1,000 and/or
(2)
C.
§ 124-34 PLUMBING § 124-36
112:287
be subject to imprisonment for six months. This penalty shall be in
addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property
damage available under state law.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the City for any expenses, loss or damage occasioned the City
by reason of such violation.53
D.
53.Editor’s Note: The Sewer Rate Schedule, as amended, that was included at the end of this
chapter, was repealed 4-13-2009 by Ord. No. 801. Ordinance No. 801 also provided that
said schedule was to be used to calculate rates for services rendered before July 1, 2009.
For current sewer rates, see Appendix B at the end of Chapter 1, General Provisions
§ 124-36 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 124-36
112:288
Chapter 130
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 119. Sewers and sewage — See Ch. 124.
§ 130-1. Purpose and authority.
§ 130-2. Definitions. [Amended 7-27-1992 by Ord. No. 562]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BULKY WASTES — Large items of refuse, including but not limited to
appliances, furniture, large auto parts, trees, branches and stumps and
construction and remodeling waste which cannot be handled by normal
municipal waste processing, collection or disposal methods.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police for the City of Westminster,
Maryland.
CITY — The City of Westminster, Maryland.
CITY BUILDINGS — Buildings and facilities owned or leased by the City of
Westminster.
CLERK — The Clerk for the City of Westminster, Maryland.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment engaged in
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including but not limited
The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain and enhance the
public health, safety and general welfare by establishing requirements
and procedures relating to the collection and disposal of solid waste in
the City of Westminster. Proper collection and disposal of solid waste
will minimize damage to the health of the residents of the City, enhance
the protection of the environment and maintain the high standards of
cleanliness which have been a long-standing attribute of the City.
A.
Prior to the enactment of this chapter, the Solid Waste Management
Committee of the Mayor and Common Council undertook a detailed
review and analysis of information relating to the collection and
disposal of solid waste and issued a report and recommendation which
was adopted by the Mayor and Common Council on February 12, 1990.
B.
Article XI-E of the Maryland Constitution, Article 23A of the Annotated
Code of Maryland and the City's Charter authorize the City to enact
ordinances for the protection and promotion of public safety, health,
morals and welfare.
C.
§ 124-36 PLUMBING § 130-2
112:289
to stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants, shopping centers and
theaters.
CONTAINER — A portable device in which solid waste is held for storage or
transportation.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Public Works for the City of Westminster,
Maryland.[Amended 12-6-2007 by Ord. No. 773]
DISPOSAL — The deposition, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing
of solid waste into or on the land or water in a manner that the solid waste
or a constituent of the solid waste enters the environment, is emitted into
the air or is discharged to the waters.
GARBAGE — Waste resulting from animal, grain, fruit or vegetable matter.
INCINERATOR — An enclosed device using controlled combustion for the
primary purpose of thermally destructing solid waste.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment engaged in
service, including but not limited to hospitals, nursing homes, life-care
communities, care homes, orphanages, schools and universities.
MULTIFAMILY UNITS — A building containing four or more dwelling units,
not including a four-unit building in which one unit is owner-occupied as the
principal residence.[Amended 3-10-2008 by Ord. No. 778]
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials,
including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous materials resulting
from residential and municipal activities.
MUNICIPAL WASTE DISPOSAL OR PROCESSING FACILITY — A facility
using land for disposing or processing of municipal waste. The facility
includes land affected during the lifetime of operations, including but not
limited to areas where disposal or processing activities actually occur,
support facilities, borrow areas, offices, equipment sheds, air and water
pollution control and treatment systems, access roads, associated on-site
or contiguous collection, transportation and storage facilities, closure and
post-closure care and maintenance activities and other activities in which
the natural land surface has been disturbed as a result of or incidental to
operation of the facility.
POLLUTION — Contamination of air, water, land or other natural resources
which will create or is likely to create a public nuisance or to render such
air, water, land or other natural resources harmful, detrimental or injurious
to public health, safety or welfare or to domestic, municipal, commercial,
industrial, agricultural, recreational or other legitimate beneficial uses or to
livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other life.
PROCESSING — Technology used for the purpose of reducing the volume
or bulk of municipal or residual waste or technology used to convert part or
all of the waste materials for off-site reuse. Processing facilities include but
are not limited to transfer facilities, composting facilities, incinerators and
resource recovery facilities.
§ 130-2 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 130-2
112:290
RECYCLABLES — Source-separated materials that are authorized by the
Director to be separated from the municipal waste for the purpose of
recycling. Recyclables include but are not limited to metal, glass and plastic
consumer product containers or packaging, newsprint and cardboard.
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, plastics and other materials which would otherwise be
disposed of or processed as municipal waste.
REFUSE — All materials which are discarded as useless. Such materials
may include but are not limited to shrub cuttings, grass clippings, leaves,
cardboard, paper, bottles, cans, clothing, plastic containers, gutter and
down spouting, lumber scraps, paint cans, screens and storm windows, rug
scraps, tires, Christmas trees, newspapers, telephone books and magazines
which can be handled by normal municipal waste processing, collection or
disposal methods.
RESIDENTIAL UNITS — Single-family detached, single-family
semidetached and single-family attached residential housing units and
apartments with three or fewer units.
RESIDUE — Solid and semisolid refuse, such as but not limited to ash,
ceramics, glass, metal and organic substances, remaining after incineration
or combustion processing.
SALVAGING — The controlled removal or recycling of material from a solid
waste processing or disposal facility.
SANITARY LANDFILL — A land site on which engineering principles are
utilized to bury deposits of municipal waste without creating public health
or safety hazards, nuisances or pollution.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials, including
but not limited to solid, semisolid, liquid and contained gaseous materials
resulting from municipal, industrial, commercial, agriculture and
residential activities.
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT — The entire process or a part thereof of
storage, collection, transportation, processing, treatment and disposal of
solid wastes by a person engaging in the process.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials that are
separated from municipal waste at the point of origin for the purpose of
recycling.
STORAGE — The containment of waste on a temporary basis which does not
constitute disposal of the waste.
TRANSFER — A facility which receives and temporarily stores solid waste
at a location other than the generation site and which facilitates the bulk
transfer of accumulated solid waste to a facility for further processing or
disposal.
WASTE — A material whose original purpose has been completed and which
is directed to a disposal or processing facility or is otherwise disposed. The
term does not include source-separated recyclable materials.
§ 130-2 PLUMBING § 130-3
112:291
§ 130-3. Administration of chapter; violation of regulations.
[Amended 7-27-1992 by Ord. No. 562; 2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 569]
This chapter shall be administered by the Director. The Director, subject
to approval of the Mayor and Common Council, may establish regulations
regarding the collection or disposal of solid waste, including recyclables.
Upon approval by resolution of the Mayor and Common Council, any such
regulation shall have the force and effect of law, and any violation thereof
is declared to be a municipal infraction. The penalty for violation shall
be a fine of $25 for each offense. These regulations may include, among
other subjects, the days and hours and routes for collection of solid waste,
including recyclables; the specifications for solid waste containers and
recyclables bins, and the times and manner in which they shall be set out
for pickup of the contents thereof by the collectors and removal of such
containers after they have been emptied; preventing the mixture of certain
types of solid waste in any one container; limiting the amount of solid waste
or the number of containers that may be set out for any one premises at
any one time; the imposition of reasonable fees to cover the costs of the
administration of the chapter, including the cost of licensing and inspection;
and such other matters as may be deemed appropriate. Copies of any such
regulations shall be maintained in the office of the Director at City Hall and
are available for inspection during regular hours of business.
§ 130-4. Permit required to collect or dispose of solid waste; fee;
penalty for violations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
collecting or disposing of solid waste within the confines of the City
unless such person shall have obtained a permit from the Clerk for
collection and any other permits required by federal, state and county
law.
A.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate as a collector or hauler
of solid waste within the City except as provided in this chapter. This
subsection shall not be construed to prevent a person from disposing of
his own solid waste at a municipal waste disposal or processing facility,
provided that it is transported in a manner to prevent spillage.
B.
The Clerk is authorized to issue permits under this section upon the
filing of an application for a permit. Such application shall be filed
on forms furnished by the Clerk and contain such information as he
shall prescribe. The application shall be accompanied by a permit fee
as provided in the General Fee Ordinance.54 An initial permit shall be
valid for a period of one year. Thereafter, the permit shall be renewed
annually upon submission of a renewal application and payment of
a permit fee as provided in the General Fee Ordinance. [Amended
11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 791]
C.
54.Editor’s Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
§ 130-3 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 130-4
112:292
§ 130-5. Residential collection. [Amended 7-27-1992 by Ord. No.
562]
§ 130-6. Nonresidential collection.
The collection and disposal of solid waste from nonresidential units shall be
at the cost and expense of the owner of the property. Such units include but
are not limited to multifamily units, industrial uses, commercial uses, mixed
units of a commercial/residential use, institutional establishment uses or
any combination thereof. Such premises shall have on-site containers as
required by this chapter and by regulation of the Director. Additionally, the
owner of said premises shall cause solid waste to be removed from the
premises at regular intervals as determined by regulation of the Director.
§ 130-7. Bulk pickup. [Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 791]
Any violation of any subsection of this section is declared to be a
municipal infraction. The penalty for violation shall be a fine of $400 for
each offense.
D.
The City shall provide for the collection and disposal of solid waste,
including recyclables, for residential units within the City. The Mayor
and Common Council are authorized to enter into a contract or
contracts with permitted collectors to perform all or part of such
collection and disposal.
A.
Regular collection service shall not include removal of items such as
tires, crates, refrigerators, stoves, air conditioners, chairs, pipe, auto
parts, mufflers, trees and other like items. Owners or occupants of any
premises shall have these items removed as provided in § 130-7.
B.
Owners and occupants of any premises provided solid waste disposal
services by the City shall separate recyclables from their other solid
waste and shall place such recyclables in a recyclables bin or as
otherwise provided by the Director pursuant to regulations
promulgated under § 130-3 of this chapter.
C.
The Mayor and Common Council is authorized to establish in the
General Fee Ordinance a service charge by the City for bulk pickup of
large items, including but not limited to appliances and furniture, to be
implemented by a sticker purchase system or by such other means as
designated by said ordinance.
A.
Upon request by the owner or occupant of any premises served by
the City’s garbage and trash collection service and subject to the
availability of vehicles and personnel, the Director may authorize
removal of solid waste from such premises when the amount to be
removed is greater than that which is normally collected or at a time
other than the regular collection day for such premises, upon such
terms and conditions and upon the payment of such fee as may be
B.
§ 130-4 PLUMBING § 130-7
112:293
§ 130-8. Maintenance of premises; penalty for violations.
§ 130-9. Performance of work by City.
provided by the Mayor and Common Council in the General Fee
Ordinance.
Owners and occupants of occupied premises and owners and persons
in charge of unoccupied premises, including vacant lots, within the City
are hereby charged with the duty of maintaining such premises at all
times in a sanitary, clean and tidy condition and so as to prevent the
accumulation thereof of solid waste which constitutes a nuisance or a
fire hazard.
A.
Owners and occupants of occupied premises and owners and persons
in charge of unoccupied premises, including vacant lots, within the
City are hereby charged with the duty of maintaining any grass on
such premises at a height of not more than six inches and the further
duty of maintaining such premises free of noxious weeds and dense
underbrush.
B.
A violation of this section is declared to be a municipal infraction. The
penalty for violation shall be a fine of $100 for each offense.
C.
If, at any time, the maintenance of any premises within the City is found
by the Chief of Police or other official designated by the Mayor and
Common Council to be in violation of § 130-8 or 130-10, he shall give
notice, in writing, to the owner, occupant or person in charge of such
premises, stating therein the condition which constitutes such violation
and directing the addressee to remedy such condition within seven days
for a first offense and within three days for any subsequent offense, and
it shall be unlawful for any such owner, occupant or person in charge
to fail to comply with the terms of such written notice, provided that
any owner, occupant or person in charge of premises to whom such
notice is addressed may, within two days from receipt thereof, appeal
to the legislative body, in which case the terms of such notice shall be
stayed pending action of the legislative body, which shall be final, and
provided further that if the Chief of Police or other designated official
shall state in such notice that the conditions stated therein are such as
to constitute an imminent hazard to the public health, safety or welfare,
the addressee shall comply with the terms of such notice and no appeal
shall lie to the legislative body. [Amended 8-9-1993 by Ord. No. 580]
A.
Upon the failure of any person to whom notice has been given pursuant
to Subsection A of this section to comply with the terms of such notice
or with the terms imposed by the legislative body on appeal, as the case
may be, the Chief of Police or other designated official shall forthwith
direct the appropriate city officer to remedy the condition which is the
subject of such notice, and the expenses incurred by the City in so doing
shall be charged to the addressee of such notice, to be collectible as
city taxes; and such expenses shall constitute a lien upon the premises
B.
§ 130-7 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 130-9
112:294
§ 130-10. Responsibility of owners and occupants; penalty for
violations. [Amended 2-8-1993 by Ord. No. 569]
upon which such condition occurred, to be collected as city taxes are
collected, if not otherwise first paid to the City.
Abatement by the City of conditions in violation of this chapter and
reimbursement to the City of expenses incurred thereby shall not bar
the issuance of a municipal infraction and the prosecution for such
violation.
C.
Residential units. It shall be the joint and severable responsibility of
the owner and occupant to provide a sufficient number of approved
containers for storage of solid waste to prevent overflow between times
of collection in residential units and to maintain the premises in
accordance with the standards of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for
the owner or occupant of such private property to fail to provide such
containers.
A.
Multifamily units. It shall be the responsibility of the owner and not
the occupants of multifamily units to provide a sufficient number of
approved containers for the storage of solid waste to prevent overflow
between times of collection and to maintain the premises in accordance
with the standards of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for the owner of
such multifamily unit property to fail to provide such containers.
B.
Institutional establishments. It shall be the responsibility of the owner
and not the occupant of institutional establishments to provide a
sufficient number of approved containers for the storage of solid waste
to prevent overflow between times of collection and to maintain the
premises in accordance with the standards of this chapter. It shall be
unlawful for the owner of such institutional establishment to fail to
provide such containers.
C.
Commercial and industrial land or buildings. It shall be the joint and
severable responsibility of the owner and occupant of commercial and
industrial land or buildings to provide a sufficient number of approved
containers for the storage of solid waste to prevent overflow between
times of collection and to maintain the premises in accordance with
the standards of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for the owner and
occupant of such commercial and industrial land or buildings to fail to
provide such containers.
D.
Shopping centers. In addition to the responsibilities provided in
Subsection D hereof, the owner and occupants of all shopping centers
within the limits of the City are hereby required to install and maintain
trash receptacles on the edge of the pedestrian walkway areas within
such shopping centers. They shall be of a type and size and placed at
such location as may be required and approved by the Director and
clearly designated as receptacles for solid waste.
E.
§ 130-9 PLUMBING § 130-10
112:295
§ 130-11. Containers. [Amended 7-27-1992 by Ord. No. 562]
Vacant land. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of all vacant land
to keep his property free of solid waste.
F.
Any owner who leases a residential unit located within the City shall
provide a copy of a synopsis prepared by the Director of the regulations
adopted pursuant to § 130-3 to the tenant contemporaneous with the
execution of the lease for said premises.
G.
In the event that an owner leases a residential unit located within the
City without a written lease, the owner shall furnish a copy of the
synopsis prepared by the Director of the regulations adopted pursuant
to § 130-3 to the tenant promptly after occupancy.
H.
Deficiencies observed in violation of the standards of this chapter shall
constitute prima facie evidence that the required maintenance is not
adequate. The Chief of Police may proceed to rectify such deficiencies
as provided in § 130-9.
I.
Violation of this section is declared to be a municipal infraction. The
penalty for violation shall be a fine of $100 for each offense, except that
the penalties for violation of Subsection G or H shall be a fine of $25 for
each offense.
J.
All containers for the storage of solid waste, except bins for the storage
of bulky rubbish, shall be vermin-proof and waterproof, of
noncorrodible material or similar material, and shall be equipped with
tight-fitting lids at all times.
A.
All solid waste shall be placed in containers as provided herein and
shall be placed at convenient outdoor pickup locations on the premises
as may be designated by the Director.
B.
Receptacles used for storage of solid waste with respect to residential
units shall meet one of the following specifications:
Trash cans of a durable grade of galvanized metal or other suitable
material approved by the Director, from 20 to 32 gallons' capacity.
They should be provided with two lifting handles on opposite sides
and a tightly fitting cover with a lifting handle. The can should be
without inside protrusions, and the solid waste should be loosely
packed so that the contents shall discharge freely when the
receptacle is inverted.
(1)
Refuse bags made of heavy, multi-ply paper or polyethylene or
ethylene copolymer resin and designed for outdoor storage of
refuse. Bags must be securely tied or sealed to prevent emission
of odors, be of a material so liquids and greases will not be able
to penetrate through the material and be of sufficient thickness
and strength to contain the solid waste enclosed without tearing or
ripping under normal handling.
(2)
C.
§ 130-10 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 130-11
112:296
§ 130-12. Maintenance of containers; penalty for violations.
§ 130-13. Interference with containers; penalty for violations.
§ 130-14. Matter not to be placed in containers; penalty for
violations.
Recyclables bins made of durable plastic approximately 18 gallons
in size and provided by the City or its designee.
(3)
It shall be the responsibility of the persons providing containers
pursuant to § 130-10 to ensure that containers are properly maintained.
A.
The presence of solid waste in places other than inside proper
containers, the presence of sour odors or the presence of insects,
rodents or other vermin or evidence of their presence shall constitute
improper maintenance or lack of maintenance. The lack of maintenance
of containers constitutes a violation of this section and is declared to be
a municipal infraction. The penalty for violation shall be a fine of $100
for each offense.
B.
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to remove the cover
from any container which has been set out for collection of the contents
thereof or to upset, remove or in any way tamper with any such
container.
A.
Any violation of this section is declared to be a municipal infraction. The
penalty for violation shall be a fine of $400 for each offense.
B.
The following matter shall not be placed in receptacles used for regular
solid waste collection service:
(1) Dead animals.
(2) Feces.
(3) Materials impregnated with urine (except disposable diapers).
(4) Poisons.
(5) Explosives.
(6) Dangerous or corrosive chemicals.
(7) Clothing taken from persons with infectious diseases.
(8) Heavy metals or metal parts.
(9) Lumber.
(10)Dirt.
(11)Rocks.
A.
§ 130-11 PLUMBING § 130-14
112:297
§ 130-15. Separation of solid waste. [Amended 7-27-1992 by Ord.
No. 562]
The Director is authorized to provide by regulation for the implementation
of § 130-5C, including each class of solid waste to be collected by the City to
be separated, and the Director may require the use of separate containers
for items to be recycled, including but not limited to metal, glass, paper,
cardboard and plastics.
§ 130-16. Storage and removal; penalty for violations.
§ 130-17. Littering prohibited; penalty for violations.
(12)Bricks.
(13)Concrete blocks.
(14)Tires.
(15)Automobile or machine oil.
(16)Crates.
(17)Other refuse from construction or remodeling.
Violation of this section is declared to be a municipal infraction. The
penalty for violation shall be a fine of $100 for each offense.
B.
It shall be unlawful for any person to store or accumulate any solid
waste within the City except as provided in this chapter and regulations
promulgated pursuant thereto. "Store or accumulate" shall mean to
exist outside of an approved container for a period of time in excess
of 15 days. The provisions of this section shall apply to any land or
premises where solid waste accumulates or is stored, be it residential,
commercial or industrial, including vacant property.
A.
Violation of this section is declared to be a municipal infraction. The
penalty for violation shall be a fine of $100 for each offense.
B.
Definitions. As used in this section, unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, the following words or phrases shall have the following
meanings:
LITTER — All rubbish, solid waste, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead
animals or other discarded materials of every kind and description.
PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY — The right-of-way of any road or
highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches
thereof; any park, parking facility, playground, building, refuge or
conservation or recreation area; any residential or farm properties,
timberlands or forest.
A.
B. Unlawful activities.
§ 130-14 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 130-17
112:298
§ 130-18. Dumping solid waste on land of another or into another
container or upon any public highway; penalty for violations.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit,
throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing,
placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private
property in this city or any waters in this city unless:
Such property is designated by the City or by any of its
agencies for the disposal of such litter and such person is
authorized by the proper public authority to use such property.
(a)
Such litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container
installed on such property.
(b)
Such person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such
property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant
in lawful possession or the act is done under the personal
direction of said owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent
with the public welfare.
(c)
(1)
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to throw, dump or
deposit any trash, junk or other refuse upon any highway or to
perform any act which constitutes a violation of the vehicle laws of
the City of the State of Maryland relative to putting trash, glass and
other prohibited substances on highways.
(2)
Presumption of responsibility for violation; suspension of licenses.
Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any
motor vehicle, beat, airplane or other conveyance in violation of
Subsection B of this section and if the vehicle, boat, airplane or other
conveyance has two or more occupants and it cannot be determined
which occupant is the violator, the owner of the vehicle, boat, airplane
or other conveyance, if present, shall be presumed to be responsible for
the violation; in the absence of the owner of the vehicle, boat, airplane
or other conveyance, the operator shall be presumed to be responsible
for the violation. Furthermore, licenses to operate such conveyances
may be suspended for a period not to exceed seven days together with
or in lieu of penalties provided in Subsection E of this section.
C.
Receptacles to be provided; notice of provisions or section. The
Director is authorized and empowered to establish and maintain
receptacles for the deposit of litter at appropriate locations where such
property is frequented by the public and to post signs directing persons
to such receptacles and serving notice of the provisions of this section
and to otherwise publicize the availability of litter receptacles and
requirements of this section.
D.
Any violation of this section is declared to be a municipal infraction. The
penalty for violation shall be a fine of $250.
E.
§ 130-17 PLUMBING § 130-18
112:299
§ 130-19. On-site disposal by burial or by burning; penalty for
violations.
§ 130-20. Feeding of garbage to swine; penalty for violations.
§ 130-21. Protection of wells, springs and watercourses; penalty for
violations.
§ 130-22. Violations and penalties.
In addition to all other remedies provided by law, any violation of this
chapter, unless otherwise provided for in the applicable section, shall be
punished as a municipal infraction. The penalty for violation shall be a
fine of $100 for each offense. Each day a violation continues to exist
shall constitute a separate offense. Additionally, the City may institute any
appropriate action or proceedings to prevent any violation of this chapter.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, dump or deposit any solid
waste upon the land or property of another without written consent first
having been obtained from the owner of the property.
A.
Violation of this section is declared to be a municipal infraction. The
penalty for violation shall be a fine of $400 for each offense.
B.
On-site disposal of solid waste by burial in a pit or trench or by burning
is prohibited.
A.
Violation of this section is declared to be a municipal infraction. The
penalty for violation shall be a fine of $100 for each offense.
B.
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of garbage within the City
by feeding the same to swine.
A.
Violation of this section is declared to be a municipal infraction. The
penalty for violation shall be a fine of $100 for each offense.
B.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any solid waste in or
to knowingly pollute or contaminate any watercourse, body of water,
spring, well or other source of water in the City.
A.
Violation of this section is declared to be a municipal infraction. The
penalty for violation shall be a fine of $400 for each offense.
B.
§ 130-18 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 130-22
112:300
Chapter 133
SPECIAL CAPITAL BENEFIT ASSESSMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Special taxes and other charges — See §§ 24
and 25 of the City Charter.
Buildings — See Ch. 56.
Special sewer benefit assessments — See Ch.
124, Art VI.
Water — See Ch. 160.
Zoning — See Ch. 164.
Fees — See Ch. A175.
§ 133-1. Findings, intent and authority.
New development and growth in the City can add to and help maintain
the quality of life in the City under a balanced growth management
program.
A.
New development and growth require the provision of increased public
facilities, including additional or expanded public works, improvements
and equipment adequate to serve said new growth.
B.
The City, in exercise of its governmental functions, must assure the
availability of additional or expanded public works, improvements,
facilities and equipment and desires to do so without undue hardship
on the existing fiscal budget.
C.
The City has determined that new residential, commercial, industrial
and related development should assume a fair share of the capital
costs of providing additional or expanded public works, improvements,
facilities and equipment.
D.
The City finds that requiring new development to pay its proportionate
fair share of the costs of providing additional or expanded public works,
improvements, facilities and equipment necessary due to new
development promotes the health, safety and general welfare of the
City's residents.
E.
The City finds that the establishment of a special capital benefit
assessment and resulting fees is an equitable and appropriate method
to help provide for additional or expanded public works, improvements,
facilities and equipment necessary due to new development.
F.
The City finds that the establishment of a special capital benefit
assessment will ensure and coordinate the provision of adequate public
works, improvements, facilities and equipment with new developments
so that the public health, safety and welfare are enhanced, congestion
is lessened, accessibility and use is improved and economic
development is promoted.
G.
§ 130-22 PLUMBING § 133-1
112:301
§ 133-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING PERMIT — A written statement issued by the Carroll County
Department of Permits and Inspection authorizing buildings and structures
in accordance with the provisions of the Building Code of the jurisdiction.
CITY — The Mayor and Common Council of Westminster.[Amended
7-13-1992 by Ord. No. 556]
DEVELOPMENT — Any activity, other than normal agricultural activity,
which materially affects the existing condition or use of any land or
structure so as to result in the construction, establishment or placement of
residential, commercial, industrial or related units.
DIRECTOR OF FINANCE — The Director of Finance of the City of
Westminster.
DWELLING and DWELLING UNIT — The definitions given to those terms
by § 164-3 of the Code.
PLANNING DIRECTOR — The Planning Director of the City of Westminster.
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR — The Public Works Director of the City of
Westminster.
STRUCTURE — The definition given to that term by § 164-3 of the Code.
§ 133-3. Schedule of special capital benefit assessment charges.
[Amended 12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 606; 11-27-2000 by Ord. No. 661;
11-22-1999 by Ord. No. 645; 7-22-2002 by Ord. No. 682; 1-27-2003
by Ord. No. 694; 6-14-2004 by Ord. No. 716; 12-6-2007 by Ord. No.
773; 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 791]
The City finds that the establishment of a special capital benefit
assessment promotes the purposes of the City's Comprehensive Plan
adopted March 25, 1985, its capital improvements budget and the
master plan of highways and promotes consistency between adopted
plans and zoning, subdivision and building regulations.
H.
Article XI-E of the Maryland Constitution, Article 23A of the Annotated
Code of Maryland and the City's Charter authorize the City to enact
ordinances for the protection and promotion of public safety, health,
morals and welfare, including but not limited to matters relating to
planning and zoning.
I.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, in any instance in
which the City approves a building permit for any building, dwelling,
apartment, living unit or other structure within the corporate limits
of the City, as herein set forth, a special benefit assessment is hereby
levied and imposed upon the affected real property, to be paid by
A.
§ 133-1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 133-3
112:302
its owner in the amount or amounts as provided in the General Fee
Ordinance.55
In any instance in which an existing structure is altered to add
additional dwelling units, commercial units or business offices, there
shall be imposed a special benefit assessment as provided in the
General Fee Ordinance. However, in no event shall the cumulative
assessments for said alterations exceed 75% of the assessment for new
construction.
B.
In any instance in which an industrial or commercial structure is
altered to add additional square footage, there shall be imposed a
special benefit assessment in accordance with the General Fee
Ordinance. Expansion of existing structures shall be allowed credit for
previously paid special benefit assessments in all types of uses except
dwellings and dwelling units and planned unit developments.
C.
In any instance in which a school or college expands existing structures
or constructs new buildings for nonresident use, there shall be imposed
a special capital benefit assessment in accordance with the schedule
entitled “Industrial Warehousing” in the General Fee Ordinance. In
the instance where a school or college adds or expands its residential
buildings, a special capital benefit assessment shall be imposed in
accordance with the schedule entitled “Dwellings and Dwelling Units”
in the General Fee Ordinance or, in the event of construction of
dormitories, the schedule entitled “Schools and Colleges, Including
Dormitories” in the General Fee Ordinance shall be applicable.
D.
In an instance in which a continuing-care facility licensed by the State
Department of Aging provides three levels of care for individuals 60
years of age or older, independent living, assisted living, and
comprehensive care as those terms are defined by Maryland law, and
also owns and maintains substantial on-site infrastructure, there shall
be imposed a special benefit assessment in the following amounts. For
independent-living units (single-family dwelling units or apartments or
multifamily units) there shall be imposed a special benefit assessment
in the amount of 65% of the amount of assessment set forth for said
uses in the General Fee Ordinance. For assisted-living units and/or
comprehensive-care units the amount of assessment shall be the same
as set forth in the General Fee Ordinance for hospitals, care homes and
nursing homes.
E.
In situations where no specified category is provided for in this section,
the Director of Planning shall determine the applicable special capital
benefit assessment to be charged, but in no case shall such charges
exceed those existing in Subsection A of this section.
F.
The Director of Planning may waive or modify special benefit
assessments for the construction or rehabilitation of lower-income
G.
55.Editor’s Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
§ 133-3 PLUMBING § 133-3
112:303
§ 133-4. Payment of fees. [Amended 7-13-1992 by Ord. No. 556]
§ 133-5. Creation of account.
housing units as authorized under § 21-101 of Article 24 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland.
The special capital benefit assessment shall be paid by the owner to the
City, prior to the issuance of a building permit, for any improvement
to real property or substantial change of use in accordance with the
schedule set forth in § 133-3. The amount of the special capital benefit
assessment shall be set as of the date of application for the building
permit. A building permit shall not be issued until any applicable
special capital benefit assessment fee has been paid.
A.
For commercial and industrial structures, the special capital benefit
assessment shall be paid for the initial building permit for the primary
structure. Subsequent building permits for tenant improvements shall
not be subject to the special capital benefit assessment unless the
land use type for which the tenant improvement permit is sought is
subject to a higher special capital benefit assessment than the land
use type indicated when the initial permit was obtained. Any tenant
improvement subject to a higher special capital benefit assessment
shall pay only the difference between the higher amount and the
amount for the original use.
B.
Special capital benefit assessment fees are a lien against the real
property and shall be levied, collected and enforced in the same manner
as are city real property taxes and shall have the same priority and
bear the same interest and penalties as city real property taxes for lien
purposes.
C.
The special capital benefit assessment schedule of fees set forth in
§ 133-3 may be modified by the Mayor and Common Council from time
to time as required to meet the purposes of this chapter. The Mayor and
Common Council may review the schedule of fees contemporaneous
with the approval of the six-year program for capital improvements and
the capital budget provided for in Chapter 20 of the Code.
D.
The special capital benefit assessment fees imposed by this chapter are
separate from and in addition to any other fees which may be imposed
by any federal, state or county governmental agency.
E.
The City shall establish an account within its general fund for the
special capital benefit assessment fees levied in accordance with this
chapter. A separate bank account is not required. Interest shall be
credited to the special capital benefit assessment account monthly,
based on the average balance in the account monthly and the average
percent of interest realized by the City during the month.
A.
§ 133-3 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 133-5
112:304
§ 133-6. Use of funds.
Special capital benefit assessment fees collected under this chapter
shall be deposited in the special capital benefit assessment account
to assure that the fees and all interest accruing to the account are
designated for the capital costs of additional or expanded public works,
improvements, facilities and equipment reasonably required to
accommodate and/or benefit new construction, growth or development.
B.
It shall be the duty of the Director of Finance to account for such funds
and establish the necessary audits and other records to ensure that all
collections of special capital benefit assessment fees are in accordance
with the issuance of building permits set forth in § 133-4 hereof.
C.
The Mayor and Common Council for the City of Westminster shall have
the sole power to appropriate funds from the special capital benefit
assessment account created in accordance with § 133-5 hereof.
A.
All special capital benefit assessment fees collected under this chapter
shall be used solely for financing, in whole or in part, the capital
costs of additional or expanded public works improvements, facilities
and equipment required to accommodate and/or benefit growth,
construction or development, with the purpose that new growth,
construction and development pay a proportionate fair share of the
costs and expenses. Such fees may be used for funding capital
improvements for the City's six-year program approved by the Mayor
and Common Council pursuant to § 20-2 of the Code. [Amended
7-13-1992 by Ord. No. 556]
B.
Special capital benefit assessment funds collected under this chapter
shall not be utilized for water and/or sewer projects of any type.
C.
Special capital benefit assessment fees collected under this chapter
shall not be used for replacement, maintenance or operating expenses.
D.
Nothing in this chapter shall release, relieve or in any way decrease
a developer's obligation for assuming sole responsibility for financing
the construction of all on-site and off-site improvements that are
determined by the City to be directly attributable to the development
and are required by the City or other applicable governmental authority
to be constructed in accordance with approved plans, public works
agreements and related documents.
E.
Nothing in this chapter shall release, relieve or in any way decrease
a developer's obligation to the City for full payment of any and all
other required fees and assessments, mandatory conveyances of land,
execution of documents and for meeting any and all other requirements
that are specified in the Code.
F.
Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the use of funds by the City from
other sources to supplement or augment any special capital benefit
assessment fees collected under this chapter.
G.
§ 133-5 PLUMBING § 133-7
112:305
§ 133-7. Adjustments.
§ 133-8. Applicability. [Amended 7-13-1992 by Ord. No. 556]
This chapter shall apply to all building permits for improvements or change
of use for which an application is filed from and after August 8, 1988.
Chapter 135
STORM SEWER SYSTEMS ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain management — See Ch. 83.
Sewers and sewage — See Ch. 124.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 136.
If special capital benefit assessment fees have not been expended
or encumbered by the end of the fifth year following collection, the
City shall consider lowering or eliminating the special capital benefit
assessment fee.
A.
Should the need for the special capital benefit assessment be
eliminated due to action by the federal, state or county governments,
the balance in the special capital benefit assessment account shall
revert to the unappropriated surplus of the City.
B.
§ 133-7 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 133-8
112:306
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 135-1. Purpose; objectives.
§ 135-2. Definitions.
In this chapter the following terms have the meanings indicated. Any term
not defined in this chapter shall have the meaning as defined in any chapter
of the Code or the Natural Resource Article, § 8-1201, et seq., Annotated
Code of Maryland, or any subsequent amendments. Any term not defined as
above shall have its generally accepted meaning.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPS — Conservation practices or
systems of practices and management measures that minimize adverse
impacts to the environment, including surface water, groundwater flow
and circulation patterns, and to the chemical, physical, and biological
characteristics. BMPs include schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or
indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance
systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and
practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal,
or drainage from raw materials storage.
CITY — The City of Westminster.
CITY SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM or MS4 — A separate storm
sewer system that is owned or maintained by the City and designed to
convey stormwater runoff to a point of managed discharge.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments.
CODE — Code of the City of Westminster.
COMAR — Code of Maryland Regulations.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the public health, safety,
and general welfare of the residents of the City of Westminster, Carroll
County, the Chesapeake Bay Region, and the state through the
regulation of nonstormwater discharges to the storm drainage system.
This chapter establishes methods for controlling the introduction of
illicit discharges or pollutants into the City's separate storm sewer
system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the NPDES
permit process.
A.
The objectives of this chapter include:
Regulation of the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by
stormwater discharges by any user; and
(1)
(2) Prohibition of illicit connections and discharges to the MS4.
B.
§ 135-1 PLUMBING § 135-2
112:307
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — An activity subject to NPDES construction
permits, including a construction project resulting in land disturbance of
one acre or more, clearing, grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
COUNTY — The Board of Commissioners of Carroll County.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Public Works of the City of
Westminster.[Amended 12-6-2007 by Ord. No. 773]
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Department of Public Works or the
Director's written designee.[Amended 12-6-2007 by Ord. No. 773]
DRAINAGE BASIN — An area drained by an ordered stream system and
classified by the highest order stream that forms its discharge.
ENHANCEMENT — An action performed to provide additional protection to
create or improve the function of an ecosystem.
FACILITY — Any structure or complex of structures where runoff is
discharged into a MS4.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste,
or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — A surface or subsurface drain or conveyance
which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system, including,
but not limited to:
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Any discharge to any MS4 that is not composed
entirely of stormwater runoff except discharges resulting from common
residential stormwater runoff, fire-fighting activities or from any legally
permitted discharge. The direct discharge of any sanitary discharge,
including domestic sewage or other pollutants into any MS4, is considered
an illicit discharge.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — An activity subject to NPDES industrial permits
as defined in 40 CFR § 122.26(b)(14) or any subsequent amendment.
NPDES — National pollutant discharge elimination system.
A conveyance which allows a nonstormwater discharge including
sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain
system or a connection to the storm drain system from an indoor
drain or sink, regardless of whether the drain or connection had been
previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized
enforcement agency; or
A.
A drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land
use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in
plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized
enforcement agency.
B.
§ 135-2 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 135-2
112:308
NPDES STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the
Environmental Protection Agency or the state that authorizes the discharge
of pollutants to waters of the United States.
OUTFALL — The point where a storm sewer system discharges.
PERSON — Includes the federal government, the state, any county,
municipal corporation, or other political subdivision of the state, or any
of their units, or an individual, receiver, trustee, guardian, executor,
administrator, fiduciary, or representative of any kind, or any partnership,
firm, association, public or private corporation, or any other entity.
POLLUTANT —
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — The equivalent of a municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) as defined in 40 CFR 122.26. A
conveyance or system of conveyances including, but not limited to, drainage
systems, public streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, swales,
constructed channels, storm drains, associated underground piping and any
on-site stormwater management facilities that are:
SIGNIFICANT MATERIALS — Includes, but is not limited to, raw materials,
petroleum derivative products; any controlled hazardous substances
A contaminant that may result in any alteration of the physical,
chemical, or biological properties of groundwater or surface water,
including any change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor
of the receiving waters or discharge or deposit of any organic matter,
harmful organism, or liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other
substance into groundwater or surface water that may render the
waters harmful, or detrimental to the public health or welfare, to any
domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other
legitimate beneficial use of the water, to any livestock, wild animals,
birds, fish or other aquatic species that may use the water; or
A.
Any substance that may cause or contribute to pollution, including,
but not limited to, paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil; petroleum;
automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard
wastes; refuse; rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or
abandoned objects, ordnances, and accumulations, so that same may
cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and
fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform
and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes
and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and
noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
B.
Designed or used for the collection and conveyance of stormwater
runoff (either immediate or delayed) from any form of precipitation
event:
A.
B. Not any part of a combined sewer system; and
Not part of or discharging into any publicly owned treatment works
(POTW) as defined in 40 CFR 122.2.
C.
§ 135-2 PLUMBING § 135-2
112:309
pursuant to COMAR 26.13; industrial waste pursuant to COMAR
26.08.01.01; infectious waste pursuant to COMAR 26.04.07.02; materials
such as solvents or detergents; finished materials such as metallic products;
raw materials used in food processing or production; fertilizers; pesticides;
waste products such as ashes, slag and sludge or any other material that
could result in pollution of waters of the state as a constituent in stormwater
discharge.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Any facilities by which stormwater is
collected or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage
systems, streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping
facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and man-made or altered
drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
STORMWATER — Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely
of water resulting from any form of natural precipitation.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed, the use of which requires fixed
location on the ground or which is attached to something having a fixed
location.
WATERCOURSE — Any natural or artificial stream, river, creek, ditch,
channel, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine or wash, in
and including any adjacent area that is subject to inundation from overflow
or floodwaters and their associated wetlands.
§ 135-3. Discharges.
No new connection to an MS4 may be effected without prior written
approval of the Director.
A.
No person may:
Discharge any significant materials or pollutant into any
component of any MS4 that would constitute an illicit discharge:
(1)
(2) Continue any illicit discharge to any MS4;
Create any condition that may result in an illicit discharge or
pollution of stormwater conveyed and discharged from any outfall
of those systems;
(3)
Cause or contribute to any type of illicit discharge into an MS4 or
watercourse that may result in an potential for adverse impact;
(4)
Alter or create an obstruction to flow of an MS4 or watercourse
that reduces its capacity or ability to provide its intended design
capacity or natural function; or
(5)
Create a new connection or maintain a connection that may
introduce any discharge other than unpolluted water into any MS4
or watercourse.
(6)
B.
§ 135-2 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 135-3
112:310
§ 135-4. Exemptions.
The following discharges are exempt from the prohibitions established by
this chapter:
The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
C.
A. Potable water sources.
B. Landscape irrigation or lawn watering.
C. Permitted diverted stream flows.
D. Rising groundwater.
E. Groundwater infiltration to storm drains.
F. Uncontaminated pumped groundwater.
G. Uncontaminated discharge from foundation drains or pumps.
H. Air conditioning condensation.
I. Springs.
J. Noncommercial washing of vehicles.
K. Natural riparian habitat or wetland flows.
L. Fire-fighting activities.
M. Any water source not containing pollutants.
Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement agency
as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
N.
Dye testing with prior verbal notification to the authorized enforcement
agency.
O.
Any nonstormwater discharge legally permitted under an NPDES
permit issued by the Maryland Department of the Environment,
provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements
of the issued permit and with all other applicable laws and regulations
and with prior written approval of discharge to the MS4.
P.
§ 135-3 PLUMBING § 135-4
112:311

ARTICLE II
Storm Sewer Protection
§ 135-5. Maintenance.
Any person in control of any part of a storm sewer system, including any
stormwater management facility or any surface or subsurface stormwater
conveyance system, shall maintain those components in good and workable
condition. The owner shall promptly repair and restore the systems or
components when conditions warrant.
§ 135-6. Suspensions; terminations.
§ 135-7. Compliance required.
A person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater
discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of the permit. Proof of
compliance with the permit shall be submitted in a form acceptable to the
Director prior to allowing any discharge to the MS4.
§ 135-8. Inspections.
This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges,
including construction activity or any other discharge to any MS4.
The Director may, without prior notice, suspend any approved
discharge access to an MS4 by a person, when suspension is necessary
to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may
present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, to public
health or welfare, or to any system, watercourse, or designated
sensitive resource. If a person fails to comply with a suspension order,
the City may take steps to prevent or minimize damage to any
stormwater system, watercourse, or sensitive resource or to minimize
an identified danger or hazard to the general health and welfare.
A.
A person discharging to an MS4 or watercourse in violation of this
chapter may have the system access terminated if such termination
would abate, reduce, or eliminate an illicit discharge. The Director
shall notify a violator in writing of the proposed termination of system
access. The violator may petition to the Director for reconsideration.
Reinstatement of a discharge, connection, or access which has been
terminated pursuant to this section without the Director's approval
constitutes a violation of this chapter.
B.
The Director may, upon notification, enter and inspect the source of
any discharge, including those under an individual or general NPDES
permit, that are subject to this chapter when necessary to determine
compliance. Failure to cooperate with an inspection constitutes a
violation of this chapter.
A.
§ 135-5 PLUMBING § 135-8
112:313
§ 135-9. Control of illicit discharges.
§ 135-10. Watercourse protection.
§ 135-11. Notification of spills or accidental discharges.
To determine compliance, the Director may inspect, sample, examine,
and investigate the source of any discharge to an MS4. In support
of any investigation, the Director may review and copy any records
maintained pursuant to the conditions of any discharge permit or this
chapter.
B.
The Director may require the discharger to install monitoring
equipment if the Director determines that the nature of the discharge
warrants it. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be
maintained in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger
at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and
quality shall be calibrated to ensure accuracy.
C.
The owner of any property shall prevent accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or pollutants into MS4 or watercourses through
the use of structural and nonstructural BMP's.
A.
Any person who is the source of an illicit discharge may be required
to implement, at the person's expense, additional structural and
nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to
any MS4. Compliance with the terms and conditions of a valid NPDES
permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater constitutes compliance
with this section.
B.
The owner of property through which a watercourse passes shall keep
and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property generally
free of man-made obstructions or sources of pollutants.
A.
The owner shall maintain existing privately owned structures within
or adjacent to a watercourse so that the structures will not become a
hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.
B.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, any person responsible for
a site who has information of an illicit discharge of pollutants into
stormwater, the storm sewer system, or watercourse, shall immediately
contain and clean up the release. Said person shall also give notification
as provided in this section.
A.
Time.
For a release of hazardous materials, the person shall immediately
notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via
emergency dispatch services.
(1)
B.
§ 135-8 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 135-11
112:314
§ 135-12. Guaranty.
The Director may require a surety, cash bond, irrevocable letter of credit,
or other means of security acceptable to the Director as a guaranty under
certain requirements of this chapter. In cases when a guaranty is required,
the amount required shall be no less than the total estimated cost of the
action required. The guaranty shall include forfeiture provisions for failure
to complete the required activity within the time specified. The guaranty
may not be released prior to final inspection which verifies compliance
with this chapter. No partial releases may be made. In the event that the
guarantor fails to perform or complete the required activity, the Director
may use the guaranty to complete the work.
§ 135-13. Enforcement.
§ 135-14. Civil penalty.
For a release of nonhazardous materials, the person shall notify the
Director in person or by telephone or facsimile no later than the
next business day.
(2)
Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written
notice addressed and mailed to the Director within three business
days of the notice by telephone.
(3)
If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial
or industrial use, the owner or operator shall retain an on-site written
record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence.
C.
Whenever the Director finds that a person has violated this chapter, the
Director shall issue a notice of violation.
A.
If abatement of a violation or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration shall be completed. The notice shall state
that should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the
established deadline, the work will be contracted for completion by the
City and the costs shall be charged to the violator. Such costs shall
constitute a lien upon the premises upon which the condition occurred,
to be collected as City taxes are collected, if not otherwise first paid to
the City. Abatement by the City of conditions in violation of this chapter
and reimbursement to the City of costs incurred thereby shall not bar
the issuance of a municipal infraction and the prosecution for such
violation.
B.
If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this
chapter, the Director may petition for a preliminary or permanent
injunction restraining the person from activities which would create
further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or
remediation of the violation.
C.
§ 135-11 PLUMBING § 135-14
112:315
Any person who shall violate a provision of this chapter or fail to comply
therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted
within the limits provided by state or local law. Each day that a violation
continues shall be a separate offense. In addition to other remedies, any
violation may be deemed a municipal infraction and prosecuted as such.
The penalty for violation shall be a fine of $400 for each offense, which
may be doubled in accordance with applicable law.
A.
The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of or noncompliance
with this chapter shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance or
permit it to continue, and also the person shall be required to correct or
remedy such violations and noncompliance with any reasonable time.
B.
Additionally, the Mayor and Common Council may institute injunctive,
mandamus or other appropriate action or proceedings in law or equity
for the enforcement of this chapter or to correct violations of this
chapter and any court of competent jurisdiction shall have the right
to issue restraining order, temporary or permanent injunctions or
mandamus or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
C.
§ 135-14 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 135-14
112:316
Chapter 136
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning and Zoning Commission — See Ch.
7, Art. II.
Environmental Advisory Board — See Ch. 7,
Art. III.
Buildings — See Ch. 56.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 83.
Sewers and sewage — See Ch. 124.
Storm sewer systems environmental
management — See Ch. 135.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 139.
Water — See Ch. 160.
Zoning and subdivision of land — See Ch. 164.
Fee Schedule — See Ch. A175.
§ 136-1. Purpose; authority.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain, and enhance the
public health, safety, and general welfare by establishing minimum
requirements and procedures that control the adverse impacts
associated with increased stormwater runoff. The goal is to manage
stormwater by using environmental site design (ESD) to the maximum
extent practicable (MEP) to maintain after development, as nearly as
possible, the predevelopment runoff characteristics, and to reduce
stream channel erosion, pollution, siltation and sedimentation, and
local flooding, and to use appropriate structural best management
practices (BMPs) only when necessary. This will restore, enhance, and
maintain the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of streams,
minimize damage to public and private property, and reduce the
impacts of land development.
A.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the Environment Article, Title 4,
Subtitle 2, of the Annotated Code of Maryland, Article 23A of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, and the City Charter and shall apply to all
development occurring within the City of Westminster. The application
of this chapter shall be the minimum stormwater management
requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any
other powers granted by state statute. The City of Westminster
Department of Public Works shall be responsible for the coordination
and enforcement of this chapter. The City may engage and/or hire
agents, consultants, registered engineers, attorneys and others with
regard to the requirements of this chapter and may assess the charges
and expenses associated therewith to the applicant. This chapter
applies to all new and redevelopment projects that have not received
final approval for erosion and sediment control and stormwater
management plans by May 4, 2010.
B.
§ 135-14 PLUMBING § 136-2
112:317
§ 136-2. Incorporation of documents by reference.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following documents are incorporated
by reference:
§ 136-3. Definitions.
In this chapter, the following terms have the meanings indicated. Any term
not defined in this chapter shall have the meaning as defined in any chapter
of the Code. Any term not defined in the Code in any chapter shall have its
generally accepted meaning.
ADMINISTRATION — The Maryland Department of the Environment
(MDE), Water Management Administration (WMA).
ADVERSE IMPACT — Any deleterious effect on waters or wetlands,
including the quality, quantity, surface area, species composition, aesthetics
or usefulness for human or natural uses, which is or may potentially be
harmful or injurious to human health, welfare, safety or property or to
biological productivity, diversity, or stability or which unreasonably
interferes with the enjoyment of life or property, including outdoor
recreation.
AGRICULTURAL LAND MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — Those methods and
procedures used in the cultivation of land in order to further crop and
livestock production and conservation of related soil and water resources.
APPLICANT — Any person, firm, or governmental agency that executes the
necessary forms to procure official approval of a project or a permit to carry
out construction of a project.
AQUIFER — A porous water-bearing geologic formation generally restricted
to materials capable of yielding an appreciable supply of water.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPs — A structural device or
nonstructural practice designed to temporarily store or treat stormwater
runoff in order to mitigate flooding, reduce pollution, and provide other
amenities.
CFR — The Code of Federal Regulations.
CHANNEL PROTECTION STORAGE VOLUME (CPV) — The volume used to
design structural management practices to control stream channel erosion.
Methods for calculating the CPV are specified in the 2000 Maryland
Stormwater Design Manual.
The 2000 Maryland Stormwater Design Manual, Volumes I and II
(Maryland Department of the Environment, April 2000), and the Carroll
County supplement to the 2000 Maryland Stormwater Design Manual
(August 2010), and all subsequent revisions, are incorporated by
reference and shall serve as the official guide for stormwater principles,
methods, and practices.
A.
USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service, Maryland Conservation
Practice Standard Pond Code 378 (January 2000).
B.
§ 136-2 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 136-3
112:318
CITY — The City of Westminster.
CLEARING — The removal of trees and brush from the land, but shall not
include the ordinary mowing of grass.
CODE — The Code of the City of Westminster.
COMAR — The Code of Maryland Regulations.
COMMISSION — The City of Westminster Planning and Zoning
Commission.
CONCEPT PLAN — The first of three required plan approvals that includes
the information necessary to allow an initial evaluation of a proposed
project.
COUNTY — The Board of Commissioners of Carroll County.
DAM BREACH INUNDATION AREA — The area potentially inundated by a
sudden dam failure.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Public Works of the City of
Westminster.
DESIGN MANUAL — The 2000 Maryland Stormwater Design Manual and
all subsequent revisions, together with the Carroll County supplement to
the 2000 Maryland Stormwater Design Manual (August 2010), which
collectively serve as the official guide for stormwater management
principles, methods, and practices.
DETENTION STRUCTURE — A permanent structure for the temporary
storage of runoff, which is designed so as not to create a permanent pool of
water.
DEVELOP LAND — To change the runoff characteristics of a parcel of
land in conjunction with residential, commercial, industrial, or institutional
construction or alteration.
DEVELOPER — A person who engages in development or who owns
property upon which a development is proposed or accomplished.
DEVELOPMENT — Any change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings and other structures, grading,
dredging, filling, paving, clearing, excavation, dumping, extraction or
storage of soil or minerals, and the storage of equipment or material; and
the subdivision of land, including off-conveyances.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Department of Public Works of the City of
Westminster.
DRAINAGE AREA — That area contributing runoff to a single point,
measured in a horizontal plane, which is enclosed by a ridgeline.
EASEMENT — A grant or reservation by the owner of land for the use of
such land by others for a specific purpose or purposes, and which must be
included in the conveyance of land affected by such easement.
ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed in the State of Maryland,
proficient in stormwater management design.
§ 136-3 PLUMBING § 136-3
112:319
ENVIRONMENTAL SITE DESIGN (ESD) — Using small-scale stormwater
management practices, nonstructural techniques, and better site planning
to mimic natural hydrologic runoff characteristics and minimize the impact
of land development on water resources. Methods for designing ESD
practices are specified in the Design Manual.
EXEMPTION — Those land development activities that are not subject to
the stormwater management requirements contained in this chapter.
EXTREME FLOOD VOLUME (QF) — The storage volume required to control
those infrequent but large storm events in which overbank flows reach or
exceed the boundaries of the one-hundred-year floodplain.
FINAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The last of three required
plan approvals that includes the information necessary to allow all
approvals and permits to be issued by the Department.
FLOODPLAIN — That land adjacent to a body of water or stream inundated
by the base flood.
FLOW ATTENUATION — Prolonging the flow time of runoff to reduce the
peak discharge.
GRADING — Any act by which soil is cleared, stripped, stockpiled,
excavated, scarified, filled or any combination thereof.
IMPERVIOUS AREA — Any surface that does not allow stormwater to
infiltrate into the ground.
INFILTRATION — The passage or movement of water into the soil surface.
LAND SURVEYOR — A professional land surveyor registered in the State of
Maryland, proficient in drainage design.
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE (MEP) — Designing stormwater
management systems so that all reasonable opportunities for using ESD
planning techniques and treatment practices are exhausted and only where
absolutely necessary a structural BMP is implemented.
OFF-SITE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The design and construction
of a facility necessary to control stormwater from more than one
development.
ON-SITE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The design and construction of
systems necessary to control stormwater within an immediate development.
OVERBANK FLOOD PROTECTION VOLUME (Qp) — The volume controlled
by structural practices to prevent an increase in the frequency of outof-
bank flooding generated by development. Methods for calculating the
overbank flood protection volume are specified in the Design Manual.
PERSON — Includes the federal government, the state, any county,
municipal corporation, or other political subdivision of the state, or any
of their units, or an individual, receiver, trustee, guardian, executor,
administrator, fiduciary, or representative of any kind, or any partnership,
firm, association, public or private corporation, or any other entity.
§ 136-3 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 136-3
112:320
PLANNING TECHNIQUES — A combination of strategies employed early in
project design to reduce the impact from development and to incorporate
natural features into a stormwater management plan.
RECHARGE VOLUME (Rev) — That portion of the water quality volume
used to maintain groundwater recharge rates at development sites.
Methods for calculating the recharge volume are specified in the Design
Manual.
REDEVELOPMENT — Any construction, alteration, or improvement
performed on sites where existing land use is commercial, industrial,
institutional, or multifamily residential and existing site impervious area
exceeds 40%.
RETENTION STRUCTURE — A permanent structure that provides for the
storage of runoff by means of a permanent pool of water.
RETROFITTING — The implementation of ESD practices, the construction
of a structural BMP, or the modification of an existing structural BMP in a
previously developed area to improve water quality over current conditions.
SCD — The Carroll County Soil Conservation District.
SEDIMENT — Soils or other surficial materials transported or deposited by
the action of wind, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — Any tract, lot, or parcel of land, or combination of tracts, lots,
or parcels of land that are in one ownership, or are contiguous and in
diverse ownership, where development is to be performed as part of a unit,
subdivision, or project.
SITE DEVELOPMENT (PRELIMINARY) PLAN — The second of three
required plan approvals that includes the information necessary to allow a
detailed evaluation of a proposed project.
STABILIZATION — The prevention of soil movement by any of various
vegetative or structural means.
STORMWATER — Water that originates from a precipitation event.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM — Natural areas, ESD practices,
stormwater management measures, and any other structure through which
stormwater flows, infiltrates, or discharges from a site.
STRIPPING — Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover,
including tree removal, clearing, grubbing and storage or removal of
topsoil.
VARIANCE — The modification of the minimum stormwater management
requirements for specific circumstances such that strict adherence to the
requirements would result in unnecessary hardship and not fulfill the intent
of this chapter.
WAIVER — The reduction of stormwater management requirements by the
Department for a specific development on a case-by-case review basis.
§ 136-3 PLUMBING § 136-3
112:321
WATERCOURSE — Any natural or artificial stream, river, creek, ditch,
channel, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine or wash, in
and including any adjacent area that is subject to inundation from overflow
or floodwater.
WATER QUALITY VOLUME (WQv) — The volume needed to capture and
treat 90% of the average annual rainfall events at a development site.
Methods for calculating the water quality volume are specified in the Design
Manual.
WATERSHED — The total drainage area contributing runoff to a single
point.
WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water
or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as
"hydrophytic vegetation." A wetland area is delineated according to the
1987 United States Army Corps of Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual.
§ 136-3.1. Grandfathering.
In this section, the following terms have the meanings indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE WAIVER — A decision by the City pursuant to this
chapter to allow the construction of a development to be governed by
the Stormwater Management Ordinance in effect as of May 4, 2010, but
does not include a waiver granted pursuant to § 136-7 of this chapter.
APPROVAL — A determination, documented in writing, by the City
that the materials submitted by or on behalf of the property owner in
support of the property owner's request for approval of a development
plan, including a stormwater management plan, comply with the
requirements of a specified stage in the City's development review
process; a mere acknowledgement by the City that submitted material
has been received for review does not constitute an approval.
FINAL PROJECT APPROVAL — Approval of the final stormwater
management plan and erosion and sediment control plan required to
construct a project's stormwater management facilities.
PRELIMINARY PROJECT APPROVAL — An approval as part of the City's
preliminary development or planning review process.
A.
Preliminary project approval will not be granted until the property
owner has submitted information to the City that includes, at a
minimum:
(1) The number of planned dwelling units or lots;
(2) The proposed project density;
(3) The proposed size and location of all land uses for the project; and
B.
§ 136-3 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 136-3.1
112:322
Any other information required by the City, including but not
limited to:
The proposed alignment, location, and construction type and
standard for all roads, accessways, and areas of vehicular
traffic;
(a)
A demonstration that the methods by which the development
will be supplied with water and wastewater service are
adequate; and
(b)
The size, type, and general location of all proposed wastewater
and water system infrastructure.
(c)
(4)
A project will not be deemed to have obtained a final project approval
until the property owner has secured bonding and/or financing for final
development plans if either is required by law or by agreement between
the City and the property owner.
C.
The City may grant an administrative waiver to a development that
received a preliminary project approval prior to May 4, 2010.
D.
Except as provided for in Subsection H of this section, an administrative
waiver shall expire on:
May 4, 2013, if the development does not receive final project
approval prior to that date; or
(1)
May 4, 2017, if the development receives final project approval
prior to May 4, 2013.
(2)
E.
All construction authorized pursuant to an administrative waiver must
be completed by May 4, 2017, or, if the waiver is extended as provided
in Subsection G of this section, by the expiration date of the waiver
extension.
F.
An administrative waiver shall only be extended if, by May 4, 2010, the
development:
(1) Has received a preliminary project approval; and
Was subject to a development rights and responsibilities
agreement, a tax increment financing approval, or an annexation
agreement that provides a date for completion of development
that is after the date on which the administrative waiver would
otherwise expire.
(2)
G.
Administrative waivers extended pursuant to Subsection G of this
section shall expire upon the date set forth for completion of the
development in the development rights and responsibilities agreement,
the tax increment financing approval, or the annexation agreement.
H.
§ 136-3.1 PLUMBING § 136-4
112:323
§ 136-4. Scope.
No person shall develop any land for residential, commercial, industrial,
or institutional uses without providing stormwater management measures
that control or manage runoff from such developments, except as provided
within this section. Stormwater management measures must be designed
consistent with the Design Manual, and constructed according to an
approved plan, for new development or the policies stated in § 136-8 of this
chapter for redevelopment, as appropriate.
§ 136-5. Exemptions.
The following development activities are exempt from the provisions of this
chapter and the requirements of providing stormwater management:
§ 136-6. Application for exemption.
A person may apply to the Department for a stormwater management
exemption by providing a written explanation which describes how the
proposed development qualifies for an exemption.
§ 136-7. Waivers; watershed management plans.
A. Agricultural land management practices.
Additions or modifications to existing single-family detached residential
structures if they comply with Subsection C of this section.
B.
Any developments that do not disturb over 5,000 square feet of land
area.
C.
Land development activities that the Administration determines will
be regulated under specific state laws which provide for managing
stormwater runoff.
D.
The Department may grant stormwater management quantitative
control waivers only to those projects within areas where watershed
management plans have been developed consistent with Subsection
E of this section. Written requests for quantitative stormwater
management waivers shall be submitted that contain sufficient
descriptions, drawings, and any other information that is necessary to
demonstrate that ESD has been implemented to the MEP. A separate
written waiver request shall be required in accordance with the
provisions of this section if there are subsequent additions, extensions,
or modifications to a development receiving a waiver.
A.
If watershed management plans consistent with Subsection E of this
section have not been developed, stormwater management quantitative
control waivers may be granted to the following projects, provided that
it has been demonstrated that ESD has been implemented to the MEP
when the Department determines that circumstances exist that prevent
the reasonable implementation of quantity control practices.
B.
§ 136-4 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 136-7
112:324
Stormwater management qualitative control waivers apply only to:
Infill development projects where ESD has been implemented to
the MEP and it has been demonstrated that other BMPs are not
feasible;
(1)
Redevelopment projects if the requirements of § 136-8 of this
chapter are satisfied; or
(2)
Sites where the approving agency determines that circumstances
exist that prevent the reasonable implementation of ESD to the
MEP.
(3)
C.
Waivers shall only be granted when it has been demonstrated that ESD
has been implemented to the MEP and must:
(1) Be on a case-by-case basis;
Consider the cumulative effects of the Department's waiver policy;
and
(2)
Reasonably ensure the development will not adversely impact
stream quality.
(3)
D.
A watershed management plan developed for the purpose of
implementing different stormwater management policies for waivers
and redevelopment shall:
Include detailed hydrologic and hydraulic analyses to determine
hydrograph timing;
(1)
Evaluate both quantity and quality management and opportunities
for ESD implementation;
(2)
Include a cumulative impact assessment of current and proposed
watershed development;
(3)
(4) Identify existing flooding and receiving stream channel conditions;
(5) Be conducted at a reasonable scale;
Specify where on-site or off-site quantitative and qualitative
stormwater management practices are to be implemented;
(6)
Be consistent with the General Performance Standards for
Stormwater Management in Maryland found in the Design Manual;
and
(7)
(8) Be approved by the Administration.
E.
Stormwater management quantitative and qualitative control waivers
may be granted for phased development projects if a system designed
to meet the state's 2000 Regulatory Requirements for Multiple Phases
has been constructed by May 4, 2010. The applicant shall demonstrate
F.
§ 136-7 PLUMBING § 136-7
112:325
§ 136-8. Redevelopment.
that it has made all reasonable efforts to incorporate ESD for future
phases.
Stormwater management plans for development shall provide ESD to
the MEP consistent with the Design Manual and the supplement.
Overbank flood-protection volume requirements do not apply unless
required by the Department in uncommon situations, such as historic
flooding, or extreme erosion where more stormwater control than the
minimum required may be necessary.
A.
All redevelopment project designs shall reduce those existing site
impervious areas within the limit of disturbance (LOD) built in
accordance with an approved site plan by at least 50% below conditions
existing on the date of the most-recent Carroll County geographic
information system orthophotography or as depicted on the original
approved site plan. Where site conditions prevent the reduction of
impervious area, then stormwater management practices shall
implement ESD to the MEP for at least 50% of the site's impervious
area. When a combination of impervious area reduction and ESD is
used, the combined reduced and treated area shall equal no less than
50% of the site's impervious area within the LOD. Where existing
site impervious areas were constructed after July 1, 1984, without
an approved stormwater management plan, stormwater management
shall be provided in accordance with § 136-10 of this chapter for all
impervious surfaces on the parcel.
B.
Alternative stormwater management measures may be used to meet the
requirements in Subsection B if the owner or developer satisfactorily
demonstrates to the Department that impervious area reduction has
been maximized and ESD has been implemented to the MEP.
Alternative stormwater management measures include but are not
limited to:
(1) An on-site structural BMP;
An off-site structural BMP to provide water quality treatment for
an impervious area equal to or greater than 70% of the existing
impervious area;
(2)
A combination of impervious area reduction, ESD implementation,
and an on-site structural BMP for an area equal to or greater than
50% of the existing site impervious area within the LOD; or
(3)
A combination of impervious area reduction, ESD implementation
and an off-site structural BMPs for an area equal to or greater than
70% of the existing site impervious area within the LOD.
(4)
C.
The Department's policies for providing stormwater runoff treatment
for redevelopment projects if it is proven to the City's satisfaction that
D.
§ 136-7 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 136-8
112:326
§ 136-9. Variances.
The Department may grant a written variance from any technical
requirement of this chapter if there are exceptional circumstances
applicable to the site such that strict adherence will result in unnecessary
hardship and not fulfill the intent of this chapter. A written request, with
adequate supporting documentation, for a variance shall be provided to
the Department and shall state the specific variances sought and reasons
for their granting. The Department shall not grant a variance unless and
until sufficient justification is provided by the person developing land that
the implementation of ESD to the MEP has been investigated thoroughly,
when a variance is granted. The property owner must provide compensatory
stormwater management provided in accordance with § 136-8D of this
chapter.
§ 136-10. Minimum control requirements.
the requirements of Subsections A, B, and C cannot be met are as
follows:
Retrofitting of existing on-site or off-site BMPs that provide
inadequate stormwater treatment for the impervious areas
draining to them to bring them up to current standards in
accordance with the Design Manual and the supplement. The
retrofitted facilities must treat drainage from impervious areas that
requires additional treatment greater than that required for all site
imperviousness within the LOD; or
(1)
Fees paid into a stormwater management fund as established by
the City and set forth in the supplement that are dedicated
exclusively to provide stormwater management in the City and
are in addition to the review fees established by § 136-17 of this
chapter.
(2)
The minimum control requirements established in this section and the
Design Manual are as follows:
The Department shall require that the planning techniques,
nonstructural practices, and design methods specified in the
Design Manual be used to implement ESD to the MEP. The use
of ESD planning techniques and treatment practices must be
exhausted before any structural BMP is implemented. Stormwater
management plans for development projects subject to this chapter
shall be designed using ESD sizing criteria, recharge volume, water
quality volume, and channel protection storage volume criteria
according to the Design Manual. The MEP standard is met when
channel stability is maintained, predevelopment groundwater
recharge is replicated, nonpoint-source pollution is minimized, and
structural stormwater management practices are used only if
determined to be absolutely necessary.
(1)
A.
§ 136-8 PLUMBING § 136-10
112:327
§ 136-11. Stormwater management measures.
The ESD planning techniques and practices and structural stormwater
management measures established in this chapter and the Design Manual
shall be used, either alone or in combination in a stormwater management
plan. A developer shall demonstrate that ESD has been implemented to the
MEP before the use of a structural BMP is considered in developing the
stormwater management plan.
Control of the two-year- and ten-year-frequency storm event is
required according to the Design Manual and all subsequent
revisions if the Department determines that additional stormwater
management is necessary because historical flooding problems
exist and downstream floodplain development and conveyance
system design cannot be controlled.
(2)
The Department may require more than the minimum control
requirements specified in this chapter if hydrologic or topographic
conditions warrant or if flooding, stream channel erosion, or water
quality problems exist downstream from a proposed project.
(3)
Alternate minimum control requirements may be adopted subject to
Administration approval. The Administration shall require a
demonstration that alternative requirements will implement ESD to the
MEP and control flood damages, accelerated stream erosion, water
quality, and sedimentation. Comprehensive watershed studies may also
be required.
B.
Stormwater management and development plans, where applicable,
shall be consistent with adopted and approved watershed management
plans or flood management plans as approved by the Maryland
Department of the Environment in accordance with the Flood Hazard
Management Act of 1976.
C.
ESD planning techniques and practices.
The following planning techniques shall be applied according to
the Design Manual to satisfy the applicable minimum control
requirements established in § 136-10 of this chapter:
(a) Preserving and protecting natural resources;
(b) Conserving natural drainage patterns;
(c) Minimizing impervious area;
(d) Reducing runoff volume;
Using ESD practices to maintain 100% of the annual
predevelopment groundwater recharge volume;
(e)
Using green roofs, permeable pavement, reinforced turf, and
other alternative surfaces;
(f)
(1)
A.
§ 136-10 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 136-11
112:328
(g) Limiting soil disturbance, mass grading, and compaction;
(h) Clustering development; and
(i) Any practices approved by the Administration.
The following ESD treatment practices shall be designed according
to the Design Manual to satisfy the applicable minimum control
requirements established in § 136-10 of this chapter:
(a) Disconnection of rooftop runoff;
(b) Disconnection of nonrooftop runoff;
(c) Sheet flow to conservation areas;
(d) Rainwater harvesting;
(e) Submerged gravel wetlands;
(f) Landscape infiltration;
(g) Infiltration berms;
(h) Dry wells;
(i) Microbioretention;
(j) Rain gardens;
(k) Swales;
(l) Enhanced filters; and
(m) Any practices approved by the Administration.
(2)
The use of ESD planning techniques and treatment practices
specified in this section shall not conflict with existing state or
City law. The City shall modify planning and zoning ordinances and
public works codes to eliminate any impediments to implementing
ESD to the MEP according to the Design Manual.
(3)
Structural stormwater management measures.
The following structural stormwater management practices shall
be designed according to the Design Manual to satisfy the
applicable minimum control requirements established in § 136-10
of this chapter:
(a) Stormwater management ponds;
(b) Stormwater management wetlands;
(c) Stormwater management infiltration;
(d) Stormwater management filtering systems; and
(1)
B.
§ 136-11 PLUMBING § 136-11
112:329
(e) Stormwater management open channel systems.
The performance criteria specified in the Design Manual with
regard to general feasibility, conveyance, pretreatment, treatment
and geometry, environment and landscaping, and maintenance
shall be considered when selecting structural stormwater
management practices.
(2)
Structural stormwater management practices shall be selected to
accommodate the unique hydrologic or geologic regions of the City.
(3)
All barrel pipes and risers in ponds shall be concrete pipe with a
minimum fifteen-inch diameter. Inlet and outlet structures shall be
made of concrete with a metal inlet or grate.
(4)
A nonerosive flow velocity shall be provided at the principal
spillway.
(5)
All low-flow pipes shall have minimum twelve-inch-diameter
orifices, which shall be located inside the outlet structure.
(6)
All publicly maintained surface stormwater management facilities
shall be designed with slopes no steeper than 4:1.
(7)
All publicly maintained facilities shall have an in-fee access from
the bottom of the facility to a public right-of-way, unless an
alternative access is approved by the Department. This access shall
be a minimum of 20 feet in width, containing a twelve-foot-wide
paved access road constructed to minimum use-in-common drive
standards. The access road shall have a maximum slope of 17%
with a maximum cross slope of 3% and a maximum side slope of
4:1.
(8)
In areas of public maintenance, no loose riprap may be left
permanently exposed.
(9)
Concentrated flows shall enter surface stormwater management
facilities through drop structures and pipes. Riprap inflow ditches
down facility slopes may not be allowed.
(10)
Pipes shall outfall at the facility bottom. End treatment shall be
headwalls.
(11)
(12)All pipe outfalls shall have underdrained plunge pools or forebays.
All surface stormwater management facilities shall be
underdrained.
(13)
Structural stormwater management practices for multi-lot
residential developments shall be deeded to the City in fee simple.
For all other developments containing structural measures, the
measures shall be protected by easement recorded in the Land
Records of Carroll County and remain unaltered by subsequent
(14)
§ 136-11 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 136-11
112:330
§ 136-12. Specific design criteria.
The basic design criteria, methodologies, and construction specifications,
subject to the approval of the Department and the Administration, shall be
in accordance with the Design Manual.
§ 136-13. Review and approval of plans.
property owners. Prior approval shall be obtained from the
Department before structural stormwater measures are altered.
ESD planning techniques and treatment practices and structural
stormwater management measures used to satisfy the minimum
requirements in § 136-10 of this chapter must be recorded in the Land
Records of Carroll County and remain unaltered by subsequent
property owners. Prior written approval from the Department shall be
obtained before any stormwater management practice is altered.
C.
Alternative ESD planning techniques and treatment practices and
structural stormwater measures may be used for new development
runoff control if they meet the performance criteria established in
the Design Manual and all subsequent revisions and are approved by
the Administration. Practices used for redevelopment projects shall be
approved by the Department.
D.
For the purposes of modifying the minimum control requirements or
design criteria, the owner/developer shall submit to the Department
an analysis of the impacts of stormwater flows downstream in the
watershed. The analysis shall include hydrologic and hydraulic
calculations necessary to determine the impact of hydrograph timing
modifications of the proposed development upon a dam, highway,
structure, or natural point of restricted stream flow. The point of
investigation is to be established with the concurrence of the
Department, downstream of the first downstream tributary whose
drainage area equals or exceeds the contributing area to the project or
stormwater management facility.
E.
For any proposed development, the owner/developer shall submit a
stormwater management plan or waiver application to the Department
for review and approval. At a minimum, plans shall be submitted for the
concept, preliminary and final stormwater management construction
phases of project design. Each plan submittal shall include the
minimum content specified in § 136-14 of this chapter and meet the
requirements of the Design Manual and §§ 136-10 and 136-11 of this
chapter.
A.
The Department shall perform a comprehensive review of the
stormwater management plans for each phase of site design.
Coordinated comments will be provided for each plan phase that reflect
input from all appropriate agencies, including but not limited to the
Soil Conservation District (SCD) and the Westminster Department of
B.
§ 136-11 PLUMBING § 136-13
112:331
§ 136-14. Contents and submission of stormwater management
plans.
Planning, Zoning, and Development. All comments from those agencies
shall be addressed and approval received at each phase of project
design before subsequent submissions.
The developer shall submit a stormwater management plan that meet
the design requirements of this chapter. The plan shall include a
concept plan that provides sufficient information for an initial
assessment of the proposed project and whether stormwater
management can be provided according to this chapter and the Design
Manual and the supplement. Plans submitted for concept approval shall
include but are not limited to:
A map, at a scale specified by the Department, showing site
location, existing natural features, water and other sensitive
resources, topography, and natural drainage patterns;
(1)
The anticipated location of all proposed impervious areas,
buildings, roadways, parking, sidewalks, utilities, and other site
improvements;
(2)
The location of the proposed limit of disturbance, erodible soils,
steep slopes, and areas to be protected during construction;
(3)
Preliminary estimates of stormwater management requirements,
the selection and location of ESD practices to be used, and the
location of all points of discharge from the site;
(4)
A narrative that supports the concept design and describes how
ESD will be implemented to the MEP; and
(5)
(6) Any other information required by the Department.
A.
Following concept plan approval by the Department, the owner/
developer shall submit site development (preliminary) plans that reflect
comments received during the previous review phase. Plans submitted
for site development (preliminary) approval shall be of sufficient detail
to allow site development to be reviewed and shall include but are not
limited to:
(1) All information provided during the concept plan review phase;
Final site layout, exact impervious area locations and acreages,
proposed topography, delineated drainage areas at all points of
discharge from the site, and stormwater volume computations for
ESD practices and quantity control structures;
(2)
A proposed erosion and sediment control plan that contains the
construction sequence, any phasing necessary to limit earth
disturbances and impacts to natural resources, and an overlay plan
(3)
B.
§ 136-13 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 136-14
112:332
showing the types and locations of ESD and erosion and sediment
control practices to be used;
A narrative that supports the site development design, describes
how ESD will be used to meet the minimum control requirements,
and justifies any proposed structural stormwater management
measure;
(4)
Geotechnical investigations, including soil maps, borings, sitespecific
recommendations, and any additional information
necessary for the final stormwater management design; and
(5)
(6) Any other information required by the Department.
Following site development approval by the Department, the owner/
developer shall submit final erosion and sediment control and
stormwater management plans that reflect the comments received
during the previous review phase. Plans submitted for final approval
shall be of sufficient detail to allow all approvals and permits to be
issued according to the following:
Final erosion and sediment control plans shall be submitted
according to COMAR 26.17.01.05; and
(1)
Final stormwater management plans shall be submitted for
approval in the form of construction drawings and be accompanied
by a report that includes sufficient information to evaluate the
effectiveness of the proposed runoff control design.
(2)
C.
Reports submitted for final stormwater management plan approval
shall include but are not limited to:
Drainage area maps depicting predevelopment and postdevelopment
runoff flow path segmentation and land use;
(1)
Hydrologic computations of the applicable ESD and unified sizing
criteria according to the Design Manual for all points of discharge
from the site;
(2)
Hydraulic and structural computations for all ESD practices and
structural stormwater management measures to be used;
(3)
A narrative that supports the final stormwater management design;
and
(4)
(5) Any other information required by the Department.
D.
Construction drawings submitted for final stormwater management
plan approval shall include but are not limited to:
(1) A vicinity map;
E.
§ 136-14 PLUMBING § 136-14
112:333
§ 136-15. Preparation of stormwater management plans.
Existing and proposed topography and proposed drainage areas,
including areas necessary to determine downstream analysis for
proposed stormwater management facilities;
(2)
Any proposed improvements, including location of buildings or
other structures, impervious surfaces, storm drainage facilities,
and all grading;
(3)
(4) The location of existing and proposed structures and utilities;
(5) Any easements and rights-of-way;
The delineation, if applicable, of the one-hundred-year floodplain
and any on-site wetlands;
(6)
Structural and construction details, including representative cross
sections for all components of the proposed drainage system or
systems, and stormwater management facilities;
(7)
(8) All necessary construction specifications;
(9) A sequence of construction;
Data for total site area, disturbed area, new impervious area, and
total impervious area;
(10)
A table showing the ESD and unified sizing criteria volumes
required in the Design Manual;
(11)
A table of materials to be used for stormwater management facility
planting;
(12)
(13)All soil boring logs and locations;
(14)An inspection and maintenance schedule;
Certification by the owner/developer that all stormwater
management construction will be done according to this plan;
(15)
An as-built certification signature block to be executed after project
completion; and
(16)
(17)Any other information required by the Department.
If a stormwater management plan involves direction of some or all
runoff off of the site, it is the responsibility of the developer to obtain
from adjacent property owners any easements or other necessary
property interests concerning flowage of water. Approval of a
stormwater management plan does not create or affect any right to
direct runoff onto adjacent property without that property owner's
permission.
F.
§ 136-14 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 136-15
112:334
§ 136-16. Permit requirements.
§ 136-17. Fees.
Nonrefundable review fees will be collected for the cost of plan review,
administration, and management of the permitting process, for all projects
subject to this chapter and for inspection of all projects subject to this
The design of stormwater management plans shall be prepared by a
land surveyor or engineer licensed in the State of Maryland.
A.
If a stormwater BMP requires a dam safety permit from the
Administration or small pond approval from the SCD, the design shall
be prepared by an engineer.
B.
A grading or building permit may not be issued for any parcel or lot
unless final sediment control and stormwater management plans have
been approved as meeting all of the requirements of the Design Manual
and this chapter or exempted by the Department. Where appropriate, a
building permit may not be issued without:
Either:
For all stormwater management facilities other than facilities
serving multiple lots in residential subdivisions, recorded
easements for the stormwater management facility and
recorded easements to provide adequate access for inspection
and maintenance from a public right-of-way; or
(a)
For stormwater management facilities serving multiple lots
in residential subdivisions, a dedication to public use of the
parcel upon which such facilities are located and an agreement
to execute a deed transferring fee-simple ownership of such
parcel and facilities to the City upon satisfactory completion of
construction of such facilities in accordance with the Design
Manual and acceptance of the construction by the City and
before any grading or building permit may be issued for any lot
served by the facilities; and
(b)
(1)
A recorded stormwater management maintenance agreement as
described in § 136-25 of this chapter; and
(2)
(3) A performance bond as described in § 136-20 of this chapter.
A.
If applicable, a building permit may not be issued without permission
from adjacent property owners to discharge outside of existing
drainage courses. These discharge ways shall be protected by easement
and recorded in the Land Records of Carroll County.
B.
If applicable, a building permit may not be issued without a dam breach
inundation area protection easement which covers on- and off-site areas
and is recorded in the Land Records of Carroll County.
C.
§ 136-15 PLUMBING § 136-17
112:335
chapter, as well as inspection and maintenance of City-owned facilities. A
permit fee schedule shall be established by the City based upon the relative
complexity of the project and long-term maintenance obligations and may
be amended from time to time.
§ 136-18. Permit suspension and revocation.
Any grading or building permit issued by the Department may be suspended
or revoked after written notice is given to the permittee for any of the
following reasons:
§ 136-19. Permit conditions.
In granting an approval for any phase of site development, the Department
may impose such conditions that it deems necessary to ensure compliance
with the provisions of this chapter and the preservation of public health and
safety.
§ 136-20. Bond or other security; contents; release.
The Department shall require from the applicant a surety or cash bond,
irrevocable letter of credit or other means of security acceptable to the
Department prior to the issuance of any building and/or grading permit
for construction of a development requiring stormwater management. The
amount of security shall not be less than the total estimated construction
cost of all stormwater management facilities. The bond required in this
section shall include provisions relative to forfeiture for failure to complete
work specified in the approved stormwater management plan, compliance
with all of the provisions of this chapter and other applicable laws and
regulations and any time limitations. The bond shall not be fully released
without a final inspection of completed work by the Department or its
authorized agent, submission of as-built plans and a certification of
completion by the Department that all stormwater facilities comply with the
approved plan and the provisions of this chapter. A procedure may be used
to release parts of the bond held by the Department after various stages
of construction have been completed and accepted by the Department.
The procedures used for partially releasing performance bonds must be
Any violation(s) of the conditions of the stormwater management plan
approval;
A.
Changes in site runoff characteristics upon which an approval or waiver
was granted;
B.
C. Construction is not in accordance with the approved plan;
Noncompliance with a correction notice(s) or stop-work order(s) issued
for the construction of the stormwater management practice; or
D.
Immediate danger exists in a downstream area in the opinion of the
Department.
E.
§ 136-17 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 136-20
112:336
specified by the Department in writing prior to stormwater management
plan approval.
§ 136-21. Required plan certifications.
All plans submitted for approval pursuant to this chapter shall bear the
engineer's title block required by Title 9, Subtitle 23, Chapter 3, of the Code
of Maryland Regulations and the certifications required by the supplement.
§ 136-22. Inspection schedule and reports.
§ 136-23. Inspection requirements during construction; violations;
enforcement.
The developer shall notify the Department at least 48 hours before
commencing any work in conjunction with site development or the
stormwater management plan and upon completion of the project.
A.
Regular inspections shall be made and documented for each ESD
planning technique and practice, at the stages of construction specified
in the Design Manual, by the Department, its authorized
representative, or certified by an engineer or land surveyor, as
appropriate. At a minimum, all ESD and other nonstructural practices
shall be inspected upon completion of final grading, the establishment
of permanent stabilization, and before issuance of use and occupancy
approval.
B.
Written inspection reports shall include:
(1) The date and location of the inspection;
Whether construction was in compliance with the approved
stormwater management plan;
(2)
(3) Any variations from the approved construction specifications; and
(4) Any violations that exist.
C.
The owner/developer and on-site personnel shall be notified in writing
when violations are observed. Written notification shall describe the
nature of the violation and the required corrective action.
D.
No work shall proceed on the next phase of development until an
engineer or land surveyor, as appropriate, has inspected and approved
the work previously completed. The developer or property owner shall
furnish the City with the results of the inspection reports as soon as
possible after completion of each required inspection, and no further
permits or approvals shall be issued until such reports have been
provided to the City.
E.
At a minimum, regular inspections shall be made and documented at
the following specified stages of construction:
A.
§ 136-20 PLUMBING § 136-23
112:337
For ponds:
Upon completion of excavation to subfoundation and, when
required, installation of structural supports or reinforcement
for structures, including but not limited to:
[1] Core trenches for structural embankments;
Inlet and outlet structures, anti-seep collars or
diaphragms, and watertight connectors on pipes; and
[2]
[3] Trenches for enclosed storm drainage facilities.
(a)
During placement of structural fill, concrete, and installation
of piping and catch basins;
(b)
(c) During backfill of foundations and trenches;
(d) During embankment construction; and
Upon completion of final grading and establishment of
permanent stabilization.
(e)
(1)
For wetlands: at the stages specified for pond construction in
§ 136-23A(1) of this section, during and after wetland reservoir
area planting, and during the second growing season to verify a
vegetation survival rate of at least 50%.
(2)
For infiltration trenches:
(a) During excavation to subgrade;
During placement and backfill of underdrain systems and
observation wells;
(b)
(c) During placement of geotextiles and all filter media;
During construction of appurtenant conveyance systems such
as diversion structures, prefilters and filters, inlets, outlets,
and flow-distribution structures; and
(d)
Upon completion of final grading and establishment of
permanent stabilization.
(e)
(3)
For infiltration basins:
At the stages specified for pond construction in § 136-23A(1);
and
(a)
(b) During placement and backfill of underdrain systems.
(4)
For filtering systems:
(a) During excavation to subgrade;
(b) During placement and backfill of underdrain systems;
(5)
§ 136-23 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 136-23
112:338
(c) During placement of geotextiles and all filter media;
During construction of appurtenant conveyance systems, such
as flow-diversion structures, prefilters and filters, inlets,
outlets, orifices, and flow-distribution structures; and
(d)
Upon completion of final grading and establishment of
permanent stabilization.
(e)
For open channel systems:
(a) During excavation to subgrade;
During placement and backfill of underdrain systems for dry
swales;
(b)
(c) During installation of diaphragms, check dams, or weirs; and
Upon completion of final grading and establishment of
permanent stabilization.
(d)
(6)
The Department may, for enforcement purposes, use any one or a
combination of the following actions:
A notice of violation shall be issued specifying the need for
corrective action if stormwater management plan noncompliance is
identified;
(1)
A stop-work order shall be issued for the site by the Department if
a violation persists;
(2)
Bonds or securities shall be withheld or the case may be referred
for legal action if reasonable efforts to correct the violation have
not been undertaken; or
(3)
In addition to any other sanctions, a civil action or criminal
prosecution may be brought against any person in violation of
the Stormwater Management Subtitle, the Design Manual, or this
chapter.
(4)
B.
Any step in the enforcement process may be taken at any time,
depending on the severity of the violation.
C.
Within 30 days of completion of construction, as-built plan certification
shall be submitted by either a professional engineer or professional
land surveyor licensed in the State of Maryland to ensure that ESD
planning techniques, treatment practices, and structural stormwater
management measures and conveyance systems comply with the
specifications contained in the approved plans. At a minimum, as-built
certification shall include a set of drawings comparing the approved
stormwater management plan with what was constructed. The
Department may require additional information as it determines
necessary to comply with this chapter.
D.
§ 136-23 PLUMBING § 136-23
112:339
§ 136-24. Maintenance inspections; correction of deficiencies.
The Department shall submit notice of construction completion to the
Administration on a form supplied by the Administration for each
structural stormwater management practice within 45 days of
construction completion. The type, number, total drainage area, and
total impervious area treated by all ESD techniques and practices
shall be reported to the Administration on a site-by-site basis. If BMPs
requiring SCD approval are constructed, notice of construction
completion shall also be submitted to the appropriate SCD.
E.
The Department shall ensure that preventative maintenance is
performed by inspecting all ESD treatment systems and structural
stormwater management measures. Inspection shall occur during the
first year of operation and at least once every three years thereafter.
In addition, a maintenance agreement between the owner and the
Department shall be executed for privately-owned ESD treatment
systems and structural stormwater management measures as described
in § 136-25 of this chapter.
A.
Inspection reports shall be maintained by the Department for all ESD
treatment practices and structural stormwater management measures.
B.
Inspection reports for ESD treatment systems and structural
stormwater management measures shall include the following:
(1) The date of inspection;
(2) The name of the inspector;
An assessment of the quality of the stormwater management
system related to ESD treatment practice efficiency and the control
of runoff to the MEP;
(3)
The condition of:
(a) Vegetation or filter media;
(b) Fences or other safety devices;
(c) Spillways, valves, or other control structures;
(d) Embankments, slopes, and safety benches;
(e) Reservoir or treatment areas;
(f) Inlet and outlet channels or structures;
(g) Underground drainage;
Sediment and debris accumulation in storage and forebay
areas;
(h)
(i) Any nonstructural practices, to the extent practicable; and
(4)
C.
§ 136-23 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 136-24
112:340
§ 136-25. Inspection and maintenance agreement; maintenance
bond.
Any other item that could affect the proper function of the
stormwater management system.
(j)
(5) A description of needed maintenance.
Upon notifying an owner of the inspection results, the owner shall
have 30 days, or other time frame mutually agreed to between the
Department and the owner, to correct the deficiencies discovered. The
Department shall conduct a subsequent inspection to ensure
completion of the repairs.
D.
If repairs are not properly undertaken and completed, enforcement
procedures following § 136-25C of this chapter shall be followed by the
Department.
E.
If, after an inspection by the Department, the condition of a stormwater
management facility is determined to present an immediate danger
to public health or safety because of an unsafe condition, improper
construction, or poor maintenance, the Department shall take such
action as may be necessary to protect the public and make the facility
safe. Any cost incurred by the Department shall be assessed against the
owner(s), as provided in § 136-25C of this chapter.
F.
Prior to the issuance of any building permit for which stormwater
management is required, the Department shall require the applicant
or owner to execute an inspection and maintenance agreement binding
on all subsequent owners of land served by a private stormwater
management facility. Such agreement shall provide for access to the
facility at reasonable times for regular inspections by the Department
or its authorized representative to ensure that the facility is maintained
in proper working condition to meet design standards.
A.
The agreement shall be recorded by the applicant or owner in the Land
Records of Carroll County.
B.
The agreement shall also provide that, if, after notice by the
Department to correct a violation requiring maintenance work,
satisfactory corrections are not made by the owner(s) within a
reasonable period of time (30 days maximum), the Department may
perform all necessary work to place the facility in proper working
condition. The owner(s) of the facility shall be assessed the cost of the
work and any penalties. This may be accomplished by placing a lien
on the property, which may be placed on the tax bill and collected as
ordinary taxes.
C.
For stormwater management facilities required by this chapter to be
transferred to the City upon completion, the agreement shall also
provide for a maintenance bond to assure proper maintenance prior to
acceptance. The maintenance bond shall be in an amount prescribed
D.
§ 136-24 PLUMBING § 136-25
112:341
§ 136-26. Maintenance responsibility.
by the Department and shall be posted at the time of completion of
such stormwater management facility. In the event that the City incurs
any cost or expense with regard to maintenance of such stormwater
management facility as a result of the failure of the developer to so
maintain such facility, all such costs and expenses shall be repaid to the
City prior to the City accepting such stormwater management facility.
In addition, the City may deny the issuing of any building permits and
use and occupancy permits within the development upon default of the
developer under this subsection.
The owner of a property that contains private stormwater management
facilities installed pursuant to this chapter, or any other person or
agent in control of such property, shall maintain in good condition and
promptly repair and restore all ESD practices, grade surfaces, walls,
drains, dams and structures, vegetation, erosion and sediment control
measures, and other protective devices in perpetuity. Such repairs or
restoration and maintenance shall be in accordance with previously
approved or newly submitted plans.
A.
A maintenance schedule shall be developed for the life of any privately
owned structural stormwater management facility or system of ESD
practices and shall state the maintenance to be completed, the time
period for completion, and the responsible party that will perform
the maintenance. This maintenance schedule shall be printed on the
approved stormwater management plan.
B.
Stormwater management facilities serving multiple lots in residential
subdivisions shall be accepted by the City in accordance with the
following procedures and requirements:
Facilities may be accepted one year after all of the houses in the
development are completed but no sooner than two years after
completion of the stormwater management facilities. At the end of
this interim period and prior to acceptance, the Department shall
certify that the facilities remain in proper operating condition and
meet all applicable governmental requirements in effect at the time
of initial construction.
(1)
A deed to the Mayor and Common Council of Westminster, its
successors and assigns, shall be executed and delivered to the City,
which shall convey the stormwater management facilities and an
adequate access road to the City in fee simple (or by such easement
acceptable to the City) and shall include a perpetual easement
or right-of-way for sufficient access to and from the facilities and
a state, county or city street or road. The deed shall include a
sufficient maintenance and access area surrounding the structures
and facilities as determined by the Department.
(2)
C.
§ 136-25 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 136-26
112:342
§ 136-27. Notice of violation; stop-work orders; denial of permits.
§ 136-28. Violations and penalties; forms of relief.
Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a
fine of not more than $5,000 or imprisonment not exceeding one year, or
both, for each and every violation, with costs imposed in the discretion of
the court and not to exceed $50,000. Each day that the violation continues
shall be a separate offense. In addition thereto, the Mayor and Common
The property owner shall be responsible for all maintenance of
stormwater management facilities as required by the City prior to
acceptance by the City.
(3)
Prior to final acceptance by the City of the stormwater
management facility and appurtenant easements as set forth in
this subsection, the property owner shall pay the inspection and
maintenance fee required by § 136-17 of this chapter. Until the fee
is paid, no building permits or use and occupancy permits shall
be issued for the last 20% of the total number of residential lots
shown on the subdivision plat of the area served by the particular
stormwater management facility.
(4)
When the Department determines that a violation of the approved
stormwater management plan has occurred, it shall notify the
developer, in writing, of the violation, describe the required corrective
action and specify the time period in which to have the violation
corrected.
A.
If the violation persists after the date specified for corrective action in
the notice of violation, the Department shall stop work on the site. The
Department shall determine the extent to which work must be stopped,
which may include all work on the site except that work necessary to
correct the violation.
B.
If reasonable efforts to correct the violation are not undertaken by the
developer, the Department shall refer the violation for legal action. The
City may also perform the remedial work and make claim against the
bond for its expenses and costs.
C.
The City may deny the issuance of any permits for any project or
property to an applicant when it determines that the applicant is not
in compliance with the provisions of any building or grading permit
or approved stormwater management or erosion and sediment control
plan, or has failed to comply with any other provisions of this chapter.
D.
If a person is working without stormwater management approval, the
Department shall stop work on the site except activity necessary to
provide erosion and sediment control. The stop-work order shall remain
in effect until the approval is obtained.
E.
§ 136-26 PLUMBING § 136-28
112:343
Council may institute injunctive, mandamus or other appropriate action
or proceedings at law or equity for the enforcement of this chapter or to
correct violations of this chapter, and any court of competent jurisdiction
shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent,
injunctions or mandamus or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
§ 136-29. Right to appeal; filing.
Any person aggrieved by the action of any official charged with the
enforcement of this chapter, as the result of the disapproval of a properly
filed application for a permit, the issuance of a written notice of violation,
or an alleged failure to properly enforce this chapter in regard to a specific
application, shall have the right to appeal the action to the Circuit Court for
Carroll County. Such should be taken according to the Maryland Rules of
Procedure as set forth in Title 7, Chapter 200.
Chapter 139
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Charter provisions — See §§ 34 through 39 of
the City Charter.
Public Works Director — See Ch. 29, Art. VII
Trees — See Ch. 148.
Zoning and subdivision of land — See Ch. 164.
Fees — See Ch. A175.
§ 136-28 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 136-29
112:344
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 139-1. Powers and duties of Street Commissioner.
The Street Commissioner shall have the powers and perform the duties
prescribed for him by the City Charter, this Code and other ordinances and
as may, from time to time, be prescribed by the legislative body.
§ 139-2. Specifications and standards. [Amended 12-6-2007 by Ord.
No. 773]
The Street Commissioner shall prepare specifications and standards, not
inconsistent with law, the City Charter, this Code or other ordinances, for
the grading, construction, maintenance and repair of streets, sidewalks,
curbs and gutters and shall submit such specifications and standards to the
legislative body. Upon approval thereof by the legislative body and filing
thereof in the office of the Public Works Director, such specifications and
standards shall have the effect of rules and regulations of the legislative
body. The Street Commissioner may, from time to time, recommend
amendments thereof to the legislative body; and such amendments, when
approved by the legislative body and placed on file in the office of the Public
Works Director, shall likewise have the effect of rules and regulations of the
legislative body.
§ 139-3. Obstructions prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to stand, sit, lounge or be or place any
chairs, wood, coal or other obstacles on any sidewalks or streets in the
City so as to block up or bar such sidewalks or streets unnecessarily or
materially hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage thereof by
all persons or vehicles having occasion to pass or park thereon.
§ 139-4. Keeping sidewalks and gutters clean.
Owners and occupants of premises fronting upon any street with a
paved sidewalk shall keep such sidewalk free and clean of all filth, dirt,
earth or any other obstruction of any kind whatsoever at all times of the
year and, during the months of May, June, July, August and September,
clear and clean of all grass or any other foreign substances growing
therein.
A.
Owners and occupants of premises fronting upon any street with paved
sidewalks shall remove snow and ice from the traveled portions of the
sidewalk to a width of at least 30 inches within 24 hours after any snow
or ice ceases to fall.
B.
It shall be unlawful to remove or deposit such obstructions, filth, dirt,
earth, snow, ice and grass as set forth above in Subsections A and B
in such a manner that results in the obstruction or impediment of the
C.
§ 139-1 PLUMBING § 139-4
112:345
§ 139-5. Use of sidewalks by merchants and contractors.
§ 139-6. Level of fixtures in sidewalks.
No owner or occupant of any premises shall install or maintain or suffer
to be installed or maintained upon any sidewalk in front of his premises
any water box, pipe or other fixture which extends above the surface of
such sidewalk, and all such fixtures shall be flush with the surface of the
sidewalk, provided that this section shall not apply to fire hydrants, parking
meters or other fixtures installed or maintained by any governmental
authority.
natural drainage flow of water through any gutters or to discharge or
place such materials on the traveled portion of any public streets.
Sections 139-3 and 139-4 shall not be construed to prohibit the Director
of Public Works, upon application therefor, from granting permits to
merchants to use portions of the sidewalks in front of their places of
business for the display of merchandise or for temporary advertising
displays or to construction contractors to use portions of streets and
sidewalks for the storage of materials or for necessary work relating
to construction projects. The applicant shall also pay the fee provided
in the General Fee Ordinance.56 The Director of Public Works is
authorized to establish policies for the implementation of this
subsection subject to approval by resolution of the Mayor and Common
Council. [Amended 10-1-1993 by Ord. No. 582; 12-6-2007 by Ord.
No. 773; 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 791]
A.
No permit shall authorize any interruption or impediment to the flow of
water in any gutter or drain. Such permits shall be for not longer than
30 days, but they may be renewed at the discretion of the Public Works
Director. No such permit for the display of merchandise shall authorize
the use of more than four feet of the width of any sidewalk, and all
such permits for the storage of construction materials or for work on
a construction project shall contain a condition that ample space be
provided for the passage of pedestrians and vehicular traffic and that
adequate safeguards be installed and maintained for the protection of
persons and property, as may be specified by the Public Works Director.
[Amended 12-6-2007 by Ord. No. 773]
B.
All merchants and/or contractors shall keep all streets and pavements
free and clean of all debris, filth, dirt, earth, stones, snow, ice or
any other obstruction of any kind whatsoever which accumulates or is
deposited on the streets or pavements as a result of the merchants' and/
or contractors' activities, vehicles, equipment or machinery.
C.
56.Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
§ 139-4 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 139-7
112:346
§ 139-7. Tree trimming.
The owners and occupants of premises fronting on any of the streets of
the City shall trim and keep trimmed the trees on such lots and the trees
growing along the curbs of the pavement of such lots in such manner that
the boughs of such trees shall not interfere with lamps or lampposts or
obstruct, delay or hinder the free passage of any pedestrian or vehicular
traffic along any street. It shall be the duty of the Street Commissioner to
notify all persons who may refuse or neglect to comply with this section
to so comply within five days, and, in case of continued neglect or failure
to comply at the end of five days from such notification, the Street
Commissioner shall then trim or cause to be trimmed or cropped or cut
down said trees in such manner that the boughs thereof will no longer
obstruct, hinder or delay any pedestrian or vehicular traffic or interfere with
lamps or lampposts as aforesaid; and the owner or person in charge of such
lot whereon or before which said trees grow shall forfeit and pay to the
City the cost of trimming said trees, and such cost shall be a lien upon the
property upon which such trees are located, to be collected in the same
manner as city taxes are collected, and the payment thereof shall not bar
prosecution for violation of this section.
§ 139-8. Prohibited acts.
No person shall push, drive or pull any wheelbarrow, cart, truck or
other wagon or vehicle along, on or over any pavement or sidewalk
of the City except in cases of necessity and then only across such
pavements or sidewalks at places maintained therefor, provided that
this section shall not apply to vehicles or carriages used for the carriage
or transportation of infants or young children or vehicles used by small
children under seven years of age in play or to wheelchairs for persons
who are crippled or infirm.
A.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cast or deposit upon any street,
sidewalk or gutter any broken glass, nails, tacks or other substances
liable to injure the feet of animals or damage the pneumatic tires of
vehicles.
B.
It shall be unlawful for any person to tear down, remove or interfere
with any sign, barrier, rope or other object placed on or across any
street, lane or alley within the City which shows or is intended to show
that a portion of any such street, lane or alley is closed and not open to
public travel or traffic.
C.
No person, without authority from the Street Commissioner, shall
willfully tear up or deface any street, sidewalk, curb or gutter or move
or carry away any stone, dirt or other substance therefrom.
D.
§ 139-7 PLUMBING § 139-8
112:347

ARTICLE II
Streets
§ 139-9. Initiation of project.
Whenever the legislative body, of its own volition, shall propose to lay out,
open, widen or extend any street in the City or whenever any responsible
citizen thereof or person holding real or leasehold property therein shall
apply to the legislative body by petition for the same purpose, the legislative
body shall cause notice thereof to be published for at least two weeks in
one or more of the newspapers published in the City, in which shall be
stated the object proposed, where the same is to be located, its extent,
what and whose property is likely to be affected thereby, also the time and
place fixed for the hearing and determination of the matter and warning
all persons interested who may desire to oppose the project to file their
objection, in writing, with the City Clerk on or before the day fixed for
such hearing; and at the time appointed, the legislative body shall take the
whole subject matter into consideration and from the petition, objections
and such other testimony as may be produced before them, shall determine
whether, in its judgment, the public welfare or convenience requires that
such street or alley should be laid out, opened, widened or extended as
proposed. And should any such petition be rejected, the petitioners therein
shall be required to pay the costs incurred thereby.
§ 139-10. Apportionment of costs.
Should the legislative body decide that the public convenience or welfare
requires that any street or alley shall be laid out, opened, widened or
extended as provided in § 139-9, they shall immediately determine whether
the damages and expenses thereof shall be levied upon the entire
assessable property of the City and paid out of the City treasury or shall
be paid by the owners of property specially benefited thereby or whether
such damages and expenses shall be paid in part by the City and in part by
the owners of property specially benefited, and the proportion to be paid
by either; and they shall also cause an accurate survey and plat to be made
by a competent surveyor of the ground and premises proposed to be taken
to lay out, open, widen or extend the street or alley, on which plat shall be
located and shown the particular property and quantity thereof, included
in the proposed improvement belonging to each owner of said ground and
premises.
§ 139-9 PLUMBING § 139-10
112:349

ARTICLE III
Sidewalks and Curbs
§ 139-11. Duty of property owners.
§ 139-12. Specifications and standards.
Sidewalks and curbs shall be constructed, maintained and repaired in
conformity with the specifications and standards prescribed by the Street
Commissioner and approved by the legislative body, as provided in § 139-2.
§ 139-13. Notice to property owners.
Whenever, in the judgment of the legislative body, it may be necessary to fill
up or dig down to the proper grade or pave or repair or relay the sidewalks
or curbs in front of any lot or premises fronting upon any street within
the City, the legislative body shall pass an order or resolution requiring the
owner of any such lot or premises to fill up or dig down to the proper grade
or pave or repair or relay the sidewalk or curb within 30 days from the
time when such owner shall have been notified of such order by the Street
Commissioner, such notice to be served upon any lot owner residing within
the City, but in the event of any such lot owner being a nonresident of the
City, then the notice may be served personally or the Street Commissioner
shall publish it in some newspaper published in the City not less than four
consecutive times, and the notice of 30 days to be reckoned from the second
publication; if any owner of any such lot or premises fronting on any street
in the City shall neglect to fill up, dig down, pave or repair or relay the
sidewalk or curb within 30 days when notice shall have been given as
aforesaid, the legislative body may immediately thereafter direct the Street
Commissioner to cause the work to be done at the expense of the owner
of said lot, which expense, together with an addition thereto of 10% for
the expense of collection, shall be a lien on such property until paid and
shall be collected in the same manner that ordinary taxes are collected or
in the same manner as other debts of like amount are recovered pursuant
Each owner, and a tenant for 99 years or for 99 years renewable forever
or the executor or administrator of such tenant or the guardian of
an infant owner or a mortgagor in possession shall be deemed and
taken as such owner, of a lot within the City and fronting on any street
shall make or cause to be made a sidewalk and curb in front of such
lot or premises in conformity with the grade and curbline as shall be
established by the Street Commissioner. Such sidewalks and curbs shall
be made of such material and in such manner as the legislative body
shall by resolution prescribe, and it shall be the duty of such owner to
keep such sidewalk and curb in good and substantial repair.
A.
Before any owner of any lot or premises fronting upon any street within
the City process to pave or repair any sidewalk or curb in front of any
such lot or premises, he shall first apply to the Street Commissioner, in
writing, for the grade and curbline of such sidewalk or curb.
B.
§ 139-11 PLUMBING § 139-13
112:351
to state law, provided that the additional 10% for the expense of collection
hereinbefore specified shall not be charged except in cases wherein the City
is obliged to resort to legal proceedings to make such collection.
§ 139-13 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 139-13
112:352
ARTICLE IV
Closing Streets
§ 139-14. Petition to close. [Added 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 791]
Any citizen of the City may apply by petition to the legislative body for the
closing of any street, alley or avenue in the City, in whole or in part, but
before filing such application the citizen shall give 30 days’ notice thereof
in at least one newspaper published in the City. The citizen shall also pay to
the City a fee as provided in the General Fee Ordinance.57
§ 139-15. Action on petition.
Upon receipt of a citizen's petition to close, in whole or in part, any street,
alley or avenue in the City, the legislative body shall take into consideration
the reasons contained in the petition and in any counterpetition which may
be filed and such other testimony as may come before it and determine the
case as, in its opinion, shall seem right and proper.
§ 139-16. Examiners.
§ 139-17. Apportionment of costs.
The legislative body shall determine whether the damages adjudged by
the examiners shall be paid by the persons petitioning for the closing of
any street, alley or avenue or any part thereof or levied on the City, or
may direct that the same be paid by the petitioners and the City, in such
proportion as it may deem just, and that damages shall in all cases be
paid to the respective parties or their guardians, agents or attorneys before
the alley, street or avenue shall be closed, and in case of the death of any
party concerned, after the valuation made by the examiners or a majority
Whenever the legislative body shall decide that it is expedient that
any street, alley or avenue, in whole or in part, be closed, it shall
appoint three examiners, who shall be freeholders of the City and not
interested in or holding lands adjacent to the street, alley or avenue
or part thereof proposed to be closed, who, before they proceed to act
as such, shall take an oath to execute the trust reposed in them by
the Commission to them issued faithfully and without favor, affection
or partiality and which oath shall be endorsed on the Commission and
returned therewith.
A.
The examiners or a majority of them shall value and ascertain the
damages that may be sustained by each person adjacent to the street,
alley or avenue or that part thereof sought to be closed, and they
shall make such ascertainment a part of their return to the legislative
body; and such ascertainment, with the rest of the proceedings of the
examiners, shall be subject to ratification, rejection or alteration by the
legislative body in such manner as in its judgment shall be just
B.
57.Editor’s Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
§ 139-14 PLUMBING § 139-17
112:353
of them, the damages finally adjudged to him shall be paid to his personal
representatives.
§ 139-18. Report by examiners.
The examiners appointed pursuant to this article or a majority of them, after
the giving of 30 days' notice thereof in at least one newspaper published in
the City, shall meet on the premises and proceed to examine and determine
whether the public convenience requires that the street, alley or avenue or
part thereof shall be closed, and they shall cause a plat of the street, alley or
avenue or that part thereof to be closed to be made out and shall return the
same, together with a full report of their proceedings under their hands, to
the legislative body, together with their recommendations as to the closing
or continuing open of the street, alley or avenue or part thereof in question
and the reasons upon which such recommendations are based.
§ 139-19. Action on report.
If objection is made to the return of the examiners at the meeting of the
legislative body next succeeding the meeting at which such return was
made, the legislative body may proceed to pass judgment thereon and
affirm or reject the same or order it to be amended in its discretion, or may
continue over the proceedings of its next meeting and so on from time to
time, so long as it may think proper.
§ 139-20. Compensation of examiners.
The examiners shall be entitled to such compensation for their services as
may be prescribed by the legislative body, which, with all charges arising
from the survey or attendance of witnesses or other expenses, shall be,
in the discretion of the legislative body, paid by the petitioners or levied,
collected and paid by the City or apportioned between the petitioners and
the City as the legislative body shall determine.
§ 139-17 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 139-20
112:354
ARTICLE V
Projections Over Sidewalks
§ 139-21. Permit required. [Added 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 791]
No outdoor display sign or display structure shall be erected over any
pavement or sidewalk area by attachment to, suspension from or support
on a building or structure until a permit for the same has been issued by
the Mayor and Common Council, for which permit there shall be paid a
fee as provided in the General Fee Ordinance.58 Each such application shall
be in writing, and the applicant shall state therein the location, legend,
size and material of the proposed sign, the method of attaching the sign
to the building or structure and the height of the sign from the pavement
or sidewalk. No permit shall be granted for the erection of a sign that
would extend over the pavement or sidewalk more than 12 inches from any
building or structure, nor shall any permit be granted for the erection of a
sign without its height, length, legend and design also being approved by
the Mayor and Common Council.
§ 139-22. Limit of projection; penalty for violations.
§ 139-23. Awnings. [Amended 12-6-2007 by Ord. No. 773;
11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 791]
No awning shall be erected over any pavement or sidewalk until a permit
to do so has been issued by the Public Works Director for which permit
there shall be a fee as provided in the General Fee Ordinance.59 Each
application for such a permit shall be in writing, and the applicant shall
state therein the location, Size and material of the proposed awning, the
method of attaching the awning to the building or structure and the height
of the awning from the pavement or sidewalk. No permit shall be granted
for the erection of an awning that would be within seven feet of a pavement
or sidewalk, nor shall any permit be granted for the erection of a permanent
type awning.
From and after September 1, 1972, it shall be unlawful for the owner
or occupant of any building or structure within the City to keep or
maintain any sign or advertising structure of any nature that shall
extend more than one foot over any pavement or sidewalk.
A.
From and after September 1, 1972, no person, firm or corporation shall
erect or maintain on any sidewalk or pavement any sign or advertising
structure or device of any nature.
B.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
section shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25, and each and
every day any such sign or structure shall remain in violation hereof
shall be construed to be a separate offense.
C.
58.Editor’s Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
59.Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
§ 139-21 PLUMBING § 139-24
112:355
§ 139-24. Nuisances.
All porches, porticoes or other elevated structures one or more stories high
over any pavement or sidewalk of the City in front of any building or lot and
which are supported by posts or pillars stationed inside of eight feet clear
from the front of the houses or lots on any street or which may have a roof
or cover less than eight feet clear from the sidewalk or pavement and all
doorsteps, stoops or porticoes in front of any dwelling or other houses in the
City fronting on any street thereof, which extend more than four feet over
the pavements or sidewalks of any street or which do not leave at least five
feet of such sidewalks for free and unobstructed passage in front thereof, be
and the same are hereby declared to be public nuisances; and the Planning
and Public Works Director, when so directed by the legislative body in
any case, shall give notice to the owners of any such porches, porticoes
or elevated structures aforesaid or of such doorsteps, stoops or porticoes
declared in this section to be nuisances or to the tenant of the premises to
which they are attached and belong for the removal of such posts, pillars,
porches, porticoes, doorsteps or other obstructions above mentioned or the
modification thereof in such manner as the legislative body may direct so
as to abate or remove the nuisance within 20 days from the delivery of
such notice; and if the same are not removed or modified in accordance
with such notice at the end of such 20 days, the owner of such building or
premises to which the nuisance is attached or who owns such nuisance shall
be subject to prosecution for violation of this section, and such nuisance
shall be subject to abatement by the Planning and Public Works Director at
the cost of the owner thereof and in case of his refusal to pay such costs
shall constitute a lien upon the property in favor of the City to be collected
in the same manner as city taxes are collected.
§ 139-24 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 139-24
112:356
ARTICLE VI
Excavations
[Amended 8-11-2003 by Ord. No. 705; 12-6-2007 by Ord. No. 773;
11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 791; 8-22-2016 by Ord. No. 868]
§ 139-25. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to dig up, underbore, install any facilities
or structure, or otherwise occupy any area within, above or below any part
of the public streets, sidewalks or other rights-of-way or public places of
the City for the purpose of putting down, laying or installing gas or water
pipes, cellar or other drains, fiber optic conduit or cabling, wireless facilities
or support structures, or any other utility or communications facilities,
without first having applied for and obtained a permit from the Public Works
Director for that purpose. Any such person shall pay to the City a permit
fee in the amount provided in the General Fee Ordinance.60 Nothing in this
article shall affect or limit the City's right to charge a separate fee for access
to or the use of City-owned property or facilities.
§ 139-26. Permit limitations.
Any permit granted pursuant to this article shall be in addition to, and not in
lieu of, any fee, rent, lease, license or franchise required to occupy, or place
facilities on or to attach to, City property, facilities or rights-of-way.
§ 139-27. Construction plan.
An applicant for a permit under this article shall provide information
specified by the Director, demonstrating the intended scope of the
installation and the expected placement of facilities addressed under this
article.
§ 139-27.1. Filling and restoring surface.
Each holder of a permit issued pursuant to this article shall, within the
period of time specified in such permit or, if no time limit is specified
therein, within 10 days after completion of the work authorized by the
permit, adequately refill with the same type of material as had been
removed or with other materials approved by the Public Works Director,
without disturbing or damaging existing City infrastructure, and restore the
surface of the place so excavated to as good condition as it was before such
excavation was made, and upon failure to do so within the time required,
such person shall be guilty of a municipal infraction subject to a fine of
$1,000.
§ 139-27.2. Bond or deposit.
60.Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
§ 139-25 PLUMBING § 139-27.2
112:357
§ 139-27.3. Safety measures during construction.
From the time any installation or excavation is begun pursuant to a permit
required by this article until completion of the work and restoration of the
area where the installation or excavation took place, the permit holder shall
be responsible for the installation and maintenance of adequate safeguards
to protect persons, animals and property from the dangers directly or
indirectly arising from all work done with respect to such installation or
excavation, and the following safeguards, among others, which may be
necessary or appropriate, shall be mandatory: warning signs, adequate
illumination at night and during other periods of darkness or poor visibility
and enclosure of the place of excavation or installation by barricades, rope
or other suitable fixtures.
§ 139-28.1. Wireless facilities and support structures.
Prior to the issuance of any permit required by this article, the Public
Works Director may require the applicant to give bond with corporate
surety, payable to the City, in such amount as may be considered by the
Public Works Director to be adequate to cover the costs and expenses
of filling the authorized excavation and restoration of the surface of the
place excavated to as good condition as it was prior to the excavation
and conditioned upon the applicant's compliance with § 139-27.1, but
in lieu of such bond, a cash deposit with the City Treasurer for such
purpose shall be acceptable.
A.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A of this section, in the
case of any application to excavate, underbore or otherwise disturb any
City street, sidewalk or right-of-way in which any City-owned utilities,
fiber, or conduit are located, the applicant shall post a bond in the
amount of 110% of the cost of the work that is the subject of the permit
to repair any direct, indirect, or incidental damage to City facilities or
infrastructure, to fill any excavation, and to restore the surface of the
disturbed area. The posting of such bond shall not excuse the permit
holder from liability for the entire cost of any such necessary repairs or
restoration and shall be in addition to permit fee imposed by the City
pursuant to § 139-25 of this article.
B.
The installation of wireless facilities and support structures in the
City rights-of-way shall require a permit under this article. No permit
shall be issued with respect to the installation of wireless facilities
and support structures in or on any City street, sidewalk, or right-ofway
unless and until the permit applicant and the City parties have
negotiated and executed a franchise or right-of-way use agreement
setting forth the terms and conditions, including providing for fair
compensation to the City for the applicant's use of its rights-of-way, and
where applicable, lease payments for the use of any City-owned poles
or facilities.
A.
§ 139-27.2 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 139-28.1
112:358
§ 139-28.2. Wireless facilities requirements and findings.
An applicant for such a permit shall submit the following information
pertaining to particular sites or a proposed deployment:
A technical description of the proposed facilities, along with
detailed diagrams accurately depicting all proposed facilities and
support structures;
(1)
A detailed deployment plan describing construction planned for the
twelve-month period following the permit, and a description of the
completed deployment;
(2)
(3) An engineering certification relating to the proposed construction;
(4) A statement relating to co-location;
A statement demonstrating the permittee's duty to comply with
applicable safety standards for the proposed activities in the City
rights-of-way;
(5)
In the case of a proposed attachment to a City-owned facility
located in the City rights-of-way, an executed attachment
agreement with the City;
(6)
In the case of a proposed attachment to an investor-owned utility
pole in the rights-of-way, proof of the existence of an executed
attachment agreement with the utility pole owner, setting forth, at
a minimum, the title, date and term of the agreement and signed
by the pole owner or authorized representative thereof; and
(7)
(8) Such other information as the Director may require.
B.
Wireless facilities and support structures proposed to be located on
City streets, sidewalks or other rights-of-way shall meet the following
requirements:
Absent a special finding by the Director, wireless facilities may only
be installed on existing utility poles or light poles, and only entities
certificated by the Maryland Public Service Commission pursuant
to the Annotated Code of Maryland, Public Services and Utilities,
Division I, Title 7 or Title 8,61 may erect new poles in the City's
rights-of-way.
(1)
Any new pole installed in City rights-of-way to support wireless
facilities shall:
Comply with all structural and safety standards specified by
the Director;
(a)
(b) Not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic flow or sight lines;
(2)
A.
61.Editor's Note: See §§ 7-101 et seq. and 8-101 et seq. of the Public Utilities Article of the
Annotated Code of Maryland.
§ 139-28.1 PLUMBING § 139-28.2
112:359
§ 139-29. Exceptions.
(c) Not exceed 60 feet in height;
Shall be designed to accommodate the co-location of at least
three different wireless providers' antennas and related
equipment;
(d)
If metal, be treated or painted with nonreflective paint, and in
a way to conform to or blend into the surroundings; and
(e)
Comply with such other requirements and conditions as the
Director may conclude are appropriate to impose.
(f)
Any wireless facilities installed on a pole or any other structure in
the rights-of-way shall:
Have an equipment box or boxes no greater in collective size
than 24 cubic feet in volume, provided that neither the width
nor the depth of any box may exceed two linear feet;
(a)
Have panel antennas no greater than two feet in height, and
omni/dome antennas no more than four feet in height, and no
wider than the 16 inches in diameter;
(b)
Have no more than three panel antennas per pole, and no more
than one omni/dome antenna per pole;
(c)
Have microwave dishes no greater than two feet in diameter,
with no more than three microwave dishes per pole;
(d)
Be treated or painted with nonreflective paint, and in a way to
conform to or blend into the pole or the surroundings; and
(e)
Comply with such other requirements and conditions as the
Director may conclude are appropriate to impose.
(f)
(3)
Wireless facilities and support structures proposed to be located on
City streets, sidewalks or other rights-of-way may be permitted upon a
finding by the Director that:
The application complies with all standards and requirements set
forth in Subsection A;
(1)
The location selected in the application is not in an area where
there is an overconcentration of poles or other facilities in, on or
over the streets, sidewalks or other rights-of-way; and
(2)
The location selected, and scale and appearance of the wireless
facilities and support structures to be installed, are consistent with
the principles and goals of Chapter 164 of the Code.
(3)
B.
No City permit shall be 139-29 required under this article to excavate
any portion of a street that is a part of the state highway system and for
A.
§ 139-28.2 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 139-29
112:360
which a state permit is required under the provisions of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, Transportation, § 8-646 (2015).62
No permit shall be issued with respect to any City street, sidewalk,
or right-of-way where, in the judgment of the Public Works Director,
sufficient capacity no longer exists for additional facilities to be placed
in the proposed location without jeopardizing the physical integrity of
utilities or other facilities already present in the proposed location or
the safe and efficient vehicular or pedestrian use of the street, sidewalk,
or right-of-way.
B.
62.Editor's Note: See § 8-646 of the Transportation Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland.
§ 139-29 PLUMBING § 139-29
112:361

ARTICLE VIA
Underground Facilities
[Added 7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 785]
§ 139-29.1. Marking.
The City is authorized to mark the location of any of its underground
facilities wherever located in accordance with the provisions of with
Subtitle 1 of Title 12 of the Public Utility Companies Article of the
Annotated Code of Maryland (Article). For the purposes of this section,
the term “underground facilities” has the meaning defined in § 12-101
of that Article.
A.
Any person who requests or obtains any such markings shall pay to the
City a fee for reimbursement of expenses of the amount adopted from
time to time by resolution of the Mayor and Common Council. Any such
fee shall not exceed the amount allowed under § 12-111 of the Article.
B.
The Director of the Department of Public Works is authorized to adopt
regulations for the implementation of this section and for the collection
of the fees.
C.
§ 139-29.1 PLUMBING § 139-29.1
112:363

ARTICLE VII
Enforcement
§ 139-30. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-11-2003 by Ord. No.
705]
Any violation of this chapter is declared to be an infraction. The penalty for
violation shall be $250 for each offense.
§ 139-30 PLUMBING § 139-30
112:365
Chapter 143
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Charter provisions — See §§ 28 and 41 of the
City Charter.
Department of Finance — See Ch. 19.
Special assessments — See Ch. 124, Art VI,
and Ch. 133.
§ 143-1. Fiscal and tax years designated.
Beginning July 1, 1964, the fiscal year of the City shall be the period
beginning July 1 in each year and ending June 30 in the following year;
beginning July 1, 1964, the taxable year shall be the period beginning July
1 in each year and ending June 30 in the following year; and from and after
July 1, 1964, the dates of finality shall be January 1 and July 1 of each year.
§ 143-2. Deadline for tax levy. [Amended 2-23-2009 by Ord. No. 797]
The tax levy hereafter shall be made not later than the 15th of June of each
year.
§ 143-3. Due date; interest; penalty; semiannual payments.
[Amended 4-22-1996 by Ord. No. 60763]
From and after July 1, 1964, and except as provided in Subsection B, all
taxes for the taxable year beginning on July 1 in each year and ending
on June 30 in the following year shall be due and payable on July 1
of the year in which levied and shall be subject to interest beginning
October 1 at the rate of 2/3 of 1% for each month or fraction thereof
until paid. Additionally, there is hereby imposed a tax penalty of 1/2
of 1% on unpaid taxes for each month or fraction thereof beginning
October 1 until paid.
A.
From and after July 1, 2000, the owner(s) of owner-occupied residential
property has(have) been afforded the right to pay property taxes for
such property due on owner-occupied residential property on a
semiannual payment schedule under the provisions of § 10-204.3 of
the Tax Property Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland. Owner(s)
who pay real property taxes on a semiannual basis shall also pay a
service charge as authorized by that section and as established by the
Mayor and Common Council in its ordinance providing for the levy of
taxes. Nothing herein shall preclude the owner(s) of owner-occupied
residential property from paying property taxes on an annual basis.
[Amended 5-22-2000 by Ord. No. 652]
B.
63.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 7-1-1996.
§ 139-30 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 143-3
112:366
§ 143-4. Assessment and levy.
The legislative body shall have power to select as the subjects of city
taxation such classes of personal property, of land or improvements on land,
assessable under Article 81 of the Annotated Code of Maryland, 1957,64 as
it may deem wise, and to levy such special or limited rates of city taxation
as it may deem wise on any class of property so selected as a subject of city
taxation for which a fixed or limited rate of city taxation is not prescribed
by the aforesaid Article 81 or by the City Charter, provided that all such
city taxes shall be levied upon assessments made pursuant to the aforesaid
Article 81 by the County Commissioners of Carroll County or by the State
Department of Assessments and Taxation, except that the Director of the
City Department of Finance shall have the right and authority to provide for
A payment under a semiannual schedule is due: [Amended 5-22-2000
by Ord. No. 652]
For the first installment:
(a) On July 1 of the tax year;
May be paid without interest on or before September 30 of the
tax year; and
(b)
If not paid on or before September 30 of the tax year, shall bear
interest beginning October 1 at the rate of 2/3 of 1% for each
month or fraction thereof until paid, and a tax penalty of 1/2 of
1% on the unpaid first installment for each month or fraction
thereof beginning October 1 until paid.
(c)
(1)
For the second installment:
(a) On December 1 of the tax year.
Except for the service charge, may be paid without interest on
or before December 31 of the tax year.
(b)
If not paid on or before December 31 of the tax year, shall bear
the service charge provided in Subsection B and shall bear
interest beginning January 1 at the rate of 2/3 of 1% for each
month or fraction thereof until paid, and a tax penalty of 1/
2 of 1% on the unpaid second installment for each month or
fraction thereof beginning January 1 until paid.
(c)
May be prepaid without the service charge or interest on or
before September 30 of the tax year.
(d)
(2)
C.
The City is authorized to enter into such agreements with other
governmental units as it deems necessary to collect real property taxes,
including, but not limited to, those collected on a semiannual basis.
D.
64.Editor's Note: See now the Tax-General and Tax-Property Articles of the Annotated Code of
Maryland.
§ 143-3 PLUMBING § 143-4
112:367
the assessment of any escaped taxable property in the City which shall be
subject to the regular tax rate of the City on the assessment thus made until
such property has been assessed by the appropriate assessing authorities
under the aforesaid Article 81. There shall be the same right of appeal in
cases of such assessments as is provided by law for assessments made by
the County Commissioners.
§ 143-5. Historic tax credit: historically valuable, architecturally
valuable or architecturally compatible structures. [Added 4-24-2000
by Ord. No. 647; amended 4-23-2001 by Ord. No. 667]
Establishment of historic tax credit program for qualified expenses. In
accordance with § 9-204 of the Tax-Property Article of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, there is hereby established a City of Westminster
real property tax credit in the amount of 10% of the qualified expenses
for the restoration and preservation of an eligible historic property, and
5% of the qualified expenses for the construction of an architecturally
compatible new structure on an eligible historic property.
A.
Definitions. In this section, the following terms have the meanings
indicated: [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 740]
CERTIFICATE OF ELIGIBILITY — A document issued by the
Commission to the owner of an eligible property, which authorizes the
Department of Finance to apply an historic tax credit to the eligible
property under this section.
COMMISSION — The Historic District Commission created under
§ 164-51.3 of the City Code.
CONTRIBUTING PROPERTY — Property included in the 1977 Survey
of Historic Structures in Westminster, described in the Building of
Westminster by Christopher Weeks, or in the updated 1998 edition,
Index Map Historic Survey of 1977 prepared by the Maryland Historic
Trust listed in Categories A, B, C, D and F, or in receipt of a Certification
of Significance from the Maryland Historic Trust.
ELIGIBLE PROPERTY —
ELIGIBLE WORK —
(1) Properties located within the City's Local Historic District;
Properties listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places; or
(2)
Contributing properties located within a National Registered
District.
(3)
Work done on an eligible property:
(a) In compliance with regulations approved by the Commission;
(1)
B.
§ 143-4 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 143-5
112:368
QUALIFIED EXPENSES —
After the owner receives initial approval of an application for a
certificate of eligibility; and
(b)
In conformity with the application for which approval was
given.
(c)
In conformity with the Secretary of the Interior's "Standards
for the Treatment of Historic Buildings" (1995).
(d)
"Eligible work" includes:
The repair or replacement of exterior features of an existing
structure;
(a)
Work that is necessary to maintain the physical integrity of
an existing structure with regard to safety, durability or
weatherproofing; or
(b)
Maintenance of the exterior of an existing structure, including
routine maintenance;
(c)
New construction of an architecturally compatible structure;
or
(d)
Interior restorations necessary to restore or maintain the
historic integrity and efficient or safe functioning of an eligible
property, excluding elective and/or cosmetic renovations.
(e)
(2)
"Eligible work" does not include landscape maintenance or new
landscape plants.
(3)
The amount of money paid by the owner of an eligible property to
a licensed contractor for eligible work or for materials used to do
eligible work by the owner.
(1)
In order to be eligible for a tax credit under this section, qualified
expenses must be $5,000 or greater. [Amended 11-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 772]
(2)
Procedures.
The owner of an eligible property may apply to the Commission for
an historic tax credit for qualified expenses. The application shall
be in the form and accompanied by additional information that the
Commission may require by regulation.
(1)
The Commission shall give preliminary approval of a certificate of
eligibility if it determines the property to be an eligible property
and if it determines that the proposed work is eligible work.
(2)
All eligible work shall be completed within 24 months after the
Commission has given preliminary approval of a certificate of
(3)
C.
§ 143-5 PLUMBING § 143-5
112:369
eligibility. Upon written request, and at its discretion, the
Commission may grant an extension of time for the completion of
eligible work for an additional period not to exceed 12 months.
Upon completion of the work, the owner shall submit to the
Commission documentation that the work was done in accordance
with the preliminary approval of the certificate of eligibility and
shall document all qualified expenses.
(4)
Review.
The Commission shall review the application, the preliminary
approval and the documentation. If the Commission is satisfied
with this information, it may give final approval of the
certificate of eligibility and shall determine:
[1] What work is eligible work; and
[2] The dollar amount of qualified expenses for the work.
(a)
The dollar amount of qualified expenses and the amount of
the tax credit, if any, shall be entered on the certificate of
eligibility.
(b)
(5)
If the Commission is not satisfied with the information, it may deny
approval of the certificate of eligibility.
(6)
An owner who is denied all or part of a tax credit by the
Commission may appeal the denial to the Circuit Court for Carroll
County in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 200 of Title 7
of the Maryland Rules of Procedure.
(7)
After final approval by the Commission, it shall forward the
certificate of eligibility to the Department of Finance.
(8)
The Department of Finance shall grant the historic tax credit in the
form of a rebate, which shall not exceed the amount of the City of
Westminster real property tax which has been previously paid in
the year the credit is issued.
(9)
If the amount of the historic tax credit under this section exceeds
the amount of the City of Westminster real property tax, any
unused portion of the tax credit shall be carried forward for up to
five tax years.
(10)
A certificate of eligibility runs with the property, and change of
ownership does not result in the lapse of a tax credit granted under
this section.
(11)
If, for any reason, eligible property granted a tax credit under this
section ceases to qualify for the credit, any unused tax credit shall
lapse.
(12)
§ 143-5 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 143-5
112:370
§ 143-6. Historic tax credit for increase in assessed value due to
restoration or rehabilitation of historic properties. [Added
4-24-2000 by Ord. No. 648; amended 4-23-2001 by Ord. No. 668]
During the period in which the tax credit is used, a property
owner cannot make any changes to the approved work in the
certificate of eligibility without first having obtained the express
written approval of the Commission.
(13)
Establishment of historic tax credit program for increase in assessed
value. In accordance with § 9-204.1 of the Tax-Property Article of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, there is hereby established a City of
Westminster real property tax credit in an amount equal to the
difference between:
The City of Westminster real property tax that, but for the tax
credit, would be payable on the assessed value of an eligible
historic property after the completion of eligible work; and
(1)
The City of Westminster real property tax that would be payable
on the assessed value of the property if the eligible work was not
done.
(2)
A.
Definitions. In this section, the following terms have the meanings
indicated: [Amended 1-9-2006 by Ord. No. 740]
CERTIFICATE OF ELIGIBILITY — A document issued by the
Commission to the owner of an eligible property, which authorizes the
Department of Finance to apply an historic tax credit to the eligible
property under this section.
COMMISSION — The Historic District Commission created under
§ 164-51.3 of the City Code.
CONTRIBUTING PROPERTY — Property included in the 1977 Survey
of Historic Structures in Westminster, described in the Building of
Westminster by Christopher Weeks, or in the updated 1998 edition,
Index Map Historic Survey of 1977 prepared by the Maryland Historic
Trust listed in Categories A, B, C, D and F, or in receipt of a Certification
of Significance from the Maryland Historic Trust.
ELIGIBLE PROPERTY —
ELIGIBLE WORK —
(1) Properties located within the City's Local Historic District;
Properties listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places; or
(2)
Contributing properties located within a National Registered
District.
(3)
(1) Work done on an eligible property:
B.
§ 143-5 PLUMBING § 143-6
112:371
QUALIFIED EXPENSES —
(a) In compliance with regulations approved by the Commission;
After the owner receives initial approval of an application for a
certificate of eligibility;
(b)
In conformity with the application for which approval was
given; and
(c)
In conformity with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for
the Treatment of Historic Buildings (1995).
(d)
"Eligible work" includes:
The repair or replacement of exterior features of an existing
structure;
(a)
Work that is necessary to maintain the physical integrity of
an existing structure with regard to safety, durability or
weatherproofing;
(b)
Maintenance of the exterior of an existing structure, including
routine maintenance;
(c)
New construction of an architecturally compatible structure;
or
(d)
Interior restorations necessary to restore or maintain the
historic integrity and efficient or safe functioning, of an eligible
property, excluding elective and/or cosmetic renovations.
(e)
(2)
"Eligible work" does not include landscape maintenance or new
landscape plantings.
(3)
The amount of money paid by the owner of an eligible property to
a licensed contractor for eligible work or for materials used to do
eligible work by the owner.
(1)
In order to be eligible for a tax credit under this section, qualified
expenses must be $5,000 or greater. [Amended 11-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 772]
(2)
Procedures.
The owner of an eligible property may apply to the Commission for
an historic tax credit for the increase in assessed value due to the
restoration or rehabilitation of historic properties. The application
shall be in the form and accompanied by additional information
that the Commission may require by regulation.
(1)
The Commission shall give preliminary approval of a certificate of
eligibility if it determines the property to be an eligible property
and if it determines that the proposed work is eligible work.
(2)
C.
§ 143-6 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 143-6
112:372
All eligible work shall be completed within 24 months after the
Commission has given preliminary approval of a certificate of
eligibility. Upon written request, and at its discretion, the
Commission may grant an extension of time for the completion of
eligible work for an additional period not to exceed 12 months.
(3)
Upon completion of the work, the owner shall submit to the
Commission documentation that the work was done in accordance
with the preliminary approval of the certificate of eligibility and
shall document all qualified expenses in such form as the
Commission may require by regulation.
(4)
Review.
The Commission shall review the application, the preliminary
approval and the documentation. If the Commission is satisfied
with this information, it may give final approval of the
certificate of eligibility and shall determine:
[1] What work is eligible work; and
[2] The dollar amount of qualified expenses for the work.
(a)
The dollar amount of qualified expenses and the amount of
the tax credit, if any, shall be entered on the certificate of
eligibility.
(b)
(5)
If the Commission is not satisfied with the information, it may deny
approval of the certificate of eligibility.
(6)
An owner who is denied all or part of a tax credit by the
Commission may appeal the denial to the Circuit Court for Carroll
County in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 200 of Title 7
of the Maryland Rules of Procedure.
(7)
After final approval by the Commission, it shall forward the
certificate of eligibility to the owner, with a copy to the Department
of Finance.
(8)
The owner of an eligible property may file an application with the
Department of Finance for a tax credit under this section if:
A certificate of eligibility meeting the requirements of this
section for work done on the property has been given final
approval by the Commission; and
(a)
The assessed value of the property has increased after a
valuation or revaluation under § 8-104 of the Tax-Property
Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
(b)
(9)
The application shall be in a form as required by the Director of
Finance and shall be accompanied by the certificate of eligibility.
(10)
§ 143-6 PLUMBING § 143-6
112:373
§ 143-7. Homestead tax credit percentage. [Added 11-14-2005 by
Ord. No. 738]
Pursuant to § 9-105(e) of the Tax-Property Article of the Annotated Code
of Maryland, the homestead tax credit percentage for the City, effective for
the taxable year beginning July 1, 2006, and subsequent tax years, shall be
107%.
§ 143-8. Job creation tax credit. [Added 6-13-2011 by Ord. No. 828]
Upon receipt of an application under this section, the Department
of Finance shall forward a copy of the certificate of eligibility to
the State Department of Assessments and Taxation, which shall
determine what portion, if any, of the increase in assessment is due
to the eligible work.
(11)
After the determination by the Department of Assessments and
Taxation, the Department of Finance shall grant the City of
Westminster real property historic tax credit under this section in
the form of a rebate beginning with the first tax year in which the
real property tax would increase as a result of the assessment.
A tax credit under this section is granted annually for a term of
10 years, provided that no eligible work is altered without the
prior approval of the Commission.
(a)
If eligible work is altered without the prior approval of the
Commission, the tax credit under this section shall lapse,
beginning with the tax year immediately following the year in
which notification is received by the Department of Finance.
(b)
(12)
A certificate of eligibility runs with the property, and change of
ownership does not result in the lapse of a tax credit granted under
this section.
(13)
If, for any reason, eligible property granted a tax credit under this
section ceases to qualify for the credit, any unused tax credit shall
lapse.
(14)
During the period in which the tax credit is used, a property
owner cannot make changes to the approved work in the certificate
of eligibility without first having obtained the express written
approval of the Commission.
(15)
Definitions. In this section, the following words and phrases have the
meanings indicated:
AFFILIATE — A person:
(1) That directly or indirectly owns at least 80% of a business entity; or
Eighty percent of which is owned, directly or indirectly, by a
business entity.
(2)
A.
§ 143-6 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 143-8
112:374
AVERAGE COUNTY WEEKLY WAGE — The average weekly wage paid
to a Carroll County worker as determined by the Maryland Department
of Labor, Licensing and Regulation, or succeeding agency, with respect
to total employment (private and public sector combined).
BUSINESS ENTITY — A person conducting a trade or business in
the State of Maryland that is subject to the Maryland individual or
corporate income tax, insurance premiums tax, financial institution
franchise tax, or public service company franchise tax.
FULL-TIME POSITION — A position requiring at least 840 hours of an
individual's time during at least 24 weeks in a six-month period.
NEW OR EXPANDED PREMISES — Real property, including a building
or part of a building that has not been previously occupied, where a
business entity or its affiliates locate to conduct business.
"New permanent full-time position" means a position that is:
(a) A full-time position of indefinite duration;
(b) Located in Maryland;
Newly created as a result of the establishment or expansion of
a business facility in the state; and
(c)
(d) Filled.
(1)
"New permanent full-time position" does not include a position that
is:
Created when an employment function is shifted from an
existing business facility of the business entity or its affiliates
located in Maryland to another business facility of the same
business entity or its affiliates, if the position does not
represent a net new job in the state;
(a)
(b) Created through a change in ownership of a trade or business;
Created through a consolidation, merger, or restructuring of
a business entity or its affiliates, if the position does not
represent a net new job in the state;
(c)
Created when an employment function is contractually shifted
from an existing business entity or its affiliates, located in the
state to another business entity or its affiliates, if the position
does not represent a net new job in the state; or
(d)
(e) Filled for a period of less than 12 months.
(2)
Property tax credit established; conditions.
There is hereby established a property tax credit against the City
property tax imposed on real property owned or leased by business
entities that meet the requirements specified in this section and on
(1)
B.
§ 143-8 PLUMBING § 143-8
112:375
personal property owned by said business entities and located on
the premises for which the real property tax credit is granted.
A tax credit may not be granted under this section if:
The business entity or any of its affiliates has moved its
operations to Westminster from another county in the state; or
(a)
The new or expanded premises has otherwise been granted a
tax credit or exemption under the Maryland Code Annotated
Tax Property Article for the taxable year.
(b)
(2)
To qualify for a tax credit under this section against personal
property tax imposed by the City, a business entity must certify, on
a form prescribed by the City, that the personal property is located
on the premises that qualify for a property tax credit.
(3)
To qualify for a tax credit under this section, before it obtains
the new or expanded premises or hires employees to fill the new
permanent full-time positions at the new or expanded premises, a
business entity must provide written notification to the City of:
(a) Its intention to claim the property tax credit;
The dates on which it expects to obtain the new or expanded
premises and to hire the required number of employees in the
new permanent full-time positions.
(b)
(4)
If a business entity meets the requirements for a tax credit under this
section, the City will certify to the State Department of Assessments
and Taxation and the Maryland Department of Business and Economic
Development that the business entity has met the requirements for the
tax credit for the taxable year that follows the date on which it met the
requirements.
C.
Qualifications for tax credit.
To qualify for a property tax credit under this section, a business
entity must:
Obtain, during the twelve-month period preceding the first day
of the taxable year for which the business entity first claims
the tax credit established by this section, at least 5,000 square
feet of new or expanded premises by purchasing or leasing
newly constructed premises or by constructing new premises
or causing new premises to be constructed; and
(a)
Employ at least 25 individuals in new permanent full-time
positions at the new or expanded premises during a twentyfour-
month period beginning on or after the date that is 24
months before the first day of the taxable year for which the
business entity first claims the tax credit established under this
section and ending on or before the last day of the first year
(b)
(1)
D.
§ 143-8 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 143-8
112:376
Chapter 145
for which the business entity claims the tax credit established
under this section, 50% of which positions must pay at least
125% of the average county weekly wage.
Amount of tax credit. If a business entity meets the conditions and
requirements of Subsections B and D of this section, the credit granted
under this section shall equal a percentage of the property tax imposed
as follows:
(1) Fifty-two percent for the first and second taxable years;
(2) Thirty-nine percent in the third and fourth taxable years;
(3) Twenty-six percent in the fifth and sixth taxable years; and
(4) Zero percent for each taxable year thereafter.
E.
Reduction of taxes liable under lease agreements. The lessor of real
property eligible for property tax credits under this section shall reduce
by the amount of the property tax credits computed under this section
the amount of taxes for which the eligible business entity is
contractually liable under the lease agreement.
F.
Recapture of claimed credits. All credits claimed under this section
for a taxable year shall be recaptured if, during the three taxable
years succeeding the taxable year in which a credit was claimed, the
business entity's employment level or the square footage occupied by
the business entity at the premises falls below the applicable thresholds
required to qualify for the property tax credit under this section.
G.
Annual report. On October 1 of each year, the City shall report to
the State Department of Assessments and Taxation, the Maryland
Department of Business and Economic Development, and the State
Comptroller:
(1) The amount of each credit granted for that year; and
Whether the business entity is in compliance with the requirements
for the tax credit.
(2)
H.
Entitlement to claim credit.
After a business entity has complied with all the requirements
provided in this section, the business entity shall be entitled to
claim the tax credit for the term provided in this section.
(1)
No abrogation of this law or law hereinafter enacted that
eliminates or reduces the tax credits available under this section
shall apply to any business entity or affiliate of a business entity
that qualified for the tax credits before the effective date of such
law or abrogation.
(2)
I.
§ 143-8 PLUMBING § 143-8
112:377
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Charter provisions — See §§ 45 through 47 of
the City Charter.
Licenses — See Ch. 94.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 155.
§ 143-8 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 143-8
112:378
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 145-1. Definitions. [Amended 2-25-1991 by Ord. No. 535]
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
OWNER — The person in whose name the taxicab vehicle is registered
with the State Motor Vehicle Administration, or a person who has a written
agreement with the registered owner of the vehicle providing for the use of
said vehicle as a taxicab for the person's benefit.
TAXICAB — Includes any motor vehicle for hire designated to carry seven
persons or less, including the driver, operated upon any street in the City
or on call or demand accepting or soliciting passengers indiscriminately for
transportation for hire between such points along the streets in the City,
as may be directed by the passenger or passengers so being transported,
provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to include as a
taxicab any motor vehicle used as a hearse or ambulance or a motor vehicle
operated, with the approval of the Public Service Commission of Maryland,
on fixed routes and schedules.
§ 145-2. Licenses required.
No person shall engage in the business of operating a taxicab upon the
streets of the City without having first obtained a license therefor for each
of such taxicabs as provided in this chapter, and each taxicab driver shall
obtain a license as provided in this chapter.
§ 145-3. Applicability.
A taxicab having no Westminster City license may bring passengers into the
City but may not pick up any passenger or accept any business within the
City for any destination within the City or any destination outside the City.
§ 145-1 PLUMBING § 145-3
112:379

ARTICLE II
Owners' Licenses
§ 145-4. Application; issuance; criteria for denial. [Amended
2-25-1991 by Ord. No. 535]
§ 145-5. Fee; term.
§ 145-6. Insurance.
Before any owner's license for a taxicab shall be issued, the owner shall
file with the City Clerk an insurance policy issued by an insurance company
licensed to do business in the state, which shall be approved by the Mayor
and the City Attorney, providing insurance coverage for each and every
taxicab owned, operated or leased by the applicant. This policy of insurance
Application for a taxicab license to operate one or more taxicabs shall
be made in writing to the City Clerk upon forms furnished by him and
shall state the business name, the address from which the business is
conducted, the name of the owner and, if owned by a corporation, the
names of the principal officers thereof, the make, ownership, engine
number and license number of each vehicle to be operated and its
seating capacity. [Amended 4-13-1992 by Ord. No. 554]
A.
In the event that the applicant is not the owner of any vehicle which is
to be operated as a taxicab, then the application shall be accompanied
by a copy of the written agreement authorizing said vehicle's use as a
taxicab.
B.
The application shall be submitted by the City Clerk to the legislative
body at its next regular meeting. The legislative body may approve such
application if it is determined that public convenience and necessity
require the operation of the taxicab as proposed in the application. In
determining such public convenience and necessity, the legislative body
shall consider the number of taxicabs then operating in the City and
whether the demands of the public require additional taxicab service;
the financial responsibility of the applicant; the number, kind, type and
equipment of those taxicabs for which licenses are asked; the traffic
conditions in the City; whether the additional taxicab service will result
in a greater hazard to the public; and such other relevant facts as the
legislative body may deem advisable or necessary.
C.
Before a taxicab owner's license shall be issued as in this chapter
provided, each applicant shall pay an annual fee as provided in the
General Fee Ordinance.65 [Amended 4-13-1992 by Ord. No. 554;
5-4-1992 by Ord. No. 560; 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 791]
A.
The license shall expire on the first day of May after the date of
issuance thereof, unless sooner revoked as provided in this chapter.
B.
65.Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
§ 145-4 PLUMBING § 145-6
112:381
shall be in the sum of at least $50,000 for the injury or death of one
person in any one accident and $100,000 for the injury or death of more
than one person in any one accident, and $20,000 for damage to property
of others in any one accident through the operation of the taxicab of
the applicant. Such policy of insurance shall contain a provision for a
continuing liability thereunder to the full amount thereof, notwithstanding
any recovery thereon, and that until the policy is revoked as herein
provided, the insurance company will not be relieved from liability on
account of nonpayment of premium, failure to renew the license at the end
of the year or any act or omission of the named insured. Any insurance
company whose policy has been so filed pursuant to this section may file a
notice with the legislative body of its intention to terminate and cancel such
policy and give notice thereof to the named licensee; whereupon, after 10
days after such filing, such licensee or owner shall cease to operate or cause
to be operated within the City such taxicab for hire, and the license issued
therefor shall be automatically revoked and liability on such policy shall
cease and terminate, provided that the liability of the insurance company
thereon for any act or omission of the licensee or owner occurring prior
to the effective date of cancellation shall not be thereby discharged or
impaired.
§ 145-7. Transferability.
§ 145-8. Effect of grant of license. [Amended 4-13-1992 by Ord. No.
554]
All owner-licensees shall make the taxicab business their principal
occupation and shall on all secular days, unless good cause shall be shown
therefor, furnish regularly scheduled service, it being the purpose of this
provision to ensure to the City the operation of taxicabs by licensees who
will make the operation of taxicabs their principal occupation and to
prevent the operation of taxicabs by persons who operate taxicabs as a
sideline or additional occupation to their chief occupation. All owner-
Any owner-licensee, with the approval of the legislative body, may
transfer the ownership of his taxicab or taxicabs to another licensed
owner. In no event, however, shall any transfer be made unless and
until the transfer in all respects complies with the terms and provisions
of this chapter. For every transfer of license, a fee shall be paid for
each taxicab so transferred as provided in the General Fee Ordinance.66
[Amended 12-6-2007 by Ord. No. 773]
A.
Any owner-licensee, with the approval of the legislative body, may
transfer the taxicab license from the vehicle described therein to
another vehicle. Notice of such transfer shall be endorsed upon the
license theretofore issued. Any vehicle substituted under the provisions
of this section shall be fully covered by insurance as provided in
§ 145-6.
B.
66.Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
§ 145-6 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 145-8
112:382
licensees shall permit examination of their employment and work records
when necessary for any investigation.
§ 145-9. Taxi stands.
Any owner-licensee making written application for and being allocated
a taxicab stand in any of the metered areas of the City shall pay
an annual fee for each regular parking space allocated. One taxicab
space may be allocated to each owner-licensee as provided for in the
General Fee Ordinance.67 [Amended 4-13-1992 by Ord. No. 554;
11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 791]
A.
The license shall expire on the first day of May after the date of
issuance thereof, unless sooner revoked as in this chapter provided.
The City shall have the power to cancel any taxicab stand licensee at
any time. [Amended 4-13-1992 by Ord. No. 554; 11-24-2008 by
Ord. No. 791]
B.
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to occupy any regularly established
taxicab stand unless such vehicle is a taxicab being operated by the
owner-licensee to which such taxicab stand has been allocated as
herein provided.
C.
No telephone shall be installed on the public right-of-way at any taxicab
stand.
D.
67.Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
§ 145-8 PLUMBING § 145-9
112:383

ARTICLE III
Vehicles
§ 145-10. Identification.
§ 145-11. Equipment.
§ 145-12. Maintenance; inspections.
The legislative body shall have the power to designate distinctive colors
or other insignia to be used on the taxicabs of each licensee. A license
may be refused to any applicant or revoked if the color scheme, trade
name or insignia imitates that of any other licensee in such manner as
to deceive the public.
A.
Each taxicab shall be conspicuously marked on the right and left side
with the word "TAXICAB" and the name of the licensee, such letters and
numbers not to be less than two inches in height and of a light color
on a dark background or dark color on a light background. [Amended
4-13-1992 by Ord. No. 554]
B.
No person owning or operating a taxicab shall permit any banner or
other advertising matter to be affixed to such taxicab unless prior
thereto, said person has obtained the approval of the Chief of Police or
his designee as to size, dimension and location on the taxicab so that
any such banner or advertising matter should not affect the safety of
the taxicab. [Amended 3-9-1992 by Ord. No. 536]
C.
Every vehicle proposed for use as a taxicab shall be of the closed type,
having at least one door on each side for the entrance and exit of
passengers, in addition to the door or doors which give access to the
driver's seat.
A.
Every vehicle proposed for use as a taxicab, in addition to the outside
lights prescribed by law, shall be equipped with a dome light within
the passenger compartment of the vehicle capable of being lighted or
extinguished by the passenger or controlled by the operation of the
doors.
B.
No vehicle shall be licensed as a taxicab until it has been inspected as to
the security of the parts and the condition of the equipment thereof, as
provided in § 145-24, and after such license shall be issued, the vehicle
shall be kept in a good condition of repair and in good mechanical order
and when so operated shall be kept free from all unnecessary odor,
noise or debris. [Amended 4-13-1992 by Ord. No. 554]
A.
All vehicles so operated shall at all times be kept in a clean, wholesome
and sanitary and tidy condition.
B.
§ 145-10 PLUMBING § 145-12
112:385

ARTICLE IV
Drivers' Licenses
§ 145-13. Application; criteria for issuance or denial. [Amended
4-13-1992 by Ord. No. 554]
In addition to the owner's license as in this chapter provided, each person
driving a taxicab shall be licensed by the City, in addition to the licensing
regulations of the Motor Vehicle Administration of the state or the State
Public Service Commission.
Each applicant for a driver's license must:
(1) Be of the age of 21 years or over.
(2) Possess a valid Maryland driver's license.
Furnish a health certificate from a physician residing in the City
certifying that the applicant is of sound physique, is not addicted
to the use of intoxicating liquors or drugs, has good eyesight and
hearing, is not subject to heart disease, vertigo, epilepsy or any
disease which might affect the operation of a motor vehicle and
is not affected with any infectious disease or with any venereal
disease in a communicable form.
(3)
(4) Be able to speak, read and write the English language.
Produce certificates of his good character from two reputable local
citizens who have known him at least one year.
(5)
Fill out, upon a form to be provided by the City, a statement,
giving his full name, the number of his driver's license, his place of
residence for five years previous to moving to his present address,
age, height, color of eyes and hair, place of birth, length of time
he has resided in the City, place of previous employment, marital
status, whether he has ever been convicted of a felony or
misdemeanor, whether he has ever been previously licensed as a
driver or chauffeur and if so, when and where and whether his
license has ever been revoked and for what cause, which statement
shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant and filed with the
City as a permanent record, together with the payment of a
nonrefundable application fee of $30.
(6)
A.
No such license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted
of any felony or who has been convicted of driving a vehicle upon the
highway while under the influence of intoxicating liquors or narcotics
unless five years have elapsed since his date of conviction or discharge
from a penal institution, whichever is later, or who has three times been
convicted of a misdemeanor within a period of one year previous to the
date of such application, nor shall a license be issued to any person who
is not a person of good moral character.
B.
§ 145-13 PLUMBING § 145-13
112:387
§ 145-14. Identification. [Amended 4-13-1992 by Ord. No. 554]
Each applicant for a driver's license shall file with his application two recent
photographs of himself not less than two inches square, one of which shall
be attached to the license when issued and the other which shall be filed,
together with the application, with the Police Department of the City. The
photograph shall be stapled to the license so that it cannot be removed and
another photograph substituted without detection.
§ 145-15. Issuance; term; fee. [Amended 4-13-1992 by Ord. No. 554;
5-4-1992 by Ord. No. 560; 1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 625]
§ 145-16. Display; transferability.
§ 145-17. Badge.
There shall be delivered to each licensed driver of a taxicab a badge
of such form and style as the legislative body may prescribe, with his
license number thereon, which shall, under penalty of revocation of the
Any applicant who gives any false information pertaining to such
applicant's police record shall be deemed guilty of the crime of perjury,
and complaint may be made in the manner provided by law for
punishment of such cases.
C.
Upon satisfactory fulfillment of the requirements of §§ 145-13 and
145-14, there shall be issued to the applicant a license which shall be in
such form as to permit attaching the photograph and signature of the
licensee. Any licensee who defaces, removes or obliterates any official
entry made upon his license shall, in addition to any other penalty
imposed by this chapter, have his license revoked.
A.
Drivers' licenses shall expire the first day of May of each year unless
sooner revoked as in this chapter provided.
B.
A driver's license may be granted to the applicant upon application
conforming to the foregoing requirements and paying an annual fee of
$25.
C.
Every licensed driver shall have his license, to which shall be attached
his photograph, conspicuously displayed so that it may be easily seen
both in the day and nighttime by occupants of the taxicab.
A.
No driver-licensee may loan his license or permit another person to use
it, subject to revocation of his license.
B.
A driver’s license may be granted to the applicant upon application
conforming to the foregoing requirements and paying an annual fee as
provided in the General Fee Ordinance.68 [Amended 11-24-2008 by
Ord. No. 791]
C.
68.Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
§ 145-13 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 145-17
112:388
license, be constantly and conspicuously displayed when he is engaged in
his employment on the outside of the driver's coat or cap.
§ 145-18. Duties of drivers.
It shall be the duty of every driver-licensee to be courteous and
gentlemanly; to refrain from swearing, loud talking and boisterous
conduct; to refrain from the unnecessary use of the horn or other
signal and to give audible warning with his horn only when reasonably
necessary to ensure safe operation and he shall not use the horn or
other signal to announce his arrival at a location to which he has been
called; to drive his motor vehicle carefully and in full compliance with
all traffic laws, ordinances and regulations of the state and city and
all orders of the Police Department of the City; to promptly answer
all court notices, traffic violation notices or police notices; and to deal
honestly with the public and with his employer.
A.
It shall be the duty of every driver-licensee to report to the Police
Department within 12 hours after its occurrence any accident resulting
in any injury to persons or damage to property wherein a taxicab driven
by him was involved.
B.
No taxicab shall stand in any metered area in any public street or
place other than upon the stand assigned to it, in accordance with
this chapter, and such taxicab after discharging any passenger shall
return to its designated stand, except that a taxicab may take on any
passenger while returning as aforesaid, but no driver of a taxicab shall
seek employment by repeatedly and persistently driving his taxicab to
and fro in a short space or by otherwise interfering with the proper
and orderly access to or egress from any theater, hall, hotel, bus depot,
railroad station or other place of public gathering or in any other
manner obstructing or impeding traffic; but any taxicab may solicit
employment by driving through any public street or place without stops
other than those due to obstruction of traffic and at such speed as
not to interfere with or impede traffic and may pass and repass before
any theater, hall, hotel, bus depot, railway station or other place of
gathering, provided that after passing such public place he shall not
turn and repass until he shall have gone a distance of two blocks
beyond such place.
C.
§ 145-17 PLUMBING § 145-18
112:389

ARTICLE V
Regulations
§ 145-19. Prohibited acts.
§ 145-20. Property left in vehicles.
Every driver of a taxicab, immediately after the termination of any hiring
or employment, shall carefully search such taxicab for any property lost or
left therein, and any such property, unless sooner claimed or delivered to
the owner, shall be taken to the City Hall and deposited with the Police
Department or the City Clerk within 12 hours after the finding thereof, with
brief particulars to enable the Police Department to identify the owner of
the property.
§ 145-21. Duty of taxi owner.
No owner-licensee shall permit any person who is not licensed by the City
or any person whose license has been suspended or revoked to operate any
taxicab within the City.
No person shall drive or operate a taxicab:
For any purpose personal to the driver within the City, including
social or recreational purposes, excepting when a sign bearing
the legend "NOT ON DUTY" shall be displayed in the lower right
section of the windshield of the vehicle in such manner so as not to
interfere with the safe operation of the vehicle.
(1)
For the purpose of securing passengers while cruising, except as
permitted under § 145-18C.
(2)
For the purpose of providing transportation for a person engaged
in an unlawful undertaking.
(3)
For the purpose of transporting a passenger other than in taxicab
service, and no passenger shall be allowed to ride in the front
seat with the driver unless the rear seat of the taxicab shall be
completely occupied.
(4)
(5) For more than 12 hours out of every 24 hours.
A.
A driver shall be deemed to be operating a taxicab within the terms of
this section whenever he is in charge of a taxicab and holding himself
in readiness to convey passengers.
B.
No owner, taxicab driver or other person representing the owner may
refuse to carry orderly passengers to or from any part of the City with
reasonable promptness nor refuse to deliver any orderly passenger to
any destination within the City reasonably accessible by automobile,
unless previously engaged.
C.
§ 145-19 PLUMBING § 145-22
112:391
§ 145-22. Defective taxicabs.
No owner-licensee or driver of a taxicab shall cause it to be operated in the
City when such taxicab is mechanically defective or does not comply with
all of the requirements of this chapter, and any such defective taxicab may
be impounded as provided in § 145-25.
§ 145-23. Fares and rates. [Amended 1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 625]
The governing body shall establish a schedule of fares in the General
Fee Ordinance to be charged by the owners and operators of taxicabs
licensed to do business under this chapter, and such schedule may be
amended from time to time by resolution. [Amended 11-24-2008 by
Ord. No. 791
A.
Excess rates; luggage and occupancy privileges; posting of regulations;
payment of fare.
No person owning, operating or controlling any motor vehicle used
as a taxicab within the limits of the City shall charge any rate
except in accordance with the schedule mentioned in Subsection A.
(1)
No fare in excess of nor less than the rate of fares and in
accordance with the above shall be charged by any taxi driver. No
charge shall be made for any package, bag, suitcase or ordinary
traveling bag. All drivers of taxicabs shall give to the passenger the
exclusive right to the use and occupancy of such motor vehicle, and
additional passengers shall not be carried without the consent of
the first occupant.
(2)
A printed copy of this section and the schedule of fares as
established by the governing body shall be placed in each taxicab
so as to be plainly visible to all passengers.
(3)
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the regular fare
for a taxicab after having hired it.
(4)
B.
§ 145-22 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 145-23
112:392
ARTICLE VI
Administration and Enforcement
§ 145-24. Inspections. [Amended 4-13-1992 by Ord. No. 554]
The Chief of Police shall cause to be inspected all taxicabs from time to
time or on the complaint of any citizen or as often as may be necessary.
The inspection shall be made by any garage in the City, and the cost thereof
shall be paid by the owner-licensee and shall be evidenced by a certificate
of examination and sufficiency, which certificate shall be filed with the Chief
of Police.
§ 145-25. Impoundment. [Amended 4-13-1992 by Ord. No. 554;
11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 791]
Any taxicab being operated in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter or rules adopted under this chapter may be impounded by the
Police Department. A service charge as provided in the General Fee
Ordinance shall be paid to the City before the vehicle is released from
impoundment. The payment of such service charge shall not release the
owner or driver of such vehicle from penalties imposed for violations of
provisions of this chapter nor from the payment of any additional expense
which may be incurred by the City in effecting such impoundment.
§ 145-26. Suspension and revocation of licenses. [Amended
1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 625]
The Chief of Police may suspend or revoke any owner's license or a
driver's license, as appropriate, if, after notice and opportunity for a
hearing, the Chief of Police finds:
Facts existing prior or subsequent to the issuance of an owner's
license or a driver's license which would be cause under this
chapter for refusal to issue or renew the license;
(1)
Any violation of this chapter or of any other federal, state or local
law by the owner or driver;
(2)
Conviction of an owner or driver of any felony or any other crime
of moral turpitude, including crimes of violence, sex offense or
violation of the controlled dangerous substance or gaming laws;
(3)
Procurement or attempted procurement of a license by fraud,
misrepresentation, false or misleading statement or omission of
material facts;
(4)
The operation, or the allowing of a taxicab to be operated, in a
manner that endangers the public health, safety or welfare; or
(5)
The suspension or revocation of a driver's license by the Motor
Vehicle Administration.
(6)
A.
§ 145-24 PLUMBING § 145-26
112:393
§ 145-27. Notice and opportunity for hearing. [Added 1-12-1998 by
Ord. No. 62569]
In addition to those reasons specified in Subsection A, the Chief of
Police may revoke or suspend an owner's license or a driver's license if:
A consistent pattern of reasonably verified complaints against the
owner or driver is received by the Police Department within any
twelve-month period or when a reasonably verified complaint
involving a threat to the public health, safety or welfare is received
by the Department;
(1)
The owner or driver has been convicted for operating a motor
vehicle under the influence of or while intoxicated with alcohol or
controlled dangerous substance or for reckless driving; or
(2)
The owner or driver has been convicted of failure to stop after
involvement in an accident or has a traffic record which indicates
an unsafe driving pattern or disregard for the motor vehicle laws of
this state.
(3)
B.
This section is in addition to any other provision of this chapter that
establishes cause for the suspension or revocation of an owner's license
or a driver's license.
C.
Prior to revoking or suspending an owner's license or driver's license
the Chief of Police must:
Notify the holder of the license of the proposed action and the basis
therefor in writing sent to the latest address on file with the Police
Department;
(1)
(2) State the reasons for the proposed action; and
Provide an opportunity for a hearing to contest the proposed action
under this section.
(3)
A.
B. Any hearing must be held before the Chief of Police.
Time limit to request hearing; acceleration.
The Chief of Police's proposed action on a revocation or suspension
is final if a hearing is not requested within 10 days of notification
of that opportunity.
(1)
If the Chief of Police reasonably believes that the public health,
welfare or safety is threatened by continued operation of a taxicab
by a licensee or operator, the Chief of Police may accelerate any
time requirements of this section so long as reasonable due process
is afforded.
(2)
C.
69.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former § 145-27,
Violations and penalties, as § 145-30.
§ 145-26 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 145-27
112:394
§ 145-28. When effective, surrender of license. [Added 1-12-1998 by
Ord. No. 625]
§ 145-29. Appeal from denial, suspension or revocation. [Added
1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 625]
Any person aggrieved by the denial, suspension or revocation of any owner's
license or driver's license may appeal a final decision to the Circuit Court for
Carroll County. Such appeal shall be taken in accordance with the Maryland
Rules of Procedure as set forth in Title 7, Chapter 200.
§ 145-30. Violation and penalties. [Amended 1-12-1998 by Ord. No.
625]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by fine of not
more than $250 for each offense. In addition, any license issued pursuant to
this chapter may, upon proof of any violation of this chapter, be revoked or
suspended as provided in §§ 145-26, 145-27 and 145-28.
After conducting a hearing, the Chief of Police shall issue a written
decision within 10 days.
D.
Notification by personal service or certified letter to the last address on
file with the Police Department is sufficient notice under this section.
E.
Failure to appear at a hearing, after notice, is a waiver of the right to a
hearing.
F.
A revocation or suspension of an owner's license or driver's license
is effective immediately upon personal service or the mailing of
notification of the Chief's written decision.
A.
Upon receipt of notice of a revocation or suspension, the licensee or
driver must, within 24 hours:
Place the license in the mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the
Police Department; or
(1)
(2) Physically deliver the license to the Police Department.
B.
§ 145-27 PLUMBING § 145-30
112:395
Chapter 148
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Trimming of street trees — See Ch. 139,
§ 139-7.
§ 148-1. Definitions. [Amended 12-14-1992 by Ord. No. 561]
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases used herein are
defined as follows:
CUTTING BACK — Pruning designed to reduce the crown of a tree or
individual branch, sometimes referred to as heading back, drop crotch
pruning, natural pruning, lateral pruning or directional pruning. It is
distinctly different from topping in that an effort is made to keep the
symmetry of the tree on the sides as well as the top.
DEPARTMENT — The State Department of Natural Resources.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Planning.[Amended 12-6-2007 by Ord. No.
773]
PARK TREES — Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in
public parks having individual names or to which the public has free access
as a park, plus in all facilities, parking lots, open spaces and all other areas
owned by the City.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, association, firm or partnership or
any governmental agency, including the City, or the like, singular or plural.
ROADSIDE TREES — Any trees or shrubs growing with the right-of-way of
any public road within the City.
TOPPING — The severe reduction of branches without consideration of
the specifications for cutting back. (This is generally considered to be an
undesirable practice.)
§ 148-2. Creation and composition of Tree Commission.
There is hereby created and established a City Tree Commission for the
City of Westminster, Maryland.
A.
The Commission shall consist of six voting members and two nonvoting
City staff members.
The voting members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
approval of the Common Council and shall be residents of Carroll
County.
(1)
B.
§ 145-30 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 148-2
112:396
§ 148-3. Term of office; vacancies; removal. [Amended 3-22-1993 by
Ord. No. 566]
§ 148-4. Compensation.
Members of the City Tree Commission shall serve without compensation for
their services.
§ 148-5. Officers; proceedings; quorum.
§ 148-6. Duties and responsibilities.
At least one of the voting members shall have a background in
horticulture, arboriculture, forestry or a related field.
(2)
The nonvoting staff members shall be the Director of Planning and
Public Works or his designees.
(3)
The terms of the six persons to be appointed by the Mayor and
approved by the Common Council shall be three years, except that the
terms of two of the members initially appointed shall be for only one
year, and the terms of two other members initially appointed shall be
for two years.
A.
In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member,
a successor shall be appointed and approved for the unexpired portion
of the term.
B.
Members may be removed by the Mayor and Common Council for
inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office.
C.
The officers of the Commission shall consist of a Chairman and a Vice
Chairman. Both the Chairman and the Vice Chairman shall be elected
by the members of the Commission and will hold such offices at the
pleasure of the Mayor and Common Council.
A.
The Commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and keep a
journal of the proceedings.
B.
C. A quorum at any meeting shall be three voting members.
It shall be the responsibility of the City Tree Commission to study,
investigate, counsel, develop and/or update annually and recommend
to the Mayor and Common Council a written plan for the care,
preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of
trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. Such
plan will be presented annually to the Mayor and Common Council.
Upon its review, the Mayor and Common Council may modify and
amend such proposed plan and adopt it by resolution as the official
comprehensive City tree plan.
A.
§ 148-2 PLUMBING § 148-6
112:397
§ 148-7. Permissible roadside tree species. [Amended 12-14-1992
by Ord. No. 561]
Upon the request of the Mayor and Common Council, the Commission
shall consider, investigate and make findings, reports and
recommendations upon any special matter or question coming within
the scope of its responsibilities.
B.
The Commission shall also perform the various duties and
responsibilities assigned to it in this chapter.
C.
This subsection constitutes the official list of permissible roadside tree
species for the City of Westminster.
Official Roadside Tree List for the City of Westminster,
Maryland
Common Name Botanical Name
Small Trees
Amur maple Acer ginnala
Hornbeam maple Acer carpinifolium
Tatarian maple Acer tataricum
Purpleblow maple Acer trunacatum
European Hornbeam cvs.
"Fastigata"
Carpinus betulus
American dogwood Cornus florida
Kousa dogwood Cornus kousa
Cornelian cherry Cornus mas
Goldenrain tree Koelreuteria paniculata
Purple-leaved plum Prunus cerasifera
Oriental cherry Prunus serrulata
Ironwood Ostrya virginiana
Japanese snowbell Styrax japonica
Amur Maackia Maackia amurensis
Medium Trees
Hedge maple Acer campestre
Red maple cvs. "Autumn Flame,"
"Autumn Glory," "Bowhall,"
"Gerling," "OctoberGlory," "Red
Sunset," "Tilford"
Acer rubrum
American Yellowwood Cladrastis lutea
Thornless honey locust cvs.
"Imperial," "Moraine,"
"Shademaster," "Skyline"
Gleditsia triacanthos
A.
§ 148-6 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 148-7
112:398
§ 148-8. (Reserved)70
Official Roadside Tree List for the City of Westminster,
Maryland
Common Name Botanical Name
Carolina silverbell Halesia carolina
Callery pear cvs. "Aristocrat,"
"Bradford," "Fauriel,"
"Chanticleer," "Redspire"
Pyrus calleryana
Sargent cherry Prunus sargenti
Littleleaf Linden cvs.
"Greenspire"
Tilia cordata
Chinese elm Ulmus parvifolia
Zelkova Zelkova serrata
Large tree species which have a mature height of 50 feet or more are
not considered suitable as roadside trees under most circumstances.
However, the Commission may approve their use upon an express
written determination that such trees will not adversely impair the
integrity of the comprehensive City tree plan and that said trees will
not create an unreasonable risk of danger to person or property.
B.
The following species are not considered suitable under any
circumstances and may not be approved by the Commission:
Common Name Botanical Name
Mimosa Albizia julibrissin
Tree-of-heaven Ailianthus altissima
Silver maple Acer saccharinum
Catalpa Caltalpa speciosa
Black walnut Juglans nigra
Paulownia Paulownia tormentosa
Hybrid poplar Populus nigra
Lombardy poplar Populus nigra
Siberian elm Ulmus pumila
Ginkgo (female only) Ginkgo biloba
C.
70.Editor's Note: Former § 148-8, Spacing, was repealed 12-14-1992 by Ord. No. 561.
§ 148-7 PLUMBING § 148-9
112:399
§ 148-9. Distance from street corners and fire hydrants. [Amended
12-14-1992 by Ord. No. 561]
No roadside tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet to any street corner,
measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. No
roadside tree shall be planted closer than 10 feet to any fire hydrant.
§ 148-10. Utilities. [Amended 12-14-1992 by Ord. No. 561]
No roadside trees other than those species listed as small or medium trees
in § 148-7 shall be planted under or within 10 linear feet of any overhead
utility wire, or over or within five linear feet of any underground waterline,
gas line, sewer line, transmission or other utility.
§ 148-11. Public tree care. [Amended 12-14-1992 by Ord. No. 561]
§ 148-12. Tree topping. [Amended 12-14-1992 by Ord. No. 561]
All persons are subject to the provisions of Subtitle 4 of Title V of the
Natural Resources Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland, or as
it may be subsequently amended, and must obtain a permit from the
Department to plant, prune, remove, root prune and treat trees and
shrubs existing in the right-of-way of any road within the City. The
City may remove a tree without a permit if the tree is uprooted or
determined to be an immediate danger to persons or property, provided
that it shall notify the Department within 24 hours.
A.
This section does not prohibit the planting of roadside trees by adjacent
property owners, provided that the selection and location of said trees
is in accordance with §§ 148-7 through 148-10 of this chapter.
B.
Nothing contained in this section shall relieve the owners and
occupants of premises from complying with the provisions of § 139-7 of
the Westminster City Code.
C.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or entity to top any park tree
or other tree located on public property without prior written approval
of the Director.
A.
After payment of a fee as provided in the General Fee Ordinance,71
the Director may grant written approval to allow topping of a park
tree or other tree located on City property in cases where a tree
has been severely damaged by storms or other causes or when a
tree creates a dangerous condition relating to utility wires or other
obstructions. Prior to granting any such approval, the Director shall
obtain a recommendation from the Commission, except in emergency
circumstances in which the Director is authorized to act immediately.
[Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 791]
B.
71.Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
§ 148-9 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 148-12
112:400
§ 148-13. Removal of dead or diseased trees from private property.
The City shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased
tree on private property within the City when such tree constitutes a
hazard to life and property or harbors insects or disease which constitutes a
potential threat to other trees within the City. The City will notify, in writing,
the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by said owners at their
own expense within 60 days after the date of service of notice. In the event
of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the City shall have
the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of removal to the
property owner. Said cost shall be a lien on the property upon which the
tree is located and may be collected in the same manner as the collection of
delinquent taxes.
§ 148-14. Removal of stumps.
All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of
the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface
of the ground unless the Commission authorizes an alternative method of
removal.
§ 148-15. Tree experts. [Amended 12-14-1992 by Ord. No. 561]
The City may not top any roadside tree without a permit issued by the
Department.
C.
No person or firm engaged in the business or occupation of pruning,
treating or removing trees shall engage in the practice of tree topping
within the City except:
(1) As provided for in § 148-12B; or
In cases where a tree has been severely damaged by storms or
other causes, when a tree creates a dangerous condition relating to
utility wires or other obstructions or for other valid circumstances.
In such instances, the person or firm shall file a written request
seeking approval of the Director, who shall obtain a
recommendation from the Commission, except in emergency
conditions in which the Director is authorized to act immediately.
If the Director fails to act upon the written request within seven
working days, it shall be deemed to be approved.
(2)
D.
No person or firm shall engage in the business or occupation of pruning
or treating trees within the City without having a tree expert license
issued by the Department.
A.
A public service company which desires to prune, root prune, remove
or treat a roadside tree in any way must obtain a permit from the
State Department of Natural Resources for the desired treatment. Any
treatment of a roadside tree, except removal, must be performed by a
tree expert licensed by the Department.
B.
§ 148-12 PLUMBING § 148-15
112:401
§ 148-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-14-1992 by Ord.
No. 561]
Any violation of §§ 148-9, 148-10, 148-12, 148-13, 148-14 and 148-15 is
declared to be a municipal infraction. The penalty for violations shall be a
fine of $250 for each offense and $400 for each repeat offense.
§ 148-17. Appeals.
Any applicant seeking Commission approval under §§ 148-7B, 148-12 and
148-14 may appeal an unfavorable decision of the Commission to the Mayor
and Common Council within 10 days after receipt of the Commission's
decision. After its review, the Mayor and Common Council may affirm,
reverse or modify the Commission's decision by resolution within a sixty-day
period from the date of the appeal. The decision of the Mayor and Common
Council shall be final.
Chapter 150
URBAN RENEWAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Charter provisions — See §§ 48 through 58 of
the City Charter.
§ 150-1. Findings.
The Common Council of the City hereby finds that:
The City must obtain a permit from the Department to remove, prune,
root prune or treat a roadside tree. Such treatment, except removals,
must be performed by a licensed tree expert unless the work done
by City crews is supervised by the Department's Forestry Division
in accordance with its schedule of charges. The City may obtain
conditional permits to perform limited work on roadside trees by its
employees if said employees are trained to perform the work and
supervised by a City employee who has passed the tree expert exam
administered by the Department and agrees to be responsible for the
quality of the work performed. The designated City supervisor is not
required to have the necessary three years' experience to obtain a tree
expert's license, but must exhibit the ability to cause the trimming
to be done to accepted standards. Supervision of tree trimming will
be limited to roadside trees within the City and trees on City-owned
property.
C.
Blighted area: general description. There exists in the City a blighted
area, as hereinafter defined geographically, in which area a majority of
the buildings have declined in productivity by reason of obsolescence,
A.
§ 148-15 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 150-1
150:402
depreciation and other causes to an extent that the buildings no longer
justify fundamental repairs or adequate maintenance.
Boundaries. The blighted area is found to be the area bounded by a line
drawn as follows:
B.
§ 150-1 URBAN RENEWAL § 150-1
150:403
Beginning at the intersection of the southeast side of Longwell Avenue
and the northeast side of East Main Street and running along the
southeast side of Longwell Avenue in a northeasterly direction to the
southwest side of Willis Street; then northwesterly, crossing Longwell
Avenue to the northwest side thereof at the corner of the southwest
side of Willis Street; then crossing Willis Street in a northeasterly
direction to the northeast side thereof; then proceeding westerly along
the northeast side of Willis Street, more commonly known as "City Hall
Drive," to the southeast side of Locust Street; then crossing City Hall
Drive to the southeast corner of City Hall Drive and Locust Street;
then continuing in a westerly direction along the southwest side of
Willis Street, more commonly known as "Sherwood Avenue," to the
northwest side of Railroad Avenue, Maryland Route 27, northeasterly
along Railroad Avenue for a distance of forty-five feet, more or less;
then continuing in a westerly direction by a line parallel to the
northeast side of Sherwood Avenue, if extended, a distance of one
hundred eighty feet, more or less, to the bed of the Western Maryland
Railroad tracks there situate; then southwesterly along the Western
§ 150-1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 150-1
150:404
Maryland Railroad bed of the railroad tracks to the southwest side
of Winter's Street; then westerly along the southwest side of Winter's
Street a distance of six hundred forty-five feet, more or less; then
southwesterly at a right angle to Winter's Street to the northeast side
of West Main Street, including within this line the Penney building;
then easterly forty-five feet, more or less, to a point which would
intersect with a prolongation of the northwest side of John Street,
if extended; then crossing West Main Street southwesterly and
proceeding along the northwest side of Bond Street for a distance
of two hundred fifty-five feet, more or less, to the northeast side of
an alleyway known as "Union Alley" there situate; then easterly by
a line parallel to and a distance of two hundred twenty feet from
the southwest side of West Main Street including the outbuildings of
the property fronting on West Main Street, and proceeding along the
northeast side of Union Alley for part of the distance, four hundred
ninety-five feet more or less, to the end of Union Alley; then, crossing
Union Alley in a southerly direction for a distance of thirty feet, more
or less; then by a line parallel to the last line mentioned above,
proceeding easterly seventy-five feet, more or less, and crossing
Liberty Street, Maryland Route 27, to the southeast side thereof; then,
along the southeast side of Liberty Street, Maryland Route 27, in a
southwesterly direction for a distance of fifty-five feet, more or less;
then proceeding in an easterly direction at right angles to Liberty
Street and following the property line between a building at 11 Liberty
Street owned by Albaugh-Babylon Grocery Company and the adjoining
property, the Yingling General Tire Company, for a distance of two
hundred thirty feet, more or less, to a point crossing the Western
Maryland Railroad tracks to a point on the rear line of the former Saint
John's School and Church property situate; and proceeding along the
southwest side of a driveway there situate; then continuing easterly
along the northeast boundary of the Saint John's Cemetery property
and the rear lot lines of the properties fronting onto the southwest
side of East Main Street, crossing Longwell Avenue to the southeast
side thereof, then proceeding northeasterly along the southeast side
of Longwell Avenue to the southwest side of East Main Street; then
easterly on the southwest side of East Main Street forty-three feet,
more or less, to a point which would be formed by the southwest side
of East Main Street out the southeast side of Longwell Avenue, first
herein mentioned if extended southerly, then northeasterly, crossing
East Main Street northeast side thereof and to the point of beginning.
All as shown on a plat titled "Downtown Renewal District Plan,"
prepared for the City of Westminster by Gaudreau, Inc. and Land
Design/Research, Inc., dated December 1976, which plan, for purposes
of defining the renewal area and the blighted area herein mentioned,
is directed to be displayed for public inspection in a prominent space
in City Hall pending any hearing held pursuant to or in consequence of
the passage of this chapter.
§ 150-1 URBAN RENEWAL § 150-1
150:405
§ 150-2. Plan projected.
The Mayor, by agents appointed by him, shall cause to be prepared a plan
for urban renewal of the area defined in § 150-1 and shall exercise, on
behalf of the City, the powers conferred on the City by the Acts of the
General Assembly 1961, Chapter 341, relative to the preparation of a plan
for an urban renewal project.
Chapter 155
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 139. Taxicabs — See Ch. 145.
Need for renewal established. The rehabilitation and redevelopment or
conservation of such area or combination thereof is necessary in the
interest of the public health, safety, morals and welfare of the residents
of the City.
C.
§ 150-1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 150-2
150:406
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 155-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings indicated, except when such meanings would be inconsistent
with the manifest intent of the Mayor and Common Council:
BUS —
BUSINESS DISTRICT — The territory contiguous to and including a street
or highway when 50% or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of 300
feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business
DRIVE — To drive, operate, move or be in actual physical control of a
vehicle, including the exercise of control over or the steering of a vehicle
being towed by a motor vehicle.
DRIVER — Any individual who drives a vehicle.
HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of any way or
thoroughfare of which any part is used by the public for vehicular travel,
whether or not the way or thoroughfare has been dedicated to the public
within the City and accepted by any proper authority.
MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS — Includes the following: North Longwell
Avenue Municipal Lot, Longwell Avenue Municipal Lot Annex (formerly
known as "Key Street Municipal Lot"), south end of the LeRoy L. Conaway
Municipal Lot (formerly known as "Railroad Municipal Lot") and the north
end of the LeRoy L. Conaway Lot, Chapel Municipal Lot, Albion Municipal
Lot. Winter's Municipal Lot, Eugene A. Bauerlien Municipal Lot, Longwell
Avenue Municipal Parking Garage and the Westminster Square Municipal
Parking Garage.[Added 3-24-2003 by Ord. No. 698]
OPERATE — As used in reference to a vehicle, to drive, as defined in this
section.
OPERATOR — As used in reference to a vehicle, driver, as defined in this
section.
OWNER — As used in reference to a vehicle:
PARK — To halt a vehicle, whether or not it is occupied, other than
temporarily:
A motor vehicle that is designed to carry more than 10 passengers and
is used to carry people.
A.
Any other motor vehicle that is designed and used to carry people for
compensation, except for a taxicab.
B.
A. A person who has the property in or title to the vehicle.
Includes a person who, subject to a security interest in another person,
is entitled to the use and possession of the vehicle.
B.
§ 155-1 URBAN RENEWAL § 155-1
150:407
PARKING METER — A device which shall indicate thereon the length of
time during which a vehicle may be parked in a particular place, which shall
have as a part thereof a receptacle or chamber for receiving and storing
coins of the United States or city-approved tokens, a slot or place in which
such coins may be deposited, a timing mechanism to indicate the passage
of the interval of time during which parking is permissible and which shall
also display an appropriate signal when the aforesaid interval of time shall
have elapsed and brief instructions as to its operation and the length of time
of parking allowed upon the deposit of the required coin or coins. The term
"parking meter" shall also include the mechanisms and equipment used
by the City to measure time and impose charges for the Longwell Avenue
Municipal Parking Garage and the Westminster Square Municipal Parking
Garage.[Amended 3-24-2003 by Ord. No. 698]
PARKING SPACE — A portion of the surface of the street of sufficient length
and depth from the sidewalk curb to accommodate a vehicle to be parked,
as shall be specified and marked off by authority of the Mayor and Common
Council.
POLICE OFFICER — Any member of the City Police Department who has
the authority to make arrests and also includes any officer authorized to
direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of any of the
provisions of the City Code and the Maryland Vehicle Law or of local or any
other traffic laws or regulations.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT — The territory contiguous to and including a
street or highway not comprising a business district when over 50% of the
frontage on such highway for a distance of 300 feet or more is improved
with individual residences or building uses for residential purposes.
SNOW TIRES — Those tires that are in a good state of repair and that:
STAND — To halt a vehicle, whether or not it is occupied, other than
temporarily:
When necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the directions of a police officer or a traffic control device.
A.
For the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading
property or passengers.
B.
A. Are normally designated by their manufacturer as "snow tires."
Are approved by the Administrator as meeting the standards of
effectiveness required of normally designated "snow tires."
B.
Have antiskid patterns cut into the treaded surfaces to form bars,
buttons or blocks specially designed to give effective traction on snowor
ice-covered highways.
C.
When necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the directions of a police officer or a traffic control device.
A.
§ 155-1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 155-1
150:408
STOP —
STREET — Includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue,
boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches thereto
within the City used by the public, whether actually dedicated to the public
and accepted by the proper public authority or otherwise. It also means the
entire width thereof between abutting property lines and includes roads and
driveways of the state.
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE — Any sign, signal, marking or device not
inconsistent with the Maryland Transportation Article, placed or erected by
authority of the Mayor and Common Council or other public body or official
having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL — Any device, whether manually, electrically
or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternatively directed to stop
and permitted to proceed.
VEHICLE — Every self-propelled device in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks or propelled by electric
power obtained from overhead trolley wires but not operated upon rails or
tracks.
§ 155-2. Traffic control devices.
For the purposes of and while actually engaged in receiving or
discharging passengers.
B.
Where used in a mandatory sense, the complete cessation from
movement.
A.
Where used in a prohibitory sense, to halt even momentarily a vehicle,
whether or not it is occupied, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer
or a traffic control device.
B.
The Mayor and Common Council has the authority to provide for the
placement and maintenance upon streets under its jurisdiction of such
traffic control devices as it may deem necessary to carry out the
provisions of this chapter, the Transportation Article of the Annotated
Code of Maryland, and to control, regulate, warn or guide traffic. All
such traffic control devices shall conform to the state's "Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways" with regard
to design, color, size and placement.
A.
Unless the contrary is established by competent evidence, if a traffic
control device is placed in a position approximately meeting the
requirements of this article and the requisites of the state, the device is
presumed to have been placed by the official act or direction of lawful
authority.
B.
Unless the contrary is established by competent evidence, if a traffic
control device is placed in accordance with this article and the
C.
§ 155-1 URBAN RENEWAL § 155-2
150:409
§ 155-3. Compliance with officers, signs, signals and markings.
requisites of the state and purports to meet the lawful requirements
governing these devices, the device is presumed to meet all of the
requirements of law.
No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any traffic
control device placed in accordance with this section, unless at the time
otherwise directed by a police officer or other person having authority
to direct traffic.
D.
Any violation of Subsection D hereof is declared to be a municipal
infraction. The penalty for violation shall be a fine of $35 for each
offense.
E.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
Fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any instruction, direction or
warning of any police officer of the City controlling or directing the
flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic on the streets, roads, alleys
or parking lots within the City.
(1)
Fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any warning, direction, speed
limitation or prohibition of any sign, standard or other device
erected or maintained for the purpose of controlling or directing
vehicular traffic on the streets, roads, alleys or parking lots within
the City.
(2)
Fail, neglect or refuse to obey the signal of any traffic control
signal, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated.
(3)
Fail, neglect or refuse to keep a vehicle within a proper traffic lane
as designated by lines, marks or arrows painted upon any street,
road, alley or parking lot within the City.
(4)
Park, stand or stop any vehicle within an area or zone that is
reserved for handicapped parking in accordance with the criteria
provided in the Transportation Article. For purposes of this section,
a vehicle may park, stand or stop in a handicapped parking zone
only if the vehicle displays the special registration plates for
disabled persons issued by the Maryland Motor Vehicle
Administration or registration plates issued under a similar
provision of any other state or the District of Columbia or unless
the vehicle displays a valid permit issued by the Motor Vehicle
Administration or any other state or the District of Columbia.
(5)
Remove, deface or cover any sign, standard or other device or any
painted line, arrow or mark relating to vehicular speed or control
or to the parking of vehicles.
(6)
A.
Any violation of Subsection A hereof is declared to be a municipal
infraction. The penalty for violation of Subsection A(1), (2), (3), (4) and
B.
§ 155-2 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 155-3
150:410
§ 155-4. Cruising.
(6) shall be a fine of $35 for each offense. The penalty for violation of
Subsection A(5) shall be a fine of $100 for each offense. [Amended
11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 791]
Legislative findings. The Mayor and Common Council finds that, with
consistency, a threat to the public health, safety and welfare arises from
the congestion and traffic hazards created by repetitive, unnecessary
driving of motor vehicles within the City of Westminster. The purpose of
this section is to reduce the dangerous traffic congestion as well as the
excessive noise, littering and pollution resulting from such unnecessary
repetitive driving, to provide for the safety of drivers and pedestrians
and to ensure sufficient access for emergency vehicles to and through
the City now hampered by this repetitive driving of motor vehicles.
A.
Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply:
AREA DESIGNATED — An area of property within the City designated
by the Mayor and Common Council by resolution as an area where
cruising is prohibited. Any owner, lessee or management agent of any
area may request that the Mayor and Common Council designate its
property as an area where cruising is prohibited.
CRUISING —
TRAFFIC CONTROL POINT — A clearly identified reference point in an
area designated, as determined and marked from time to time, by the
City Police Department.
Driving a motor vehicle on a street or posted private property
past a traffic control point, as determined by the City Police
Department, more than twice in any two-hour period between the
hours of 7:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. in an area designated by the
Mayor and Common Council. The passing of a designated control
point a third time under the aforesaid conditions shall constitute
cruising except as provided in Subsection B(2) hereof.
(1)
Does not apply to any municipal, emergency, police, fire,
ambulance or other governmental vehicle when the same is being
operated in its official capacity. It also does not apply to any duly
licensed public transportation vehicle nor to any vehicles utilized
for business or commercial purposes.
(2)
B.
Posting. Every area designated as an area where cruising is prohibited
shall be posted with a sign to provide notice of the prohibition which
shall state "No Cruising." All areas designated by the Mayor and
Common Council shall be so posted at the property owner's expense.
C.
Cruising prohibited. No person shall cruise. For the purposes of this
section, the person operating the vehicle and the person having care,
custody or control of a motor vehicle shall be considered the person
D.
§ 155-3 URBAN RENEWAL § 155-4
150:411
§ 155-5. Use of closed streets; damaging construction equipment.
§ 155-6. Interference with traffic control devices and railroad signs
and signals.
cruising. For the purposes of this section, the person having "care,
custody or control of a motor vehicle" shall mean either the owner
of said vehicle, if present in the vehicle at the time of violation or, if
the owner is not so present, the person or persons having the owner's
authority to use the vehicle.
Penalty as infraction. Any violation of this section is declared to be
an infraction. The penalty for violation shall be a fine of $25 for each
offense.
E.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive upon, pass over or use any
vehicle on any new street or newly repaired street before it is opened
to traffic.
A.
A person may not willfully improve or damage any street, including a
street under construction, or any work, material or structure used in
connection with the construction of a street.
B.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive upon, pass over or use any
vehicle on any street or portion of street which is undergoing repair or
which for any other reason has been closed to traffic by authority of the
Mayor and Common Council or its agents whenever signs have been
erected or barricades installed so as to show that such street or portion
thereof has been closed to traffic.
C.
Any violation of any subsection hereof is declared to be a municipal
infraction. The penalty for violation shall be a fine of $25 for each
offense.
D.
Alteration. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully alter any
traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal, including any
inscription, shield or insignia on it.
A.
Defacing. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully deface any
traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal, including any
inscription, shield or insignia on it.
B.
Injuring. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully injure any traffic
control device or any railroad sign or signal, including any inscription,
shield or insignia on it.
C.
Knocking down. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully knock
down any traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal, including
any inscription, shield or insignia on it.
D.
§ 155-4 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 155-6
150:412
§ 155-7. Display of unauthorized signs; commercial advertising.
Changing directions. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully
change the direction of any traffic control device or any railroad sign or
signal, including any inscription, shield or insignia on it.
E.
Twisting. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully twist, any traffic
control device or any railroad sign or signal, including any inscription,
shield or insignia on it.
F.
Removing any part of it It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully
remove any traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal,
including any inscription, shield or insignia on it.
G.
Lines or markings. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully
deface, remove, screen from view, tamper or otherwise interfere with
any lines or markings painted by authority of the Mayor and Common
Council on any pavement, curb or roadway for the direction of traffic or
the parking of vehicles.
H.
Any violation of any subsection hereof is declared to be municipal
infraction. The penalty for violation shall be a fine of $50 for each
offense.
I.
General prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to place,
maintain or display on or in view of any street any unauthorized sign,
signal, marking or device that purports to be, is an imitation of or
resembles a traffic control device or a railroad sign or signal or paint
on the curb, pavement or roadway any marks or lines similar to those
adopted by authority of the Mayor and Common Council to direct,
control or restrict traffic or the parking of vehicles.
A.
Signs, etc., directing movement of traffic. It shall be unlawful for any
person to place, maintain or display on or in view of any street any
unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device that attempts to direct the
movement of traffic.
B.
Signs, etc., interfering with effectiveness of traffic control devices or
railroad signs. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain
or display on or in view of any street any unauthorized sign, signal,
marking or device that hides or interferes with the effectiveness of a
traffic control device or a railroad sign or signal.
C.
Placing signs, etc., except as otherwise permitted by law. It shall be
unlawful for any person to place, maintain or display on or in view of
any street any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device that, except
as otherwise permitted by law, contains:
Any of the following words: "stop," "curve," "warning," "slow,"
"danger," "listen," "look" or "school."
(1)
(2) Any other word used in directing the movement of traffic.
D.
§ 155-6 URBAN RENEWAL § 155-7
150:413
§ 155-8. Applicability to police officers. [Amended 5-8-1995 by Ord.
No. 598]
This chapter shall have no application to the operation and parking of a
vehicle or bicycle by a police officer when on duty or conducting official
police business.
§ 155-9. Bicycles, tricycles and skateboards.
§ 155-10. Removal, towing and impounding of vehicles.
Commercial advertising prohibited. A person may not place or maintain
on any street nor may any public authority permit on any street any
traffic sign or signal that has any commercial advertising on it.
E.
Prohibited signs, etc., a public nuisance. Each sign, signal, marking or
device prohibited by this section is a public nuisance, and the City may
remove it without notice.
F.
Any violation of any subsection hereof is declared to be a municipal
infraction. The penalty for violation shall be a fine of $50 for each
offense.
G.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle or skateboard upon
any sidewalk in any business district, and it shall be unlawful for any
person above the age of 14 years to ride a bicycle or tricycle upon
any sidewalk in any residential district, and it shall be unlawful for any
person to ride a skateboard on any street or public right-of-way unless
otherwise specifically designated.
A.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a skateboard at any time
within the Westminster Municipal Playground or parks, unless
otherwise specifically designated.
B.
Any violation of any subsection hereof is declared to be a municipal
infraction. The penalty for violation shall be a fine of $25 for each
offense.
C.
Whenever any vehicle is parked or stopped at a location where parking
or stopping is prohibited or is otherwise parked so as to constitute a
hazard to public safety or is so parked, stopped or standing so as to
impede or obstruct the normal movement of traffic or pedestrians, the
officer who discovers the vehicle illegally parked shall deliver a citation
to the operator or, if the vehicle is unattended, attach a citation to
the vehicle in a conspicuous place. In the absence of the operator, the
registered owner of the vehicle shall be presumed to be the person
parking or stopping the vehicle. In addition, if the vehicle is unattended,
the Police Department may proceed immediately to have the vehicle
removed, towed and impounded. The cost of the removal, towing and
storage of any vehicle, together with any unpaid fines and
administrative expenses, shall be paid prior to the release of the
A.
§ 155-7 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 155-10
150:414
§ 155-11. Liability of owner; unsatisfied citations; impounding or
immobilization.
vehicle, and such vehicle shall only be released to the registered owner
thereof or a person specifically designated by the owner.
In cases of parking violations not covered by Subsection A hereof, the
officer who discovers the vehicle illegally parked shall deliver a citation
to the operator or, if the vehicle is unattended, attach a citation to
the vehicle in a conspicuous place. In the absence of the operator, the
registered owner of the vehicle shall be presumed to be the person
parking the vehicle. If the parking violation exists continuously for a
period of three hours or more, the Police Department may proceed
to have the vehicle removed, towed and impounded. The cost of the
removal, towing and storage of any vehicle, together with any unpaid
fines and administrative expenses, shall be paid prior to the release of
the vehicle, and such vehicle shall only be released to the registered
owner thereof or a person specifically designated by the owner.
B.
The costs of the removal, towing, impoundment and storage of vehicles
may include the amounts charged by any independent contractor
engaged by the City for such services as well as the daily storage
charges as established by resolution of the Mayor and Common
Council.
C.
The City of Westminster or any agent, employee or independent
contractor thereof, including but not limited to the Westminster City
Police Department and any officer or agent thereof, shall not in any
way be liable to the owner or any other person or entity having a right
to possession of any vehicle or any other person or entity having or
claiming any interest whatsoever in a vehicle which is removed, towed,
impounded and stored under the provisions of any section under this
article.
D.
The procedures set forth in § 155-13 shall also be utilized for any
impoundment under this section.
E.
When any unattended motor vehicle is found parked at any time upon
any street of the City of Westminster against which there are two or
more unsatisfied citations for parking violations and when a period
of 30 days or more has elapsed since the second unsatisfied citation,
the Westminster City Police Department is authorized to cause such
vehicle, either by towing or otherwise, to be removed or conveyed
to and impounded in any place designated by the Chief of Police or
immobilized in such a manner as to prevent its operation, except that
no such vehicle shall be immobilized by members of the Police
Department by any means other than by the use of a device or other
mechanism which will cause no damage to such vehicle unless said
vehicle is moved while such device or mechanism is in place.
[Amended 7-14-1997 by Ord. No. 620]
A.
§ 155-10 URBAN RENEWAL § 155-11
150:415
§ 155-12. Interference with immobilization.
§ 155-13. Hearing relating to impoundment and immobilization.
In any case involving immobilization pursuant to this section, such
police officer shall cause to be placed on such vehicle in a conspicuous
manner notice sufficient to warn any individual to the effect that such
vehicle has been immobilized and that any attempt to move such
vehicle might result in damage to such vehicle. Said notice shall further
advise the owner or operator that the vehicle has been immobilized
by the City for failure to satisfy citations for parking violations; that
the owner has the right to contest the immobilization by submitting a
written request to the City Police Department within 10 days from the
date of the immobilization or said right shall be deemed to have been
waived; and that release of the vehicle may be obtained upon payment
of the booting fee and other amount specified in this section.
B.
The owner of an immobilized vehicle shall be permitted to secure
release of the vehicle upon payment of a booting fee of $100 and all
charges which have accrued thereon by virtue of its immobilization,
together with any unpaid fines and administrative expenses.
[Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 791]
C.
The owner of an impounded vehicle shall be permitted to secure release
of the vehicle upon payment of the costs of the removal, towing,
impoundment and storage of said vehicle, together with any unpaid
fines and administrative expenses, prior to the release of the vehicle.
D.
The procedures set forth in § 155-13 shall also be utilized for any
impoundment or immobilization under this section.
E.
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with or remove or attempt
to remove the immobilization device without authorization from the
Westminster Police Department.
A.
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the owner or operator
or a person authorized by either of them to remove the warning notice
regarding immobilization.
B.
Any violation of any subsection hereof is declared to be a municipal
infraction. The penalty for violation shall be a fine of $100 for each
offense.
C.
Unless the owner of a vehicle impounded or immobilized under the
provisions of § 155-10 appears to secure a release of the vehicle within
24 hours after the vehicle has been immobilized, said owner shall be
given written notice by certified mail within 48 hours after the vehicle
has been impounded or immobilized by the Westminster City Police
Department that said owner has the right to contest the validity of
the impoundment or immobilization at a hearing which will be held
A.
§ 155-11 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 155-13
150:416
§ 155-14. Abandoned vehicles.
In dealing with abandoned vehicles, the Westminster City Police
Department is authorized to utilize the procedures set forth in Subtitle 2 of
Title 25 of the Transportation Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland as
it is presently codified or as it may be subsequently amended. Further, any
vehicle impounded under §§ 155-10 and 155-11 shall be deemed to be an
within 72 hours, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, from the
submission of a written request for a hearing.
The notice shall further advise that said owner's right to a hearing shall
be deemed to have been waived if said owner fails to make a written
request for a hearing within 10 days from the receipt of the certified
mail notice sent to said owner or if said owner executes a written
waiver when releasing the impounded or immobilized vehicle.
B.
Requests for a hearing contesting the validity of an impoundment or
immobilization shall be referred to a hearing officer appointed by the
Mayor and Common Council. Said hearing officer shall conduct the
hearing pursuant to the procedures established by regulation of the
Westminster City Police Department. The hearing officer shall consider
such facts and circumstances as the officer deems necessary in making
a determination as to the validity of the impoundment or
immobilization. The determination of the hearing officer shall be final.
It shall have no bearing on the fine, penalty or charges which might be
imposed by the District Court of Maryland for municipal infractions.
C.
If the hearing officer determines that a vehicle should not have been
impounded, the owner shall not be required to pay the impoundment
costs imposed therefor, or if they have been paid, a refund shall be
made to the owner who made said payment. The hearing officer shall
have no authority to modify any fines or administrative charges.
D.
If the hearing officer determines that a vehicle should not have been
immobilized, the owner shall not be required to pay the booting fee and
all charges which have accrued by virtue of the vehicle immobilization,
or if said fees have been paid, a refund shall be made to the owner
who made said payment. The hearing officer shall have no authority to
modify any fines or administrative charges.
E.
If, following trial in the District Court of Maryland or other tribunal,
a decision is entered in favor of the owner upon all of the parking
violations charged against the vehicle immobilized or impounded,
notwithstanding the ruling of the hearing officer with respect to the
immobilization or impoundment of the vehicle, all charges advanced
as having accrued upon the vehicle by virtue of its immobilization or
impoundment shall be returned to the person who advanced such sums
upon presentation of the official receipt issued at the time said vehicle
was released.
F.
§ 155-13 URBAN RENEWAL § 155-14
150:417
abandoned vehicle if it is not reclaimed by its owner within 48 hours after
impoundment.
§ 155-14 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 155-14
150:418
ARTICLE II
Stopping, Standing and Parking
§ 155-15. Continuous parking.
§ 155-16. Unattended motor vehicles.
§ 155-17. Obstruction of traffic.
§ 155-18. Buses and other vehicles operating over fixed routes.
No vehicle shall be permitted to remain parked continuously upon any
street for more than 48 hours except where a lesser time is provided
by this article and except where such vehicle is parked in front of a
property owned, leased or occupied by the driver of the vehicle or
where such parking is permitted with the permission of the owner,
lessee or occupant of the property.
A.
No commercial truck, bus, tractor, trailer, semitrailer or house trailer
shall be permitted to park or stand longer than one hour continuously
on any street within the City, provided that the provisions of this section
shall not apply to commercial trucks which are parked for the purpose
of doing any public or private work for or on behalf of any person,
institution or governmental entity within a radius of one block from the
place of such work.
B.
Any violation of any subsection hereof is declared to be a municipal
infraction. The penalty for violation shall be $40 for each offense.
[Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 791]
C.
A person driving or otherwise in charge of a motor vehicle may not
leave it unattended until the engine is stopped, the ignition locked, the
key removed and the brake effectively set.
A.
A person driving or otherwise in charge of a motor vehicle may not
leave the motor vehicle unattended until, if the vehicle is on a grade,
the front wheels are turned to the curb or side of the highway.
B.
Any violation of any subsection hereof is declared to be a municipal
infraction. The penalty for violation shall be $25 for each offense.
C.
No person shall park a vehicle on any street in such a manner that such
vehicle shall constitute an obstruction to the free flow of traffic upon
the street,
A.
Any violation of Subsection A hereof is declared to be a municipal
infraction. The penalty for violation shall be $25 for each offense.
B.
No bus or other vehicle operating over a fixed route in or through the
City and carrying paid passengers or cargo shall stop for the reception
or discharge of passengers or cargo or park at any place other than a
bus stop or other place designated for such a purpose by authority of
A.
§ 155-15 URBAN RENEWAL § 155-18
150:419
§ 155-19. Certain vehicles prohibited in municipal parking lots.
§ 155-19.1. Parking regulations for municipal parking lots. [Added
3-24-2003 by Ord. No. 698]
the legislative body and then only pursuant to a permit granted by the
legislative body.
No bus or other vehicle operating over a fixed route in or through
the City and carrying paid passengers or cargo shall stop or remain
standing on any street except as provided in Subsection A of this
section and except as may be necessary to avoid collision or other
danger or to comply with traffic regulations and except in case of
mechanical failure or other emergency.
B.
Any violation of any subsection hereof is declared to be a municipal
infraction. The penalty for violation shall be $25 for each offense.
C.
No bus, tractor, trailer, semitrailer, house trailer, mobile home, camper
or truck over 3/4 ton shall be permitted to park or stand on any
municipal parking lot This section does not prohibit the parking of
trucks (3/4 ton or less) with shell campers or cabs over the bed of the
truck.
A.
Any violation of Subsection A hereof is declared to be a municipal
infraction. The penalty for violation shall be a fine of $25 for each
offense.
B.
Except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in loading or unloading passengers or for emergency repairs when
the vehicle cannot be driven, no person shall park any vehicle on a
municipal parking lot:
(1) In violation of an official sign.
In a no-parking zone when posted by sign or indicated by yellow
painted curb or yellow painted lines on the parking surface.
(2)
In any place that is not designed as a parking space by painted
lines.
(3)
In or on driving aisles, driveways, sidewalks. landscaped areas,
islands. or devices for channeling traffic.
(4)
In an area where parking is temporarily prohibited when marked
off by temporary signs or barricades or when an official cover or
hood is placed over a parking meter.
(5)
So as to prevent another vehicle already stopped or otherwise
legally parked in a designated parking space, from moving away.
(6)
(7) For a period longer than 24 hours, except for permit holders.
A.
§ 155-18 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 155-19.1
150:420
§ 155-20. Use of streets for commercial storage or display.
§ 155-21. General manner of parking.
When such vehicle is unregistered or inoperative or otherwise not
capable of being operated legally or safely upon the highways,
roads and streets of the City, county or state.
(8)
By backing said vehicle into a parking space when posted by frontin-
only signs.
(9)
In such a manner as to cause said vehicle to straddle the painted
lines marking a parking space or otherwise cause the vehicle to be
parked not wholly within the area of one designated parking space.
(10)
By leaving vehicle unattended without first stopping the engine,
locking the ignition, removing the key and effectively setting the
brake thereon.
(11)
In such a manner so as to impede or obstruct the free flow of traffic
or to cause a hazard to public safety.
(12)
Any violation of this section is declared to be a municipal infraction. The
penalty for violation shall be $25 for each offense.
B.
No person shall use any portion of any street within the City for the
commercial storage, parking or placing of any motor vehicle, tractor,
motor home, recreational vehicle, boat, trailer or equipment The term
"commercial storage" shall mean the use of any portion of a street for
the storage, parking or placing of any motor vehicle, tractor, motor
home, recreational vehicle, boat, trailer or equipment for the purpose
of exhibition or display of for the purpose of storage.
A.
Any violation of Subsection A hereof is declared to be a municipal
infraction. The penalty for violation shall be a fine of $25 for each
offense.
B.
Vehicles shall be parked with right wheels parallel to the edge of the
curb or roadway and not more than 12 inches therefrom and not less
than four feet behind or ahead of any vehicle already parked. Vehicles
parked on the left side of one-way streets, where permitted, shall be
subject to the same distance limitations. These limitations shall not
apply at places designated for angular parking by appropriate signs or
markings placed by authority of the legislative body, in which instances
vehicles shall be parked in conformity with such signs or markings.
These limitations shall also not apply to vehicles parked within the radii
area of culs-de-sac which do not have center islands unless they are
otherwise posted by the City. [Amended 7-26-2004 by Ord. No. 717]
A.
Any violation of Subsection A hereof is declared to be a municipal
infraction. The penalty for violation shall be a fine of $25 for each
offense. [Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 791]
B.
§ 155-19.1 URBAN RENEWAL § 155-22
150:421
§ 155-22. Use of street for vehicle repair.
§ 155-23. Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in certain
places. [Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 791]
§ 155-24. Stopping to discharge or take on gasoline or oil.
§ 155-25. Glass, injurious substances or refuse on street.
No vehicle shall be repaired in any street except in case of emergency
and then only so as not to block or obstruct any street or sidewalk,
nor shall the motor of any such vehicle be tested while it is parked or
standing on any street except when unavoidable.
A.
Any violation of Subsection A hereof is declared to be a municipal
infraction. The penalty for violation shall be a fine of $25 for each
offense.
B.
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle:
(1) In an intersection.
(2) On a crosswalk.
(3) On a sidewalk.
(4) Within an area where yellow lines have been painted upon a curb.
Where signs have been erected prohibiting vehicular stopping,
standing or parking, including, but not limited to, fire lanes.
(5)
Across a driveway providing access to private property, without the
permission of the owner, lessee or occupant of the property.
(6)
A.
Any violation of this section is declared to be a municipal infraction. The
penalty for violation of Subsection A(1), (2), (3), (4) and (6) of § 155-23
shall be a fine of $25 for each offense. The penalty for violations of
Subsection A(5) shall be a fine of $50.
B.
No motor vehicle shall stop, stand or remain on any street for the
purpose of discharging gasoline or oil or being supplied with gasoline
or oil for a longer period than is reasonably necessary for that purpose.
A.
Any violation of Subsection A hereof is declared to be a municipal
infraction. The penalty for violation shall be a fine of $25 for each
offense.
B.
A person may not drop, throw or place on a street any glass bottle,
glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans or any other substance likely to injure any
person, animal or vehicle on the street.
A.
§ 155-22 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 155-25
150:422
§ 155-26. Parking within lines or markers.
§ 155-26.1. Fire hydrants. [Added 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 791]
§ 155-27. Improper display of registration plates.
Any person who drops, throws or places or permits to be dropped,
thrown or placed on a street any destructive, hazardous or injurious
material immediately shall remove it or cause it to be removed.
B.
Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street also
shall remove from the street any glass or other injurious substance
dropped from the vehicle.
C.
A person may not throw, dump, discharge or deposit any trash, junk or
other refuse on any street.
D.
The owner of the vehicle, if present in the vehicle, or, in his absence,
the driver of the vehicle is presumed to be responsible for any violation
of this section if:
(1) The violation is caused by an occupant of the vehicle;
(2) The vehicle has two or more occupants; and
(3) It cannot be determined which occupant is the violator.
E.
Any violation of any subsection hereof is declared to be a municipal
infraction. The penalty for violation shall be a fine of $25 for each
offense.
F.
Where white lines have been painted or markers have been been
installed upon any street or city parking lot indicating parking spaces,
no vehicle shall be parked except wholly within a parking space as
indicated by such white lines or markers.
A.
No vehicle shall be parked at any place where yellow lines have been
painted to indicate a nonparking zone.
B.
Any violation of this section hereof is declared to be a municipal
infraction. The penalty for violation shall be a fine of $25 for each
offense.
C.
No person shall stop, park, or leave standing any motor vehicle within
15 feet of a fire hydrant, except for vehicles owned or operated by a fire
department which are clearly marked as fire department vehicles.
A.
Any violation of this section is declared to be a municipal infraction. The
penalty for violation shall be a fine of $50 for each offense.
B.
A person may not allow any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer to
remain on public or private property within the corporate limits of the
City for more than 24 hours if said motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer
A.
§ 155-25 URBAN RENEWAL § 155-27
150:423
§ 155-28. Time limits within parking meter zones.
The time limits for parking as established by this article shall not be
applicable within any parking meter zone during any period in which the
parking meters are in operation as provided in this chapter.
§ 155-29. Business districts.
§ 155-30. Parking permits.
is not displaying currently valid registration plates or is displaying
registration plates of another vehicle.
Any violation of Subsection A hereof is declared to be a municipal
infraction. The penalty for violation shall be a fine of $25 for each
offense.
B.
Except as otherwise provided in Subsection B of this section, no vehicle
shall be allowed to stand within any business district designated by the
Mayor and Common Council for a longer period than two hours in any
one place continuously between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
on any day, Sundays or legal holidays excepted, nor shall any vehicle
within any business district be permitted to stand longer than actually
necessary to take on or discharge passengers, freight or merchandise
in front of any building where loading zone or no-parking spaces have
been established by authority of the legislative body and designated by
proper signs or markings or where cars are parked on both sides of the
street.
A.
The Mayor and Common Council may, in its discretion, in the interests
of orderly control of traffic within any business district, provide that a
vehicle may be allowed to stand for a lesser period than two hours at
certain points, as designated by appropriate signs giving notice of the
maximum time allowed for parking.
B.
Any violation of Subsection A hereof is declared to be a municipal
infraction. The penalty for violation shall be $25 for each offense.
C.
Any person or persons, as designated or defined by the Mayor and
Common Council by resolution, may apply to the City for a parking
permit to park his or her passenger vehicle in any area, lot, zone
or parking space designated by the Mayor and Common Council by
resolution. Said permit shall entitle any vehicle lawfully displaying the
permit to park without further charge in that area, lot, zone or space
for a period of time as designated by the Mayor and Common Council
by resolution.
A.
The Mayor and Common Council shall designate the period for which
each permit or class of permit shall be valid and the amount of the
fee to be charged therefor in the General Fee Ordinance.72 [Amended
11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 791]
B.
§ 155-27 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 155-30
150:424
Any vehicle not lawfully displaying a valid permit and which is parked
in that area, lot, zone or space which is designated for permit parking
only shall be issued a citation for said violation, and the Westminster
City Police Department is authorized to cause such vehicle, either by
towing or otherwise, to be removed or conveyed to and impounded in a
place designated by the Mayor and Common Council by resolution.
C.
The owner of any such vehicle shall have the right to contest the
validity of the impoundment by requesting a hearing as provided in
§ 155-13. Notice of the right to a hearing shall be given and the hearing,
should one be requested, shall be conducted in accordance with the
procedures specified in § 155-13. The owner of any vehicle so
impounded may appear to claim the vehicle and elect to secure
immediate release of the impounded vehicle by payment of all charges
which have accrued thereon, including the amount of any fine and the
cost of towing said vehicle.
D.
Any violation of Subsection C hereof is declared to be a municipal
infraction. The penalty for violation shall be $25 for each offense.
E.
72.Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
§ 155-30 URBAN RENEWAL § 155-30
150:425

ARTICLE III
Metered Parking
§ 155-31. Establishment of zones and charges. [Amended
11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 791]
§ 155-32. Location, adjustment and operation of meters; legend.
Parking meters installed in the parking meter zones established as provided
in this article shall be placed upon the curb immediately adjacent to the
individual parking spaces. Each parking meter shall be placed or set in such
a manner as to show or display by a signal that the parking space adjacent
to such meter is or is not legally in use. Each parking meter installed shall
indicate by a proper legend the legal parking time established by the Mayor
and Common Council. When operated, such meter shall indicate on and by
its dial and pointer the duration of the period of legal parking, and on the
expiration of such period, the meter, by a red indicator, shall indicate illegal
or overtime parking.
§ 155-33. Marking of spaces; parking within spaces.
§ 155-34. Display of parking time upon deposit of coins.
Each parking meter shall be set so as to display a signal showing legal
parking upon the deposit of a coin or coins. Each meter shall, by its device,
Parking meter zones heretofore established by the Mayor and Common
Council and in which parking meters are in place immediately prior to
the effective date of this chapter are hereby continued in full force and
effect until altered or discontinued by the Mayor and Common Council
as provided in the General Fee Ordinance.
A.
Parking meter zones and the amounts to be charged for parking in such
zones may be established, altered or discontinued by the Mayor and
Common Council as provided in the General Fee Ordinance.
B.
The Director of Public Works may have lines or markings painted or
placed upon the curb or upon the street adjacent to each parking meter,
or at both such places, for the purpose of designating the parking space
for which the meter is to be used, and each vehicle parked adjacent
or next to any parking meter shall park within the lines or markings
so established. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across any such
line or marking or to park in such position that the vehicle shall not
be entirely within the area so designated by such lines or markings.
Any vehicle parked in such parking space shall be parked so that the
foremost part of such vehicle shall be nearest to the parking meter.
A.
Any violation of Subsection A hereof is declared to be a municipal
infraction. The penalty for violation shall be a fine of $25 for each
offense.
B.
§ 155-31 URBAN RENEWAL § 155-34
150:427
clearly set out and continue in operation from the time of the deposit of one
or more coins, as may be desired, until the expiration of the time paid.
§ 155-35. Hours of operation of meters. [Amended 8-28-1996 by
Ord. No. 613]
Parking meters shall be in operation each day of the week, except for
Saturdays, Sundays and designated holidays, between the hours established
by resolution of the Mayor and Common Council and displayed on the
parking meter or on signs which are situate within or near a designated
parking area. The Mayor and Common Council may also designate other
special dates or time periods in which parking meters shall not be in
operation. Any person desiring to utilize a parking space for the parking
of a vehicle while the parking meter for such space is in operation may
do so by depositing in such meter the required coin or coins of the United
States. No charge shall be made for parking while the parking meter is not
in operation.
§ 155-36. Operator to deposit coins.
When any vehicle shall be parked in any parking space, the operator shall,
upon entering such space, deposit or cause to be deposited in the parking
meter for such parking space a coin or coins of the United States, depending
on the length of time such operator intends to utilize such parking space for
parking and in accordance with the schedule established by the Mayor and
Common Council and displayed on the parking meter. Upon the making of
such deposit, the operator shall be entitled to utilize the parking space for
the parking of such vehicle for the length of time specified in such schedule
for the amount so deposited and as indicated by the signal upon the parking
meter.
§ 155-37. Display of signal upon expiration of time; overtime
parking.
If any vehicle shall remain parked in any parking space beyond the period
of time paid for by the operator, the parking meter shall indicate such illegal
parking by a visible red indicator, and in that event, such vehicle shall be
considered as parked overtime and beyond the limit of legal parking time in
violation of the provisions of this article.
§ 155-38. Owners and operators not to permit overtime parking.
[Amended 3-24-2003 by 698]
It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator to cause, allow, permit
or suffer a vehicle to be parked overtime, whether occupied or not, in
any parking space provided for by this article during the hours stated
on the meter when the adjacent meter indicates by mechanical device
that the time paid for by the deposit of a coin or coins has expired. No
vehicle shall be parked in violation of this section.
A.
§ 155-34 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 155-38
150:428
§ 155-38.1. Causing or permitting vehicles to be parked beyond
duration of parking meter. [Added 3-24-2003 by Ord. No. 698]
§ 155-39. Protection of meters.
§ 155-40. Deposit of slugs.
§ 155-41. Unauthorized removal of coins.
Any violation of Subsection A hereof is declared to be a municipal
infraction. The penalty for violation for a first offense shall be a
warning. The penalty for a second offense shall be a fine of $15. The
penalty for a third offense shall be a fine of $25. The penalty for a fourth
offense or more shall be a fine of $50.73
B.
Except during times other than stated on the parking meter as
operating hours, it shall be unlawfully for any owner or operator to
causes allow, permit or suffer any vehicle to be parked, whether
occupied or not, in any parking space provided for by this article,
beyond the period of time established by the duration of the parking
meter, or by any notice on the parking meter limiting the period of time
a vehicle may remain parked in such a space. The insertion of additional
coins after such time has elapsed does not extend the allowable time a
vehicle may remain parked in the same space
A.
Any violation of this section is declared to be a municipal infraction. The
penalty for violation shall be $25 for each offense.
B.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, tamper with, open
or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter
installed under the provisions of this article.
A.
Any violation of Subsection A hereof is declared to be a municipal
infraction. The penalty for violation shall be a fine of $200 for each
offense.
B.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in
any parking meter any slug, device, substance or any other substitute
for a coin of the United States of America.
A.
Any violation of Subsection A hereof is declared to be a municipal
infraction. The penalty for violation shall be a fine of $100 for each
offense.
B.
It shall be unlawful for any person, without proper authority, to remove
any coins from any parking meter.
A.
73.This ordinance also provided that for purposes of calculating the number of violations set
forth in § l55-38B, the City shall reset to zero the number of violations of an owner or
operator on January 1 of each calendar-year period.
§ 155-38 URBAN RENEWAL § 155-41
150:429
§ 155-42. Use of spaces by commercial vehicles when loading and
unloading.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to prohibit commercial
vehicles from using on-street public parking spaces, as provided in this
article, when such commercial vehicles are actually engaged in the loading
or unloading of merchandise, provided that such commercial vehicles shall
not use said parking spaces for any longer period of time than is actually
necessary for such loading or unloading, not to exceed 15 minutes. In
such cases, the operators of said vehicles shall not be required to make
any deposit of coins in such parking meters so long as such loading and
unloading is actively and obviously in progress. In all other cases, such
vehicles are subject to all of the provisions and regulations of this chapter.
§ 155-43. Use by vehicles working in public right-of-way.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to prohibit commercial
or public utility vehicles from using or occupying on-street public parking
spaces, as provided in this article, when such vehicles are actually engaged
in authorized construction, maintenance or service activities to the highway,
highway equipment or public utilities and such work is totally within the
right-of-way of said highway, and provided that such spaces are not
otherwise lawfully occupied. In such cases, the operators of said vehicles
shall not be required to make any deposit of coins in such parking meters
so long as such construction, maintenance and service work is actively and
obviously in progress. In all other cases, such vehicles are subject to all of
the provisions and regulations of this chapter.
Any violation of Subsection A hereof is declared to be a municipal
infraction. The penalty for violation shall be a fine of $400 for each
offense.
B.
§ 155-41 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 155-43
150:430
ARTICLE IV
Snow Emergencies
§ 155-44. Designation of snow emergency streets; declaration of
emergency.
§ 155-45. Marking of streets.
All streets designated pursuant to § 155-44 as snow emergency streets
shall be marked by appropriate no-parking signs during any period of
snow emergency. Permanent signs which give the warning "no parking or
standing during snow emergency" may be posted at the beginning and end
of each block on such streets.
§ 155-46. Operation of vehicles restricted.
§ 155-47. Parking during declared emergency; impoundment.
The Mayor and Common Council may, by resolution from time to time,
designate streets or portions of streets to be known as "snow
emergency streets" for the purpose of removal of snow thereon.
A.
Whenever snow has accumulated to a depth of two inches in the City,
the Director of Public Works may, in his discretion, declare a snow
emergency. Upon such declaration, all vehicles on streets designated
as snow emergency streets shall be removed immediately in order to
facilitate the removal of snow. The snow emergency shall continue in
effect until the Director of Public Works declares it to be no longer
necessary.
B.
A person may not drive or attempt to drive a motor vehicle, other
than a motorcycle, on any highway that is designated and appropriately
signposted as a snow emergency route and for which a snow emergency
has been declared and is in effect unless at least two power wheels of
such vehicle are equipped with snow tires or tire chains in a good state
of repair.
A.
Any violation of Subsection A hereof is declared to be a municipal
infraction. The penalty for violation shall be a fine of $25 for each
offense.
B.
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be parked and left unattended
within the right-of-way of any snow emergency route two hours or later
after a snow emergency has been declared by the Director of Public
Works.
A.
Any violation of Subsection A hereof is declared to be a municipal
infraction. The penalty for violation shall be a fine of $25 for each
offense.
B.
Any vehicle parked and left unattended on a snow emergency street in
violation of this section may be impounded and removed by the Police
C.
§ 155-44 URBAN RENEWAL § 155-47
150:431
Department, and all costs of towing, storage or impounding shall be
charged to the owner of the vehicle. All such charges, including any fine
or penalty, shall be paid to the City before the owner may reclaim the
vehicle under the procedure contained in § 155-13.
§ 155-47 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 155-47
150:432
ARTICLE V
Payment of Fines and Election to Stand Trial
§ 155-48. Payment of fines, charges, fees and costs.
Fines, administrative charges, fees and costs imposed for any violation of
the provisions of this chapter which are municipal' infractions shall be
paid to the Westminster City Police Department or its designee within 20
calendar days of receipt of the citation.
§ 155-49. Election to stand trial.
A person receiving a citation for a municipal infraction under this chapter
may elect to stand trial for the offense by notifying the City Police
Department, in writing, of his intention of standing trial. The notice shall
be given at least five days prior to the date of payment as set forth in the
citation. Upon receipt of the notice of the intention to stand trial, the City
shall ford to the District Court a copy of the notice from the person who
received the citation indicating his intention to stand trial. Upon receipt of
the citation, the District Court shall schedule the case for trial and notify
the defendant of the trial date. All fines, penalties or forfeitures collected by
the District Court for violations of municipal infractions shall be remitted to
the City.
§ 155-50. Presumption in reference to violation.
In any trial charging a violation of any provision of this chapter governing
the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle
described in the notice of violation was parked in violation of such provision,
together with proof that the defendant named in the notice of violation
was at the time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle shall
constitute in evidence prima facie presumption that the registered owner of
such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point
where and for the time during which such violation occurred.
§ 155-51. Failure to pay fine or stand trial.
If a person receiving a citation for an infraction fails to pay the fine
for the infraction by the date of payment set forth on the citation and
fails to file a notice of intention to stand trial for the offense in a timely
fashion, the person is liable for the assessed fine. The City may double
the fine to an amount not to exceed $400 and request adjudication of
the case through the District Court, including the filing of a demand
for judgment on affidavit. The District Court shall promptly schedule
the case for trial and summon the defendant to appear. The defendant's
failure to respond to such summons shall result in the entry of judgment
against the defendant in favor of the City in the amount then due if a
proper demand for judgment on affidavit has been filed. If the person
receiving a citation for an infraction shall be found by the District Court
to have committed an infraction, the person shall be required to pay a
A.
§ 155-48 URBAN RENEWAL § 155-51
150:433
§ 155-52. Traffic control signal monitoring system offenses; failure
to pay fine or request trial; failure to pay judgment. [Added
10-10-2011 by Ord. No. 830]
fine determined by the District Court, not to exceed $400. The person
shall also be liable for the costs of the proceedings in the District Court,
and the Court may permit the City to abate any such condition at the
person's expense.
In the event of failure to pay the fine imposed within 30 days of the
date of the violation and when no timely request to stand trial has been
made and after one notice sent by ordinary mail, postage prepaid, the
person receiving the citation shall pay double the initial fine, plus an
administrative charge in the amount of $10.
B.
In the event of failure to pay the fine imposed by the District Court
within 30 days after the adjudication of a municipal infraction and after
one notice sent by ordinary mail, the person receiving the fine shall
pay it, plus an administrative charge in the amount of $10. In addition,
the City may refer the violation to the Motor Vehicle Administration
as provided by the Transportation Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, as amended.
C.
If a person receiving a civil citation for failure to obey a traffic control
device as detected by a traffic control signal monitoring system defined
by § 21-202.1 of the Transportation Article of the Annotated Code of
Maryland fails to pay such citation within 45 days of the issuance
thereof and fails to elect to stand trial at least five days prior to the due
date of the citation, the City shall impose an administrative charge in
the amount of $10.
A.
If a person receiving a civil citation for the offense described in
Subsection A of this section has failed to pay the citation or timely elect
to stand trial as set forth in Subsection A of this section and fails to pay
the citation within 75 days of the issuance of the citation, the City shall
impose a second administrative charge in the amount of $10.
B.
If a person receiving a civil citation for the offense described in
Subsection A of this section timely elects to stand trial, the City shall
request adjudication of the case through the District Court.
C.
If a person receiving a civil citation for the offense described in
Subsection A of this section fails to pay the judgment imposed by the
District Court within 10 days after the adjudication of the civil offense,
the defendant shall pay to the City an administrative charge in the
amount of $10.
D.
If a person receiving a civil citation for the offense described in
Subsection A of this section fails to pay the judgment imposed by the
District Court within 40 days after the adjudication of the civil offense,
E.
§ 155-51 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 155-52
150:434
the defendant shall pay to the City a second administrative charge in
the amount of $10.
If the defendant fails to pay a citation for the offense described in
Subsection A of this section within 105 days of the issuance thereof or,
having timely elected to stand trial, fails to pay the judgment imposed
by the District Court within 70 days, the City shall refer the violation
to the Motor Vehicle Administration as provided by the Transportation
Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
F.
§ 155-52 URBAN RENEWAL § 155-52
150:435
Chapter 160
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Charter provisions — See §§ 33.1 and 42.1 of
the City Charter.
Plumbing — See Ch. 112.
Sewers and sewage — See Ch. 124.
Fees — See Ch. A175.
§ 155-52 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 155-52
150:436
ARTICLE I
Potable Water
[Adopted as Ch. 20A of the 1972 Code, as amended through 1990]
§ 160-1. Effective date of rates. [Amended 5-11-1992 by Ord. No.
558; 5-10-1993 by Ord. No. 575; 5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 610;
5-22-2000 by Ord. No. 654; 5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 752; 4-13-2009 by
Ord. No. 801]
The rates for metered service established in the Utility Fee Ordinance74
shall be and become effective on and after July 1, 2009.
§ 160-2. Metered service. [Amended 5-11-1992 by Ord. No. 558;
5-10-1993 by Ord. No. 575; 5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 610; 5-22-2000 by
Ord. No. 654; 5-8-2006 by Ord. No. 752; 4-13-2009 by Ord. No. 801]
From and after July 1, 2009, metered rates shall be as provided in the Utility
Fee Ordinance.
§ 160-3. Fire protection service. [Amended 1-10-1994 by Ord. No.
584; 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 793]
§ 160-4. Flat-rate service and tank truck sales. [Amended
11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 793]
All unlisted or special water customers not included in the aforegoing
sections shall pay for water used or consumed according to the rates
established for metered water service. Any water sold and dispensed by
truck or tank from a metered location to be designated by the City shall
Private.
The rates for private fire service, including sprinkler systems and
hydrants located on private property shall be as provided in the
Utility Fee Ordinance,75 and are subject to the rules and
regulations of the City. All water sold at these rates shall be used
for fire purposes only.
(1)
These rates shall not be imposed upon single-family attached,
single-family detached and single-family semidetached dwellings.
(2)
A.
Sprinkler systems. Connection charges shall be made for each
connection to the City’s water system for private, commercial or
industrial sprinkler systems as provided in the Utility Fee Ordinance. In
addition, each such customer shall pay for all costs of installation from
the main to the protected premises. These rates shall not be imposed
upon single-family attached, single-family detached and single-family
semidetached dwellings.
B.
74.Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. II, Utility Fees.
75.Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. II, Utility Fees.
§ 160-1 URBAN RENEWAL § 160-4
150:437
be at the prevailing out-of-city minimum charge and rate schedule for each
premises served as provided in the Utility Fee Ordinance.
§ 160-5. Billing; interest.
§ 160-6. Application for service.
All bills will be rendered quarterly to the property owners. Bills will
not be rendered to tenants of property owners except upon request, in
writing, by the property owner.
A.
Bills are due and payable upon receipt thereof and, if not paid within
30 days of the mailing date, service may be discontinued as provided in
state law. [Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 793]
B.
C. A penalty charge of 5% will be imposed on all past due accounts.
All applications for water service must be made, in writing, on a form
provided by the City. Applications for service must be made by the
property owner or his agent or representative and shall be
accompanied by a fee as provided in the Utility Fee Ordinance.76
[Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 793]
A.
No contract for service will be entered into by the City with any
applicant until all arrears and charges due by the applicant at any
premises now or heretofore occupied by him shall have been paid or
satisfactory arrangements made in regard thereto.
B.
An accepted application by the City shall constitute a contract between
the City and applicant, obligating the applicant to pay to the City its
rates as established or as may be established from time to time. The
applicant also shall comply with the City's rules and regulations.
C.
Applications for service installations will be accepted subject to there
being an existing and adequate main in a street or right-of-way abutting
the premises to be served. The contract shall in no way obligate the City
to extend its mains to service the premises under consideration.
D.
When a prospective customer has made application for a new service or
has applied for the reinstatement of an existing service, it is assumed
that the piping and fixtures which the service will supply are in order
to receive the same, and the City will not be liable in any case for any
accident, breaks or leakage arising in any way in connection with the
supply of water or failure to supply the same or the freezing of water
pipes or fixtures of the customer nor for any damage to the property
which may result from the usage or nonusage of water supplied to the
premises.
E.
After review of the completed application and the payment of all fees
and charges required under this article and the Utility Fee Ordinance,
F.
76.Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. II, Utility Fees.
§ 160-4 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 160-6
150:438
§ 160-7. Service connections. [Amended 5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 610;
12-6-2007 by Ord. No. 773; 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 793]
the City may accept the application, provided that the property to be
served is identified as W-1 or W-3 on the Carroll County Master Plan
for Water and Sewerage. Additionally, the development of the property
must be consistent with the current City/county agreement unless the
Mayor and Common Council grants a waiver for good cause77 for which
the applicant shall pay a fee as provided in the Utility Fee Ordinance.
[Added 2-11-2002 by Ord. No. 677; amended 11-24-2008 by Ord.
No. 793]
The Utility Fee Ordinance shall establish connection charges for each
connection to the City’s water system.
A.
A property owner will be assessed the actual cost of the meter only,
in cases where a service connection already exists and no connection
charge is levied.
B.
Connections will be made upon proper application whenever such
connections are within a reasonable distance of existing and adequate
mains and lines of the City's water system.
C.
Between November 15 and March 15, the City may, in its discretion,
defer making connections until weather and ground conditions will
reasonably permit such connections.
D.
The City shall not be required to make any connection which it may
deem not to be economically feasible or which may constitute an undue
burden upon the City's physical water plant or system.
E.
The service connection from the main to the property line will be
installed by the City. Title to all services from the main to the property
line, meters and meter installations are vested in and the same shall
at all times remain the sole property of the City and shall not be
trespassed upon or interfered with in any respect. This property shall
be maintained by the City and may be removed or changed by it at any
time.
F.
The City will furnish and install the following equipment: corporation
stop, service pipe to the property line, curb stop and curb box and
remote reading unit. The meter and meter box shall be installed at the
expense of the customer.
G.
All service pipes shall not be less in size than three-fourths-inch inside
diameter.
H.
Curb stops are not to be used by the customer or his agent for turning
on or shutting off the water supply. The control of the water supply by
I.
77.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 677 provided that the Director of the Department of
Planning and Public Works shall adopt regulations for the consideration of "good cause"
waivers pursuant to this subsection.
§ 160-6 URBAN RENEWAL § 160-7
150:439
§ 160-8. Special water benefit assessment charges. [Amended
12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 604; 11-22-1999 by Ord. No. 643;
11-27-2000 by Ord. No. 659; 1-27-2003 by Ord. No. 695; 6-14-2004
by Ord. No. 714; 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 793]
the customer shall be by means of a separate stop located just inside
the building wall. Curb stops are for the exclusive use of the City.
Every service pipe must be provided with a stop and waste cock on the
inside of the cellar or foundation wall adjacent to the location where
the pipe passes through it, easily accessible and fully protected from
freezing, and all pipes in the building must be laid in such way that they
can be fully drained by that waste cock.
J.
The service pipe from the property line to the premises shall be
installed at the expense of the owner. For this installation the owner
or applicant shall employ a competent registered plumber, satisfactory
to the City, to do the work and comply with national or prevailing
plumbing codes in the area. The minimum size and cover shall be the
same as that used from the main to the property line. The materials and
method of construction shall be approved by the City, and if the service
has not been installed in accordance with the City's requirements,
water service will not be turned on until such defects have been
remedied. The service pipes between the property line and the
premises and all piping and fixtures on or in the premises of the owner
or applicant shall be maintained by him and the work performed by a
competent registered plumber in a manner satisfactory to the City.
K.
In all future installations or reinstallations of service lines, only one
premises will be supplied through one service pipe and under the
control of one curb stop. Any violation of this article by any customer
shall be deemed a violation by all customers involved, and the City may
take such action as could be taken against a single owner, except that
such action shall not be taken until an innocent owner, who is not in
violation of the City's rules, has been given a reasonable opportunity to
attach his pipe to a separately controlled service connection.
L.
In the event that any service line between the curb box and the meter
is improperly maintained or is damaged, the City shall have the right
to discontinue service to such premises upon written notice to the
customer. Service shall not be restored until satisfactory repairs have
been made.
M.
From and after the effective date of this article, in any instance in which
the City shall supply water to any building, dwelling, apartment, living
unit or other structure, a special benefit assessment is hereby levied
and imposed, payable prior to the issuance of a building permit, upon
the owner or owners of such property or properties to be served in the
amount or amounts as provided in the Utility Fee Ordinance.78
A.
78.Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. II, Utility Fees.
§ 160-7 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 160-8
150:440
§ 160-9. (Reserved)79
§ 160-10. Main extensions.
In any instance in which an existing structure is altered to convert to
additional dwelling units, commercial units or business offices, there
shall be imposed a special benefit assessment as provided in the Utility
Fee Ordinance. However, in no event shall the cumulative assessments
for said alterations exceed 75% of the assessment for new construction.
B.
In any instance in which an industrial or commercial structure is
altered to add additional square footage, there shall be imposed a
special benefit assessment in accordance with the schedules
hereinbefore set forth in the Utility Fee Ordinance. Expansion of
existing structures shall be allowed credit for previously paid special
benefit assessments in all types of uses except dwellings and dwelling
units.
C.
In any instance in which a school or college expands existing structures
or constructs new buildings for nonresident use, there shall be imposed
a special benefit assessment as provided in the subsection of the Utility
Fee Ordinance entitled “Industrial Warehousing.” In the instance where
a school or college adds or expands its residential buildings, a benefit
assessment shall be imposed in accordance with the subsection of the
Utility Fee Ordinance entitled “Dwellings and Dwelling Units,” or, in the
event of construction of dormitories, the schedule entitled “Schools and
Colleges, Including Dormitories” shall be applicable.
D.
In any instance in which a continuing-care facility licensed by the
State Department of Aging provides three levels of care for individuals
60 years of age or older, “independent living,” “assisted living,” and
“comprehensive care” as those terms are defined by Maryland law, and
also owns and maintains substantial on-site infrastructure, there shall
be imposed a special benefit assessment in the following amounts. For
independent-living units (single-family dwelling units or apartments or
multifamily units) there shall be imposed a special benefit assessment
in the amount of 65% of the amount of assessment set forth for said
uses in the Utility Fee Ordinance. For assisted-living units and/or
comprehensive-care units the amount of assessment shall be the same
as set forth in the Utility Fee Ordinance for hospitals, care homes and
nursing homes.
E.
In situations where no specified category is provided for in this article,
the Director of Planning shall determine the applicable special benefit
assessment to be charged, but in no case shall such charges exceed
those existing in the Utility Fee Ordinance.
F.
The Director of Planning may waive or modify special benefit
assessments for the construction or rehabilitation of lower-income
housing units as authorized under § 21-101 of Article 24 of the
Annotated Code of Maryland.
G.
§ 160-8 URBAN RENEWAL § 160-10
150:441
§ 160-11. Meters.
The City shall be solely responsible for any and all main extensions. No
extension will be made except upon the written request of a property
owner.
A.
The owner or owners applying for such water main extension shall be
responsible for the cost of making such an extension. Title to the main
will be vested in the City, and the main shall at all times remain the sole
property of the City and shall not be trespassed upon or interfered with
in any respect. This property shall be maintained by the City and may
be used as the City deems fit.
B.
When water facilities are to be constructed, the owner will furnish
plans for review by the City and all other agencies having jurisdiction.
These plans will denote location, profile and any other pertinent details
required by agencies having jurisdiction. The City will also require a
public works agreement spelling out the conditions by which a main will
be extended.
C.
Before an extension of a main is made by the City, the owner or
applicant shall post security for the estimated cost of the water main
extension. Final adjustments will be made upon the receipt of all bills
and expenses that may be incurred in the extension of a main. Any
surplus security will be returned to the owner. Any deficit held by the
City will be billed to the owner upon final accounting.
D.
The City will not be required to make any reimbursement to the owner
for additional connections to such mains or enter into any type of buyback
agreements.
E.
The Mayor and Common Council shall adopt and, from time to time,
amend the Utility Fee Ordinance as to the imposition of fees as it deems
necessary for the preparation, review and approval of construction
drawings, plans and other related documents for all main extensions.
Said fee shall be based upon the costs of providing such services and
shall be in addition to the costs for which the owner is responsible
under Subsection B. [Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 793]
F.
All meters will be furnished by and remain the property of the City,
which reserves the right to stipulate the size, type and make of meter
to be used as well as the location of the setting. Minimum meter size
shall be a five-eighths-inch meter with fees as provided in the Utility
Fee Ordinance.80 [Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 793]
A.
When possible, the meter will be set in the basement in a convenient
place or in a meter box at the curb or property line to control the entire
supply, the location to be provided and maintained by the owner. In the
B.
79.Editor’s Note: Former § 160-9, Double special benefit charges, was repealed 11-24-2008 by
Ord. No. 793.
80.Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. II, Utility Fees.
§ 160-10 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 160-11
150:442
§ 160-12. Discontinuance of service. [Amended 1-10-1994 by Ord.
No. 584; 7-8-2002 by Ord. No. 683]
event that the customer desires any change in the location or position
of the meter box or vault, such change in location shall be made by the
City at the cost and expense of the owner.
All meters shall be maintained by and at the expense of the City insofar
as ordinary wear and tear are concerned, but the owner will be held
responsible for damages as a result of freezing, hot water or other
external causes when such damage results directly or indirectly from
the negligence of the customer. When such damage occurs, the City will
furnish and set another meter to replace the one frozen or otherwise
damaged, and the cost of such repairs, including replaced parts, labor
and transportation charges, shall be paid for by the owner.
C.
Any owner may be required to install a suitable check valve and relief
valve in the service line on the outlet side of the meter in such a manner
as to prevent the return of hot water to the meter and shall pay the cost
of all repairs necessitated by failure to do so.
D.
The quantity recorded by the meter shall be taken to be the amount of
water passing through the meter, which amount shall be accepted as
conclusive by both the owner and the City, except when the meter has
been found to be registering inaccurately or has ceased to register. In
such cases the quantity may be determined by the average registration
of the meter in a corresponding past period when in order or by
the average registration of the new meter, whichever method is
representative, in the opinion of the City, of the conditions existing
during the period in question.
E.
The City reserves the right to remove and to test any meter at any time
and to substitute another meter in its place. In the case of a disputed
account involving the question of accuracy of the meter, such meter will
be tested by the City upon the written request of the applicant for a
fee as provided in the Utility Fee Ordinance, provided that the meter
in question has not been tested either by the City or the Public Service
Commission. [Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 793]
F.
If a meter is found to be inaccurate, it shall be replaced at the City’s
expense and the testing fee shall be returned to the applicant. However,
if a meter is found to be accurate, the owner will bear all costs of
replacement and related expense. [Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord.
No. 793]
G.
The owners shall permit no one, except an agent of the City or another
otherwise lawfully authorized to do so, to remove, inspect or tamper
with the meter or other property of the City on his premises. The
customer shall notify the City, as soon as it comes to his knowledge, of
any injury to or any cessation in registration of the meter.
H.
§ 160-11 URBAN RENEWAL § 160-12
150:443
§ 160-13. Water conservation. [Amended 8-23-1999 by Ord. No. 641;
7-8-2002 by Ord. No. 683]
Whenever the owner desires to have his service contract terminated or
his water service discontinued, he shall so notify the City in writing.
Until such notice is received by the City, the owner shall be responsible
for the payment of all service rendered by the City, including charges
for meter repairs caused by damage by hot water or freezing. A
reasonable time after the receipt of such notice shall be allowed the
City to take a final reading of the meter or meters and to discontinue
service.
A.
Service may be discontinued for any one of the following reasons:
Use of water for purposes other than for consumption on the
premises served.
(1)
(2) Misrepresentation in application.
(3) Willful waste of water.
(4) Molesting or tampering with City property or seals on appliances.
(5) Vacancy.
(6) Nonpayment of water or sewer bills, or both , when due.
Cross-connection of the City's water service pipe with any other
water supply source.
(7)
(8) Refusal of reasonable access to property.
Violation of § 160-13 of this article, or violation of any order issued
by the Mayor and Common Council, any drought management plan
adopted by resolution, or any order issued by the Mayor pursuant
thereto.
(9)
B.
A charge will be made for restoring service when water has been turned
off for any of the above reasons except vacancy as provided in the
Utility Fee Ordinance. [Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 793]
C.
The Director of Public Works is authorized to adopt rules and
regulations, subject to approval by resolution of the Mayor and
Common Council, to implement procedures for the administration of
this section. Such procedures may contain procedures relating to final
readings of water meters. [Amended 12-6-2007 by Ord. No. 773;
11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 793]
D.
The Mayor and Common Council shall exercise control of the water
supply at all times and, in case of shortage of water or for any other
reason, the Mayor and Common Council, in the exercise of its
discretion, may determine that the water supply should be conserved.
A.
§ 160-12 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 160-13
150:444
§ 160-14. Allocation policy. [Amended 4-9-2007 by Ord. No. 763;
9-23-2002 by Ord. No. 686; 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 793; 4-13-2015
by Ord. No. 853; 3-26-2018 by Ord. No. 890]
Any user or consumer of water, upon notice from the City, its agents
or employees or upon notice published for two consecutive days in
one newspaper of general circulation in Carroll County, shall comply
with any order passed by the Mayor and Common Council, any drought
management plan it has adopted pursuant to this section or any order
issued by the Mayor pursuant to said drought management plan to
conserve the water supply.
B.
In exercising its authority under this section, the Mayor and Common
Council is authorized to adopt by resolution drought management plans
which may result in the issuance of an order by the Mayor imposing
mandatory water use restrictions.
C.
Any violation of any order of the Mayor and Common Council under this
section or of any drought plan or order issued by the Mayor pursuant
to it is declared to be an infraction. The penalty for violation shall
be $200 for each initial offense and $400 for each repeat offense. In
addition to any other penalty provided herein, the City may, at any time
and without further notice, discontinue the water service of any person
violating any order of the Mayor and Common Council or of any drought
plan or order issued by the Mayor pursuant to it under this section.
D.
Establishment of allocation policy; application fees.
In order to better manage the capacity and capability of the City's
water supply system to supply the reasonably anticipated demands
and needs of the community, the Mayor and Common Council
is authorized to establish, by resolution, an allocation policy
regarding the issuance of additional water service connections.
(1)
Any application for an allocation shall be accompanied by a fee as
provided in the Utility Fee Ordinance.81
(2)
A.
The Mayor and Common Council is also authorized to establish, by
resolution, a contingency plan to prohibit, restrict and allocate the
issuance of water service connections in the event of major operational
problems, supply interruption, drought or other unanticipated and
significant water shortage due to any cause, or contamination of the
City's water supply resources or as a result of state directive.
B.
The Director of Community Planning and Development shall maintain
a ledger, in such form as the Director deems appropriate, identifying
the development projects to which water has been allocated and the
amount of water allocated for each such project, and showing a running
balance of the annual water capacity allotment.
C.
81.Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. II, Utility Fees.
§ 160-13 URBAN RENEWAL § 160-14
150:445
§ 160-15. Right of entry.
The authorized agents of the City, presenting proper credentials, shall have
the right of access at all reasonable hours to the premises supplied with
water for the purpose of reading meters, examining fixtures and pipes,
observing the manner of using water and for any other purpose which is
proper and necessary in the conduct of the water system.
§ 160-16. Rights of city.
As necessity may arise in case of main breaks, emergency or other
unavoidable cause, the City shall have the right to temporarily cut off
the water supply in order to make necessary repairs, connections,
improvements, etc., but the City will use all reasonable and practicable
measures to notify the customer in advance of such discontinuance of
service. In any case, the City shall not be liable for any damage or
inconvenience suffered by the customer nor for any claim against it at any
time for interruption in service, lessening of supply, inadequate pressure,
quality of water or any cause beyond its control. All customers having
boilers upon their premises depending upon the pressure of the water in
the City's pipes to keep them supplied are cautioned against danger of
collapse, and any such damage shall be borne exclusively by the owner.
The City shall have the right to reserve a sufficient supply of water at all
times in its reservoirs to provide for fire or any other emergencies and may
restrict or regulate the quantity of water used by its customers in case of
scarcity or whenever the public welfare may require it. Any owner requiring
reduced water pressure shall do so through pressure-reducing valves, to
be furnished and installed at the owner's expense, on the outlet side of the
meter ahead of the stop and drain valve.
§ 160-17. Mingling of waters.
No water will be furnished to any premises where any possibility exists
of the mingling of the water furnished by the City with water from any
other source nor will the City permit its mains or service pipes to be
connected in any way to any piping, tank, vat or other apparatus containing
liquids, chemicals or any other matter which may flow back or have crossconnection
into the City's service pipes or mains or any other water
facilities or units and consequently endanger or adversely affect the water
supply. An exception may be made to this rule at the option of the City,
provided that proper safeguards are installed which shall be inspected and
have the approval of the City.
§ 160-18. Hydrants.
Notwithstanding anything contained in this section to the contrary,
water allocation for any development application submitted for
approval shall be subject to the additional procedures and regulations
set forth in Subsection K of § 164-193 and Subsection J of § 164-211 of
this Code.
D.
§ 160-14 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 160-18
150:446
§ 160-19. Tampering with system; violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to wrongfully connect,
disconnect, tap or interfere or tamper with any of the canals, springs,
reservoirs, tunnels, mounds, dams, plugs, mains, pipes, conduits,
connections, taps, engines and machinery or other appliance of the City for
the purpose of wasting or using such water or to in anywise tamper with any
meters used to register the water consumed, unless such person or persons
will be duly authorized by or be in the employ of the City. Violation of this
section is declared to be an infraction. The penalty for violation shall be
$400 for each initial offense and $400 for each repeat offense.
§ 160-20. Construal.
The presentation or nonprescription of a bill shall not be held to be a waiver
of any of the above rules.
§ 160-21. Delinquent bills become lien.
All delinquent water bills shall be and become liens upon the premises
served, which liens may be collected in the same manner as the collection
of delinquent taxes.82
Water from hydrants or other fire protection systems shall be used only
in case of fires, except that water from public fire hydrants may be
used in a reasonable amount and at such times and places as the City
may permit. The testing of hydrants and fire-fighting apparatus by any
fire company may be permitted upon request by an authorized agent
or employee. No pumps will be permitted to be connected with water
pipes so as to draw water directly from the main or service pipe, except
for fire purposes, without specific permission from the City.
A.
The opening or closing of any fire hydrant or plug, except in case of fire,
without the written permission of the City shall be deemed a tampering
with the appliances of the City.
B.
82.Editor’s Note: The Water Rate Schedule, as amended, formerly included at the end of this
article, was repealed 4-13-2009 by Ord. No. 801. Ordinance No. 801 also provided that
said schedule be used to calculate rates for services rendered before July 1, 2009. For
current water rates, see Ch. A175, Fees, Art. II, Utility Fees.
§ 160-18 URBAN RENEWAL § 160-21
150:447

ARTICLE II
Reclaimed Water
[Adopted 1-9-2012 by Ord. No. 831]
§ 160-22. Purpose and intent; objectives.
§ 160-23. Definitions.
In this article, the following terms shall have the meanings provided in this
section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
AVAILABLE — A reclaimed water distribution main is or will be located at
a property line of a property on which an irrigation system is installed or
proposed or a property proposed to be serviced with reclaimed water.
CROSS-CONNECTION — Any unprotected actual or potential physical
connection whereby the public water supply is connected with any other
water supply system, whether public or private, either inside or outside of
any building or buildings, in such a manner that a flow of water into the
public water supply is possible either through the manipulation of valves or
because of ineffective check or back-pressure valves or because of any other
arrangement. This includes any unauthorized taps, whether or not adequate
protection is provided.
DEPARTMENT — The City of Westminster's Department of Public Works.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Public Works or his or her designee.
DRY LINE — A pipe installed underground for the purpose of transporting
water but which is not connected to a water system.
IRRIGATION SYSTEM — A system of devices to provide for the application
of water typically to any outdoor planted material by means of a permanent
This article sets forth the requirements for the City's reclaimed water
system. The reclaimed water system provides an alternative water
source for nonpotable water demands. It is the City's policy to provide
reclaimed water to meet nonpotable water demands when it is feasible
to do so. It is the City's purpose and intent to establish a reclaimed
water system and to extend such system to certain areas of the City
where the Common Council determines that the extension of reclaimed
water is practical and economical. The reclaimed water distribution
system will be constructed in sections and phases to provide reclaimed
water service to designated areas as determined by the Common
Council from time to time and pursuant to the terms and conditions set
forth herein.
A.
The objectives of this article are:
(1) To reduce potable water demand.
(2) To reduce wastewater discharges into local watersheds.
(3) To help meet nutrient-reduction goals for the Chesapeake Bay.
B.
§ 160-22 URBAN RENEWAL § 160-23
150:449
piping system under pressure and that is manually, semiautomatically or
automatically operated. Major reclaimed water line shall mean those
reclaimed water lines that are eight inches in diameter or greater.
MDE — The Maryland Department of the Environment.
PERMIT — Written permission granted by the City to install and/or use
reclaimed water lines and/or systems.
POTABLE WATER — Water provided by the City via the City's water
distribution system or by a privately owned water system for public
consumption that meets the state's potable drinking water standards, or
water provided by a private source for consumption (drinking, cooking,
bathing, etc.) by the applicant.
RECLAIMED DISTRIBUTION MAIN — Those conduits used to supply
reclaimed water to service lines from transmission mains.
RECLAIMED WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM — Any plant, well, pipe,
tank, reservoir, facility, property or combination thereof, and associated
hardware and other appurtenances, including meters, extending to the
customer's reclaimed water meter, that is used for or has the capacity for
use for supplying reclaimed or reuse water.
RECLAIMED WATER or REUSE WATER — Water provided by the City via
the City's reclaimed water distribution system that has been treated to and
meets the state's reclaimed water standards and is permitted to be used for
certain nonpotable (e.g., nondrinking, noncooking, nonbathing) purposes.
RECLAIMED WATER SERVICE AREA — Any portion of the City's water
sewer service area that is within the City's reclaimed water distribution
system.
RECLAIMED WATER SERVICE STUBS — Those portions of reclaimed water
service pipes that extend from the City's reclaimed water mains to the
boundaries of public easements and/or rights-of-way but are not connected
to a user's facilities.
SERVICE LINE — That conduit for reclaimed water from the reclaimed
water distribution main to the property line.
TRANSMISSION MAINS — Those utility lines used to supply reclaimed
water from the City's pumping stations or treatment facilities to the City's
reclaimed water distribution system.
UTILITY SYSTEM or UTILITY LINES — Reclaimed water pipelines, water
pipelines, and sewer pipelines (any or all as determined by the context), and
all pipes, valves, valve boxes, hydrants, and other fixtures, equipment, and
apparatus connected to and forming a part of the reclaimed water, potable
water, or sewer pipelines and systems, or all, and all appliances necessary
and convenient thereto. The utility lines dedicated to the City shall include
only main transmission or distribution lines, valves, hydrants and other
apparatus, fixtures and equipment forming a part of the lines laid in public
streets, roads, highways and alleys or across City utility or sanitary sewer
easements on private property and shall not include lines leading from the
§ 160-23 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 160-23
150:450
mains at the property boundary to the building on private property and shall
not include the reclaimed water, potable water, or sewer lines within any
residences or other privately owned building.
WATER SERVICE AREA — The areas served or programmed to be served
by the City's water treatment plant as shown on the Carroll County Master
Plan map.
§ 160-24. Adoption of governing authorities.
§ 160-25. Rates, fees and charges.
The rates, fees and charges for the reclaimed water system are set forth
in the Utility Fee Ordinance, Chapter A175, Article II, of this Code. Fees
and charges incurred by any user of the reclaimed water system are subject
to the collection provisions of Article I of this chapter applicable to the
distribution of potable water.
§ 160-26. Conditions for suspension or termination of service; right
of entry.
Rules and regulations relating to waste not discharged to surface
waters contained in the Maryland Annotated Code and/or the Code of
Maryland Regulations (COMAR) and/or any permit issued to the City
by MDE or other state agency governing or relating to the use of
reclaimed or recycled water, as these may be amended from time to
time, are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated into this article
as though fully set forth within this article.
A.
In the event of any variation between the provisions of the this article
and those of the Maryland Annotated Code, COMAR, and/or any permit
issued to the City governing or relating to the use of reclaimed or
recycled water, the more strict provision shall prevail.
B.
Subject to the direction of the City Administrator, the Director shall
have the authority to implement administrative programs that may be
required to adhere to federal or state law, adhere to the conditions
of any permits from federal or state agencies, or provide efficient
operation of the reclaimed water system. Such programs may include,
but are not limited to, an application program to approve new users,
a connection inspection program, followup inspection program,
compliance and enforcement program, spill prevention, control and
notification program, and educational program to advise the public of
the proper and safe use of reclaimed water.
C.
The City may terminate, discontinue, or suspend reclaimed water
service in accordance with this article and the City's policies and
procedures in the event of:
(1) A violation of this article or City regulations, policies or procedures;
(2) Failure to pay bills by the due date;
A.
§ 160-23 URBAN RENEWAL § 160-26
150:451
§ 160-27. Authority of City to refuse, suspend or terminate service.
The City makes no guarantees that reclaimed water service will be provided
or, once provided, continued. The City may, at any time, and from time to
time, refuse to extend, or suspend or terminate, service on the basis of a
use detrimental to the system, an inadequate supply of reclaimed water, the
failure to pay required fees, or for any other reason which, in the judgment
of the Director, will cause the extension not to be to the benefit of the City.
§ 160-28. Maintenance responsibility; emergency discontinuation of
service; repairs.
§ 160-29. Enforcement procedure.
(3) Tampering with any utility service;
The existence of plumbing cross-connections with another water
source; or
(4)
Any customer condition or action that may be detrimental to the
City's potable water system, its reclaimed water system, or its
wastewater collection and treatment system.
(5)
The City may, at its option, suspend service until the condition is
corrected and all costs due the City are paid. These costs may include
delinquent billings, connection charges, and payment for any damages
caused to the potable water, reclaimed water, or wastewater collection
or water distribution system.
B.
In addition to any authority to enter private property contained
elsewhere in this Code, the Director or his or her designee may enter
any premises upon such notice that is reasonable under the
circumstances to determine the presence of any cross-connections or
other potential hazards to the City's potable water system. Each
customer of reclaimed water service shall, by completing the reclaimed
water application, give written consent to such entry upon the
customer's premises.
C.
The City shall have responsibility for maintaining and repairing
reclaimed water service stubs in the public right-of-way or easement.
The repair of all pipes and fixtures on private property shall be the
responsibility of the property owner.
A.
The City shall have the right to suspend or terminate reclaimed water
service to any property when, in the judgment of the Director, a leak
or other deficiency in the facilities is of sufficient magnitude or has
continued for a sufficient period of time to cause harm to the system or
to the public interest.
B.
It shall be a municipal infraction subject to a penalty of $500 for any
person to violate any of the provisions of this article, or any regulation,
standard, rule, or order duly adopted in furtherance of this article, or to
A.
§ 160-26 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 160-29
150:452
§ 160-30. Reclaimed water user permit.
continue any alteration, extension or construction of the utility system
or part thereof without first obtaining a permit or written permission or
to undertake or continue any alteration, extension, or construction of
the utility system or part thereof, except in conformity with the terms,
conditions, requirements, and provisions of an approved application,
plan, or both. Every day the violation continues shall be a separate
offense.
Whenever the City has reasonable cause to believe that any person is
violating or threatening to violate any of the provisions of this article
or any standards, regulation, rule or order duly adopted in furtherance
of this article, or is undertaking or continuing any alteration, extension
and construction of the utility system without first obtaining a permit
or written permission, or is undertaking or continuing any alterations,
extension, or construction of the utility system or part thereof, except
in conformity with the terms, conditions, requirements and provisions
of an approved application, plan, or both, the City may, either before
or after the institution of any other action or proceeding authorized by
this Code, institute a civil action in the name of the City for injunctive
relief to restrain the violation or threatened violation. The institution of
an action for injunctive relief under this subsection shall not relieve any
party to such proceeding from any civil or criminal penalty prescribed
for violations of this Code.
B.
No reclaimed water may be used for any purpose, either upon initial
installation, or upon change of use or change of property ownership,
until the user has obtained a reclaimed water permit from the City.
Applications for reclaimed water service shall be made and will be
accepted in the same manner as applications for water and sewer
service, subject to the provisions of this article.
A.
All applicants for reclaimed water, at the applicant's own cost and
expense, shall apply for, obtain and meet all requirements of all
necessary permits, licenses, conditions, and approvals for the initial
construction and the operation of the on-site reclaimed water facilities
and the use of reclaimed water.
B.
At the time of application, a user seeking a new connection to the
reclaimed water supply system shall enter into a public works
agreement that shall contain those provisions the Director deems
necessary to protect the public interest, including, but not limited to,
provisions relating to:
The design and construction of all facilities through which
reclaimed water shall pass;
(1)
(2) The posting of bonds or other security for performance of the work;
C.
§ 160-29 URBAN RENEWAL § 160-30
150:453
§ 160-31. Allowable uses of reclaimed water.
§ 160-32. Conservation of water resources.
Permission for the City through its officials, employees and/or
agents to enter upon the property for inspection, upon reasonable
notice under the circumstances, and to perform necessary repairs;
and
(3)
The dedication to and conditions for acceptance by the City of
any portions of the facilities that are to become part of the City's
system.
(4)
Except as set forth in Subsection B hereof, reclaimed water shall only
be used for the following purposes:
Irrigation of farmland, golf courses, athletic fields, turf, and/or
landscaping; and
(1)
Any other use that the Director considers appropriate and is
approved by MDE.
(2)
A.
Irrigation systems using reclaimed water shall be designed to keep all
spray on the user's property. The Director shall enforce buffers from the
edge of the spray influence to the following features:
Surface waters, including intermittent streams, perennial streams,
perennial water bodies and wetlands, up to 100 feet;
(1)
(2) Residential structures, up to 25 feet;
(3) Schools and playgrounds, up to 50 feet;
(4) Public roads and residential property lines, up to 25 feet;
(5) Potable wells, up to 100 feet.
B.
Irrigation and other systems using reclaimed water shall not generate
runoff that flows into the natural waterways or into the buffer areas.
Runoff shall not enter a storm sewer or drainage ditch that connects to
waters of the state.
C.
Any and all new or replacement reclaimed water supply systems within
flood-prone areas shall be designed and constructed to minimize and
eliminate discharges from such systems into floodwaters.
D.
The use of reclaimed water is intended to reduce demands on the
potable water supply, and consequently restrictions that the City may
impose from time to time upon reclaimed water usage may be less
stringent than those imposed upon potable water users.
A.
The availability of reclaimed water is directly related to the volume
of wastewater and treatment thereof. The City may, upon just cause
and for the purpose of the protection of public health, place temporary
B.
§ 160-30 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 160-32
150:454
§ 160-33. Connecting with reclaimed water pipes.
It shall be unlawful for any person to connect any pipe or take by any means
reclaimed water from, or interfere with the pipes of the reclaimed water
system of, the City without authorization from the Director.
§ 160-34. Replacement of reclaimed water service stubs.
In the event of the paying or widening of streets, or the raising or lowering
of the grade of a street, or in the installation of curbs or gutters and/or
sidewalks, or in the case of the installation of new reclaimed water lines
initiated by the public, all reclaimed water service stubs may be replaced
so as to meet the standards prescribed by the City Plumbing Code.83 There
shall be no charge for such replacements.
§ 160-35. Responsibility for making connections.
All reclaimed water services shall be installed, extended, replaced or
repaired by City forces from the City's main to the property line unless
otherwise permitted by the Director, provided that no such permission shall
be granted for work within the corporate limits in public street rights-ofway
except by licensed utility contractors. All reclaimed water connections
in new developments shall be the responsibility of the developer and at his
expense in accordance with City standards and specifications.
§ 160-36. Meter requirements; placement of meters.
§ 160-37. Maintenance by customer.
The property owner and/or customer shall be responsible for the
maintenance of all reclaimed water lines and appurtenances on the
customer's property, in conformance with state and local regulations. The
City reserves the right to disconnect the service to any property when the
reclaimed water system and appurtenances are not properly maintained.
In addition, should the customer require reclaimed water at different
and special limitations upon reclaimed water users due to conditions,
upsets, or other acts which interfere with the production or
transmission of reclaimed water.
A separate reclaimed water metered connection is required for each lot
at the time of connection with reclaimed water service.
A.
All such meters shall be placed in the street right-of-way at such
locations as the Director shall determine. Reclaimed water meters
shall be placed within five feet of the potable water meter serving
the property. All meters shall conform to the standards and material
specifications of the City. All reclaimed water meters shall be installed
in accordance with the City's standards and fee schedule.
B.
83.Editor's Note: See Ch. 112, Plumbing.
§ 160-32 URBAN RENEWAL § 160-37
150:455
pressures, or different quality, or in any way different from that normally
supplied by the City, the customer shall be responsible for the necessary
devices to make adjustments and for obtaining approval from the Director.
§ 160-38. Access to and obstruction of appurtenances, structures or
easements.
§ 160-39. Removal, damage to or interference with system.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, damage, or interfere with any
reclaimed water pipes belonging to the City or to remove, break, or injure
any portion of any manhole or any part of the reclaimed water of the utility
system.
§ 160-40. Ownership by City.
All reclaimed water facilities and appurtenances within dedicated public
easements, when constructed or accepted by the City, shall become and
remain the property of the City. No person shall, by payment of any charges
provided herein or by causing any construction of facilities accepted by the
City, acquire any interest or right in any of these facilities or any portion
thereof, other than the privilege of having his or her property connected
thereto for reclaimed water service in accordance with this article and any
amendments thereof.
No person shall open, enter into, place, or allow anything to be placed
in a manhole, vault, or valve box of the City's reclaimed water system
without written approval from the Director or his or her designee.
A.
No person shall damage, obstruct, or cover a manhole, vault, or valve
box of the City's reclaimed water system.
B.
No person shall plant trees, shrubs, or other plants within a reclaimed
water easement without prior written approval from the Director.
C.
No person shall place any part of a structure or any permanent
equipment within a reclaimed water easement without prior written
approval from the Director.
D.
§ 160-37 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 160-40
150:456
Chapter 164
ZONING AND SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Charter provisions — See §§ 15 through 23 of
the City Charter.
Planning and Zoning Commission — See Ch.
7, Art. II.
Planning Director — See Ch. 29, Art. V.
Buildings — See Ch. 56.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 83.
Nuisances — See Ch. 100.
Sewers and sewage — See Ch. 124.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 136.
Water — See Ch. 160.
Fee Schedule — See Ch. A175.
§ 160-40 URBAN RENEWAL § 160-40
150:457

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 164-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of
the City of Westminster, Maryland." It is referred to in this chapter as the
"Zoning Ordinance" or "this chapter."
§ 164-2. Purpose.
Purpose of chapter.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety, morals
and general welfare of the community by regulating and restricting
the height, number of stories and size of buildings and other
structures, the percentage of a lot that may be occupied, the
density of population, the size of lots, yards, courts and other open
spaces and the location and use of buildings, structures and land
for retail, industrial, residential and other purposes; to provide for
adequate light and air; to regulate off-street parking to prevent
vehicular and pedestrian congestion and undue crowding of land;
to secure safety from fire, panic and other danger; and to conserve
the value of property.
(1)
This chapter has also been enacted to control safety; to promote
the conservation of natural resources; to prevent environmental
pollution; to avoid undue concentration of population; and to
facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water,
sewerage, schools, recreation, parks and other public
requirements. It also provides reasonable consideration, among
other things, to the character of the districts and, considerably for
particular users, with a view to conserving the value of buildings
and encouraging the orderly development and most appropriate
use of land throughout the City.
(2)
A.
Conservation, agricultural and residential zones generally. The purpose
of conservation, agricultural and residential zones is to promote a
suitable environment for family life at various densities through the
provision of recreational, religious and educational facilities as basic
elements of a balanced neighborhood, to stabilize and protect the
essential characteristics of existing residential development and to
foster development compatible with the topography and other natural
characteristics of the area.
B.
Business zones generally. The purpose of the business zones is to
provide a range of retail uses and services and commercial activities.
In order to protect the abutting or surrounding residential zones, the
regulations for these zones establish standards, including parking
requirements, to ensure that said uses will be operated in a manner
least objectionable to said residential areas.
C.
§ 164-1 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-2
150:459
§ 164-3. Definitions and word usage.
Industrial zones. The purpose of the industrial zones is to provide space
for certain industrial uses and activities and for particular wholesaling
and retailing facilities for commodities appropriate in an industrial
zone.
D.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases used herein
are defined as follows:
ACCESS — A means of approach or admission.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building subordinate to and located on the
same lot with a main building, the use of which is clearly incidental
to that of the main building or to the use of the land and which is not
attached by any part of a common wall or common roof to the main
building.
ACCESSORY USE — A use of a building or lot or portion thereof which
is customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the
main building or lot.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ACTIVITY [Amended 3-22-1993 by Ord.
No. 571] — Any commercial activity, whether conducted intermittently
or full-time, which involves:
Any building, room, place or establishment where there is the
sale, display, exhibition or viewing of books, magazines, films,
photographs or other materials distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to human
sex acts or by an emphasis on male or female genitals, buttocks or
female breasts;
(1)
Any building, room, place or establishment where manipulated
massage or manipulated exercises are practiced for pay upon the
human body by anyone not a duly licensed physician, osteopath,
chiropractor, registered nurse and practical nurse operating under
a physician's directions, registered speech pathologist and physical
or occupational therapist who treat only patients recommended
by a licensed physician and operate only under such physician's
direction, whether with or without the use of mechanical,
therapeutic or bathing devices, and shall include Turkish
bathhouses. The term shall not include a regularly licensed
hospital, medical clinic or nursing home, duly licensed beauty
parlors or barbershops;
(2)
Any building, room, place or establishment which provides topless
dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female
impersonators or similar entertainers; or
(3)
Any building, room, place or establishment which provides for offtrack
betting, telephone betting or parimutual satellite simulcast
betting for wagering, betting or gambling purposes.
(4)
A.
§ 164-2 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-3
150:460
AGRICULTURE or AGRICULTURAL PURPOSES — The use of land for
the raising of farm products for use or sale, including animal or poultry
husbandry; the growing of crops such as grain, vegetables, fruit, grass
for pasture or sod, trees, shrubs, flowers and similar products of the
soil; and the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating or storing
the produce thereof, provided that such accessory use is secondary to
normal agricultural activities.
AIRPORT (including "airpark" and "airfield") — A place where aircraft
may take off and land, discharge cargo or passengers, be repaired, take
on fuel or be stored.
ALLEY — A right-of-way which provides a secondary means of access to
abutting lots and is not intended for general traffic circulation.
AMUSEMENT CENTER — A commercially operated facility containing
such enterprises as a bowling alley, pool hall, skating rink, billiard
parlor or one providing more than two coin-operated amusement
devices suitable for participation by people of any age, including but
not limited to television games, electronic novelty games,
electromechanical and electronic target games, driving games, pinball
machines, small kiddy rides and other similar devices.
ARTIST LIVE/WORK SPACE — A structure containing one residential
dwelling unit associated with and forming an integral part of an art
studio.[Added 1-12-2004 by Ord. No. 710]
ART STUDIO — A structure with a minimum and maximum floor area
of 500 and 1,500 square feet, respectively, used for the production
of paintings, drawings, prints and print-plates, pottery, puppetry,
sculpture, stained glass, ceramics video, moving or still photography,
creative writing, dance or music, none of which involves amplified
sound. Metalworking, woodworking except for carving with hand tools,
the firing of pottery in kilns, and the use of fiberglass is prohibited.
Art studios must provide for the ventilation of fumes directly to the
rear exterior of the structure. Art studios must not share any portion of
forced-air heating or cooling system with dwelling units unassociated
with the art studio. Users must abide by all applicable local, state,
and federal requirements for storage, use, ventilation, and disposal of
materials, fluids and chemicals used in any of the processes listed in
this definition.[Added 1-12-2004 by Ord. No. 710]
BASEMENT — A portion of a building located partly underground, but
having more than 1/2 of its floor to ceiling height above the average
grade of the adjoining ground.
BOARD — The Board of Zoning Appeals of the City of Westminster.
BOARDING (LODGING) OR ROOMING HOUSES — A dwelling or part
thereof where meals and/or lodgings are provided in exchange for
compensation for nontransient persons.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or
walls used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of
§ 164-3 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-3
150:461
persons, animals or chattels and any cabin or mobile house. When any
portion thereof is completely separated from all other portions by a
division wall from the ground up through the roof and without any door
or other openings, such portion shall be considered a separate building.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF — The vertical distance from the average
finished grade adjoining the building wall to the highest point of the
coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to
the average height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and
gambrel roofs.
BUILDING LINE — The line established by law beyond which a building
shall not extend as determined by front, side and rear yards herein.
BUILDING, MAIN — A building in which is conducted the principal use
of the lot on which it is situated. In any residential zone, any dwelling
shall be deemed to be a main building on the lot on which the same is
located if the lot is used primarily for residential purposes.
CARE HOMES — See "retirement homes/care homes."[Added
9-24-2001 by Ord. No. 672]
CELLAR — A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground
and having less than 1/2 of its floor to ceiling height above the average
grade of the adjoining ground.
CITY — The City of Westminster.
COFFEE HOUSE — An establishment where coffee, tea, and other
nonalcoholic beverages and light refreshments are served for
predominantly on-site customers and providing a place for the
interchange of ideas and opinions of individuals or groups, and which
may include entertainment without amplification. A coffee house is
not a convenience food and beverage store and is not a restaurant or
cafe.[Added 1-12-2004 by Ord. No. 710]
COMMISSION — The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of
Westminster.
COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A plan for the desirable
use of land, as officially adopted and as amended from time to time by
the Planning Commission or the Common Council, which is intended to
guide the physical development of the City of Westminster, including
private and public land use, transportation and community facilities,
and to provide both a foundation and guide for decisions regarding
zoning, subdivision regulations, community needs and acquisition of
sites for public facilities, such as streets, parks and public buildings.
CONSTRUCTION STARTED — Construction will be deemed to have
begun when all of the necessary excavation and piers and/or footings
of one or more buildings or structures covered by the permit have been
completed.
DAY-CARE FACILITY — A place used for the reception or care for
compensation of a child or children under 18 years of age or elderly
§ 164-3 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-3
150:462
persons over the age of 60 years of age for any part of a twenty-fourhour
period.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner(s) of all of the land
proposed to be included in a given development, the authorized agent
thereof, the holder of an option or contract to purchase, a lessee having
a remaining term of not less than 30 years or other persons having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — Any activity, other than normal agricultural activity,
which materially affects the existing condition or use of any land or
structure.
DWELLING —
DWELLING, CONVERSION — A building existing at the time of
enactment of this chapter which may be converted or altered to
accommodate two or more families, as a rental facility, condominium
or cooperative, subject to regulations prescribed by § 164-150.
Conversions shall not be defined to include additions to or expansions
of existing units where not proposed in conjunction with the creation of
additional units to accommodate families.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A building containing three or more
dwelling units separated.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS
[Added 9-24-2001 by Ord. No. 672] —
Any building arranged, designed or used, in whole or part, to
provide living facilities for one or more families, but not including
a tent, cabin, trailer or mobile home or a room in a hotel or motel.
(1)
A dwelling shall contain the following minimum actual square feet
of living space, excluding common areas:
Efficiency unit, single-room living area, consisting of kitchen,
bathroom and a combination living room, dining space and
bedroom: 400 square feet.
(a)
(b) One-bedroom unit: 500 square feet.
(c) Two-bedroom unit: 600 square feet.
(d) Three-bedroom unit: 700 square feet.
In the event of rehabilitation or conversion of existing
structures, a ten-percent reduction may be allowed.
(e)
(2)
Dwelling units exclusively inhabited by older persons, as defined
below, that live independent of any services provided by a nursing
home or a retirement home/care home;
(1)
Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62 years of age or
older; or
(2)
§ 164-3 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-3
150:463
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED — A group of at least three
dwelling units separated by fire walls, each having separate ground
floor entrances from the outside and with no unit directly above or
below another unit.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A building designed or
used exclusively for residential purposes by one family or one dwelling
unit and not attached to any other dwelling units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED — A group of two
single-family dwelling units which are joined to one another by a
common party wall and/or an attached permanent structure, such as
a garage, whether or not such dwelling units are located on a single
parcel of ground or on adjoining individual lots.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or portion thereof arranged or designed
for occupancy by not more than one family for living purposes.
EXPLOSIVE — Any chemical compound, mixture or device, the primary
or common purpose of which is to create explosions.
EXTRACTIVE OPERATIONS — The extracting or mining of sand, gravel,
limestone, soapstone or building stone.
FAMILY — An individual or two or more persons related by blood or
marriage or a group of not more than five persons not related by
blood or marriage living together as a single housekeeping group in a
dwelling unit.
FARM — A parcel of land or lot used for agricultural purposes which is
intended to provide a source of income for the occupant or owner.
FINAL PLAT — A drawing of the subdivision showing lots, streets
and other information which may be required in this chapter, which
is desired to be made of official record in the office of the Clerk of
the Circuit Court and which may be all or a portion of a preliminary
plan. A preliminary plan shall be a master drawing of a subdivision
prepared for the overall planning of a property desired to be subdivided
and which is in accordance with this chapter. A concept is an optional
plan which establishes in concept or sketch form the layout for the
subdivision of land. The purpose of this plan is to provide a basis for
Intended and operated for occupancy by persons 55 years of age or
older and:
At least 80% of the occupied units are occupied by at least one
person who is 55 years of age or older;
(a)
The housing facility or community publishes and adheres to
policies and procedures that demonstrate the intent required
under 42 U.S.C. § 3607; and
(b)
The housing facility or community complies with rules issued
by the United States Secretary of Housing and Urban
Development for verification of occupancy.
(c)
(3)
§ 164-3 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-3
150:464
the informal evaluation of plans and to foster a more efficient review
process.
FLOODPLAIN —
FRONT YARD — A yard extending across the full width of the lot and
lying between the front lot line or the proposed front street line and the
nearest line of the building or any enclosed portion thereof.
GARAGE [Amended 8-10-1998 by Ord. No. 629] —
HEALTH DEPARTMENT — The Maryland State Department of Health
and Mental Hygiene.
HOME OCCUPATION — Any occupation or profession carried on by a
member of the immediate family residing on the premises, provided
that:
HOSPITAL — An institution receiving inpatients and rendering medical,
surgical or obstetrical care. Such terms shall include general hospitals
and institutions in which services are limited to special fields such as
cardiac, eye, ear, nose and throat, pediatrics, orthopedic, skin, cancer,
mental, tuberculosis, chronic disease and obstetrics. The term
"hospital" shall also include sanitariums and sanatoriums, including
those wherein mental patients, epileptics, alcoholics or drug addicts are
treated or receive care.
ILLUMINATED ELECTRONIC DISPLAY — An audio and video message
display used primarily at drive-through facilities, service stations and
A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream or
watercourse which is subject to partial or complete inundation.
(1)
An area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of
surface waters from any source.
(2)
RESIDENTIAL GARAGE — An accessory building, portion of a
main building or building attached thereto used for the storage of
private motor vehicles, 50% of which may be for the storage of a
commercial vehicle.
(1)
SERVICE GARAGE — A garage, other than a residential garage,
where motor vehicles, trailers or other types of equipment are
stored, equipped for operation, repaired or kept for hire or sale.
(2)
PARKING GARAGE — A garage, other than a residential garage or
service garage, where parking is provided for motor vehicles on a
temporary basis.
(3)
(1) There is no commodity sold upon the premises.
No person is employed other than a member of the immediate
family residing on the premises.
(2)
No mechanical or electrical equipment is used except such as is
permissible for purely domestic or household purposes.
(3)
§ 164-3 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-3
150:465
other similar auto-themed establishments.[Added 9-28-2015 by Ord.
No. 86084]
JUNKYARD — Any area where waste and discarded or salvaged
materials are bought, sold, exchanged, baled, packed, stored,
disassembled, handled or abandoned, including the salvaging, storing
and wrecking of automobiles or other vehicles and machinery or parts
thereof, housewrecking yards, used lumberyards and places for storage
of salvaged building or structural steel materials and equipment. An
unenclosed residential area used for the storage of any automobile
which does not have current license plates issued by the Motor Vehicle
Administration shall be deemed to be a junkyard. Not included are
pawnshops, used car sale lots and commercial establishments for the
sale, purchase or storage of used furniture and household equipment,
used cars in operable condition and salvaged machinery and the
processing of used, discarded or salvaged materials as a part of the
manufacturing operations.
KENNEL — Any building or structure and/or land used, designed or
arranged for housing, boarding, breeding or care of more than three
adult dogs kept or bred for hunting, sale, exhibition or domestic use
or other domestic animals for profit, but not including those animals
raised for agricultural purposes.
LANDSCAPING — The improvement of a lot with grass, shrubs, trees,
ground covers, vines, flowers, other vegetation and other ornamental
objects. Landscaping may include pedestrian walks, flower beds,
ornamental objects such as sculpture, fountains, statues and similar
natural and man-made objects designed and arranged to produce an
aesthetically pleasing effect.
LOT —
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting on two or more streets at their
intersection, where the interior angle of the intersection does not
exceed 135º.
LOT, INTERIOR — Any lot, including a through lot other than a corner
lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The line separating the lot from the street rightof-
way line upon which it fronts or, where a lot does not abut a street,
A piece or parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
principal building and its accessory buildings to be used, developed
or built upon as a unit under single ownership, including all open
spaces required by this chapter.
(1)
A defined portion of a subdivision or parcel of land which may be
intended for building development, immediate or future, by one or
more owners.
(2)
84.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it would be effective retroactively to
2-23-2012, except to the extent that it would impair a vested right of a property owner.
§ 164-3 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-3
150:466
that lot line which faces the principal entrance or approach to the main
building.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line most distant and most nearly parallel
to the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
LOT MEASUREMENTS —
LOT OF RECORD — A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in
the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Carroll County or a lot
or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has
been so recorded.
MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSARY — A person or entity licensed
by the state that acquires, possesses, transfers, sells, dispenses, or
distributes products containing medical cannabis and related supplies
and products at a state-licensed dispensary pursuant to COMAR
10.62.01 to 10.62.35.[Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 859]
MEDICAL CANNABIS GROWER — A person or entity licensed by the
state that cultivates, manufactures, grows, packages or distributes
medical cannabis to a licensed processor or a registered, independent
medical testing laboratory pursuant to COMAR 10.62.01 to
10.62.35.[Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 859]
MEDICAL CANNABIS GROWER FACILITY — A location or facility at
which a licensed medical cannabis grower operates.[Added
10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 859]
MEDICAL CANNABIS PROCESSOR — A person or entity licensed by
the state that transforms medical cannabis into another product or
extract, and packages and labels medical cannabis and transfers its
product to a licensed dispensary pursuant to COMAR 10.62.01 to
10.62.35.[Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 859]
MEDICAL CANNABIS PROCESSOR FACILITY — A facility at which a
licensed medical cannabis processor operates.[Added 10-26-2015 by
Ord. No. 859]
(MICRO) WIRELESS COMMUNICATION ANTENNA ARRAY — An
antenna array for the reception of wireless communications services,
less than 1/2 meter in height and diameter, which is either groundmounted
or attached to an existing building or structure.[Added
9-25-2017 by Ord. No. 869]
DEPTH — The average horizontal distance between the front lot
line and the rear lot line.
(1)
WIDTH — The horizontal distance between side lot lines, measured
at right angles to the lot center line at the front setback line.
On irregular-shaped lots, the width shall be the average distance
between the side lot lines, with the average distance to be
measured at ten-foot intervals beginning at the front lot line.
(2)
§ 164-3 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-3
150:467
MINOR SUBDIVISION — A subdivision of fewer than three lots.
MOBILE HOME — Any vehicle or preassembled structure so
constructed and located, regardless of its foundation, as to permit
occupancy thereof for living or sleeping or for the conducting of any
business and so designed that it may be moved or transported on
roads by means of attached wheels or hauled on a separate conveyance
or may be propelled or drawn by its own motor power; included are
automobile trailers, truck trailers, trailer coaches, trailer homes,
mobile homes, buses, streetcars and all similar devices.
MONOPOLE — A single, freestanding pole-type structure, tapering
from base to top and supporting one or more antennas. For purposes
of this chapter, a monopole is not a tower.[Added 10-26-1998 by Ord.
No. 631]
NONCONFORMING USE — The use of a building, structure or land
which was lawful when established and legally continued, but which no
longer conforms to the requirements of the zone in which it is located
because of the adoption or amendment of this chapter or the Zoning
Map.
NURSING HOME — Any rest home, convalescent home or home for the
aged and any place devoted primarily to the maintenance and operation
of facilities for the treatment and care of any persons suffering from
illnesses, diseases, deformities or injuries who do not require the
extensive or intensive care that is normally provided in a general
hospital or other specialized hospital but who do require care in excess
of room and board and who need medical, nursing, convalescent or
chronic care. It also includes the following:
OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL, BUSINESS-NONRESIDENTIAL — Offices
and/or buildings used for office purposes by recognized professions,
including doctors, dentists, lawyers, accountants, engineers,
veterinarians, or other such similar professions, including medical or
dental clinics or veterinary clinics.[Added 11-25-2013 by Ord. No.
848-A]
OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL, RESIDENTIAL — Rooms and/or buildings
used for office purposes by not more than one member of any
recognized profession, including doctors, dentists, lawyers,
accountants, engineers, veterinarians, etc., but not including medical
An extended care, intermediate care or personal care facility as
defined within Maryland State Health Department regulations and
as may hereinafter be amended.
(1)
A domiciliary care facility as further defined within Maryland State
Health Department regulations and as hereinafter amended.
(2)
A treatment facility for emotionally disturbed children and for
adolescents as defined within the Maryland State Health
Department regulations and as hereinafter amended.
(3)
§ 164-3 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-3
150:468
or dental clinics or veterinary clinics, provided that such use shall be
incidental to and subordinate to residential use and not involving a
commercial enterprise.
OPEN SPACE — Land provided and deemed necessary and desirable
for present and future residents and citizens of the area, including such
land in stream valleys, natural woods, areas of unusual natural scenic
beauty, local play lots, recreational walkways, pathways and planting
areas in residential subdivisions, but not to include streets, off-street
parking or utility easements.
OPEN SPACE, ENVIRONMENTAL — Land provided for the use of
residents and citizens of an area which possesses such characteristics
as natural woods, stream valleys, floodplains, areas of unusual scenic
beauty or environmental constraints.
OPEN SPACE, RECREATIONAL — Common open space provided and
deemed necessary and desirable for active, recreational purposes.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, association, firm or partnership
or any governmental agency, except the City, or the like, singular or
plural.
PLANNED BUSINESS CENTER — Three or more retail stores or
service establishments designed as a single unit and primarily served
by common accessories such as signs, parking lots, arcades, and
walkways.[Added 9-9-2013 by Ord. No. 846]
PLANNING DIRECTOR — The Planning Director of the City of
Westminster.[Amended 1-28-2008 by Ord. No. 774]
PRIVATE INDOOR RECREATIONAL FACILITIES — Rooms and/or
buildings that are designed for recreational use as sports facilities
and operated by a private nongovernmental entity such as for-profit
commercial business or private nonprofit. Such facilities do not include
outdoor uses and are not included in the accounting for any required
environmental open space and/or recreational open space.[Added
12-14-2015 by Ord. No. 861]
RANGE, INDOOR SHOOTING — An enclosed building where the
discharge of projectile weaponry such as a rifle, pistol and archery is
practiced, which may include, as accessory thereto, the sale, on-site
rental and/or repair of firearms, ammunition, archery equipment and
the like in accordance with and subject to all applicable laws, ordinance
and regulation.[Added 2-27-1995 by Ord. No. 594]
REAR YARD — A yard extending across the full width of the lot and
lying between the rear lot line and the nearest line of the building.
RETIREMENT HOMES/CARE HOMES — Specifically designed multidwelling-
unit buildings consisting of dwelling units to which occupancy
is restricted to housing for older persons or handicapped persons and
organized with a specific program of adequate supportive services for
the particular clientele.[Amended 9-24-2001 by Ord. No. 672]
§ 164-3 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-3
150:469
RIDING STABLE — Any building or structure used or designed for
the boarding, breeding or care of horses, other than horses used for
farming or agricultural purposes.
SANITARY FILL — Any premises used primarily for disposal by
abandonment, discarding, dumping, reduction, burial, incineration or
any other means and for whatever purpose of garbage, trash, refuse,
dead animals, waste material of any kind, junk, discarded machinery or
vehicles or parts thereof, but not sewage or animal waste.
SATELLITE TELEVISION ANTENNA — Any device used or designated
for receiving radio or electromagnetic signals from one or more
orbitally based satellites and is external to or is attached to the exterior
of any building.[Added 10-26-1998 by Ord. No. 631]
SCHOOL SITE — A site of at least 30 acres used by a public or private
school, college or university as part of its educational campus.[Added
3-25-2013 by Ord. No. 842]
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITIES — Any building or portion
thereof containing individual, compartmentalized and controlled-access
units for the storage of personal property by lease or rent.
SERVICE STATION — Any area of land, including buildings and other
structures, that is used to dispense motor vehicle fuels, oil and
accessories at retail, where minor repair service is incidental and
where no storage or parking space is offered for rent.
SETBACK — The required minimum horizontal distance between the
building line, as defined herein, and the related front, side or rear
property line. 85
SIDE YARD — A yard between the side line of the lot and the nearest
line of the building and extending from the front yard to the rear yard.
SIGN — A name, identification, description or display illustrating the
form of any letter, word, model, banner, flag, device or representation
which is affixed or represented, directly or indirectly, upon a building,
structure or land and which directs attention to a product, place,
activity, person, institution or business.
SIGN, BUSINESS — A sign which directs attention to a business or
profession or to a commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered
upon the premises where the sign is located.
SIGN, OUTDOOR ADVERTISING — A sign structure which directs
attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment not
necessarily conducted, sold or offered upon the premises where such
sign is located.
SIGN, VARIABLE ELECTRONIC MESSAGE (VEMS) — An illuminated
variable message sign that utilizes computer-generated text or some
85.Editor’s Note: The definition of “sewage disposal plant,” which originally followed this
definition, was repealed 4-24-2017 by Ord. No. 878. See now the definition of “wastewater
treatment plant.”
§ 164-3 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-3
150:470
other electronic means of changing its message and display.[Added
9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 86086]
STORY — That portion of a building, other than a cellar as defined
herein, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the
floor next above it or, if there is no floor above it, the space between the
floor and the ceiling next above it.
STORY, GROUND — The lowest story, ground story or first story of
any building, the floor of which is not more than 3 1/2 feet below
the average contact ground level at the exterior walls of the building,
except that any basement used as a separate dwelling by other than a
janitor or caretaker or his family shall be deemed a ground story or first
story.
STORY, HALF — A partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the
wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more
than four feet above the floor of such story; provided, however, that any
partial story used as a separate dwelling, other than for a janitor or
caretaker and his family, shall be deemed a full story.
STREET — A private, public or dedicated way or a public proposed
right-of-way, widening or extension of an existing street or public way
shown on any plan approved by the Commission. The word "street"
shall also mean road, highway, boulevard, avenue, lane or court.
STREET LINE — A line defining the edge of a street right-of-way and
separating the street from abutting property or lots. If, on a Master Plan
of streets and highways duly adopted by the Commission, a street is
scheduled for future widening, the proposed right-of-way line shown on
the Master Plan shall be the street line.
STREET, MAJOR — A street or highway designated as a major street or
expressway on the Official Major Street Plan of the City of Westminster.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change in the structural members
of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or
girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed, the use of which requires a
fixed location on the ground or which is attached to something having
such location, but not including fences, power, gas, water, sewage or
communication lines or poles, towers or pole structures, sidewalks,
driveways or curbs.
SUBDIVIDER — An individual, partnership, firm or corporation or agent
therefor that undertakes or participates in the activities covered by this
chapter.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of any lot, tract or parcel of
land into two or more lots, plats, parcels, sites or other divisions of land,
whether for immediate or future sale, lease or building development.
86.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it would be effective retroactively to
2-23-2012, except to the extent that it would impair a vested right of a property owner.
§ 164-3 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-3
150:471
If a new street is involved, subdivision shall mean any division of a
tract or parcel of land. The sale or exchange of parcels of land between
owners of adjoining properties for the purpose of small adjustments
in boundaries shall not be considered a subdivision, provided that
additional lots are not thereby created and that the original lots are not
reduced below the minimum sizes required by this chapter.
SUBDIVISION, RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — An alternate method of
subdivision permitted under § 164-197.1 for single-family detached
units developed in the R-10,000 Residential and R-20,000 Residential
Zones.[Added 7-9-2001 by Ord. No. 664]
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — An unstaffed facility established
for the purpose of providing wireless voice, data or video transmission
within a designated service area consisting of one or more antennas
attached to a support structure and related equipment and mounted on
a freestanding monopole in accordance with § 164-139.1. Antennas are
limited to the following types and dimensions: omnidirectional (whip)
antennas not exceeding 15 feet in height and three inches in diameter;
directional or panel antennas not exceeding eight feet in height and two
feet in width. An antenna may be mounted on a freestanding monopole
in accordance with § 164-139.1. A telecommunications facility may
include related equipment located within a building, an equipment
cabinet or an equipment room within a building. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, an antenna or mast subject to 47 CFR 1.4000 shall not be
considered a telecommunications facility, but only to the extent the
antenna or mast is exempt from local land use law by the provisions
of 47 CFR 1.4000.[Added 10-26-1998 by Ord. No. 631; amended
3-25-2013 by Ord. No. 842; 9-25-2017 by Ord. No. 869]
TELECOMMUNICATIONS INSTALLATION — An unstaffed installation
established for the purpose of providing wireless voice, data video
transmission and consisting of one or more antennas and related
equipment, attached to or contained on or within a building, where no
portion of any antenna or equipment is visible from the public rightsof-
way, unless screened pursuant to § 164-131.3. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, an antenna or mast subject to 47 CFR 1.4000 shall not be
considered a telecommunications installation, but only to the extent the
antenna or mast is exempted from local land use law by the provisions
of 47 CFR 1.4000.[Added 9-25-2017 by Ord. No. 869]
TEMPORARY USE — Any use which has been authorized under the
provisions of this chapter which is limited as to the time in which such
use shall legally continue.
TOURIST HOMES (BED/BREAKFAST) — A dwelling, occupied as such,
in which, for compensation, rooms and/or meals are offered to transient
persons under the management of the occupants of that dwelling.
TOWER — A freestanding lattice-type structure, supporting antennas
used for radio, television broadcasting or wireless transmission or
reception.[Added 10-26-1998 by Ord. No. 631]
§ 164-3 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-3
150:472
§ 164-4. Interpretation.
§ 164-5. Effective date; territorial applicability.
This chapter shall take effect on November 6, 1979, and shall apply to
all land, buildings, properties and their uses within the territorial limits
of the City of Westminster. Should the territorial limits be expanded by
VARIANCE — A relaxation of the terms of this chapter as to density,
bulk or area requirements as provided in § 164-161.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT — A facility designed and
constructed to receive, treat, and store sewage or sewage combined
with other waterborne waste and which is owned by the state, or a
political subdivision or municipal corporation of this state or owned by
another public entity incorporated for the purpose of treating sewage
under the Annotated Code of Maryland, the Environmental Article, §
9-601 et seq.[Added 4-24-2017 by Ord. No. 878]
YARD — An open space on the same lot with a building or a group of
buildings lying between the building or outer building of a group and
the nearest lot or street line and open and unoccupied from the ground
up.
ZONING CERTIFICATE — A written statement issued by the Zoning
Administrator authorizing buildings, structures or uses in accordance
with the provisions of the Westminster City Code. The statement may
also contain requirements as to any fees, costs or benefit assessments
imposed by said Code.[Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 792]
Word usage. The singular number shall include the plural, and the
plural the singular; the word "structure" shall include the word
"building"; the word "used" shall include "arranged," "designed,"
"constructed," "altered," "converted," "rented," "leased" or "intended to
be used"; and the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory. Words
used in the present tense include the future tense; the word "may" is
permissive; "now" shall mean at the time of the adoption of this chapter;
"hereinafter" shall mean after the adoption of this chapter.
B.
In interpreting and applying this chapter, the requirements contained
herein are declared to be the minimum requirements for the protection
of health, morals, safety or welfare.
A.
This chapter shall not be deemed to interfere with or abrogate or annul
or otherwise affect in any manner whatsoever any ordinances, rules,
regulations or permits or easements, covenants or other agreements
between parties; provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a
greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the
height of buildings or larger open spaces than is imposed or required
by other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits or by easements,
covenants or agreements between parties, the provisions of this
chapter shall prevail.
B.
§ 164-3 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-5
150:473
annexation, the Zoning Maps applicable under the Carroll County Zoning
Ordinance shall be immediately effective in the City of Westminster upon
such annexation unless and until otherwise changed pursuant to this
chapter.
§ 164-6. Zoning of annexed lands.
Whenever a joint petition for annexation and zoning is filed with the City
and there shall be introduced before the Mayor and Council a resolution
to enlarge the corporate boundaries of the City in accordance with the
requirements of applicable law, the Mayor and Council shall also consider,
as appropriate, an application for a local or sectional Zoning Map
amendment for the territory proposed to be incorporated into the City by
the resolution.
The City Clerk shall transmit copies of said resolution and zoning
application to the Planning Commission of the City.
A.
Thereafter, the Planning Commission shall study the territory proposed
to be annexed and prepare a preliminary report recommending the
action to be taken as to the zoning application, explicitly making a
recommendation as to the zoning classification or classifications for the
territory that would be appropriate if it were to be annexed.
B.
The Planning Commission shall then hold at least one public hearing on
such preliminary report on at least 15 days' notice of the time and place
of it, which shall be published in a paper of general circulation in the
City.
C.
Following such hearing, the Planning Commission shall submit to the
Mayor and Council its final report which shall recommend the action
the Mayor and Council should take as to the zoning application, and the
Mayor and Council shall hold a public hearing on the recommendation
of the Planning Commission simultaneously with its hearing on the
proposed annexation.
D.
Public notice of such public hearing on the final report shall be given in
accordance with the requirements of Article 66B of the Annotated Code
of Maryland, as now constituted and as it may hereafter be amended
from time to time.
E.
Following such public hearing, the Mayor and Council may adopt an
ordinance amending the Zoning Map to include such territory and
the zoning classification or classifications thereof simultaneously with
adoption of a resolution enlarging the corporate boundaries of the City
to include such territory. Such ordinance shall be effective on the date
that such annexation becomes final.
F.
The provisions of §§ 164-176 through 164-186 of this chapter shall not
apply to procedures under this section, but the provisions of §§ 164-187
through 164-190 shall apply, except that a specific finding that there
was a substantial change in the character of the neighborhood where
G.
§ 164-5 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-6
150:474
§ 164-7. Copy on file.
A certified copy of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Westminster,
Maryland, as may be amended from time to time, shall be filed in the office
of the Zoning Administrator of the City of Westminster, Maryland.
the property is located or that there was a mistake in the existing
zoning classification in the county shall not be necessary.
§ 164-6 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-7
150:475

ARTICLE II
Zoning Districts
§ 164-8. Establishment. [Amended 10-12-1992 by Ord. No. 551;
12-20-1999 by Ord. No. 649; 9-25-2000 by Ord. No. 638]
For the purpose of this chapter, the area of Westminster is hereby
divided into districts or zones as follows: [Amended 1-12-2004 by
Ord. No. 710]
C Conservation Zone
A Agricultural Residential Zone
R-20,000 Residential Zone
R-10,000 Residential Zone
R-7,500 Residential Zone
B Business Zone
C-C Central Commerce Zone
D-B Downtown Business Zone
NP Neighborhood Preservation Overlay Zone [Added
11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 816]
C-B Central Business Zone
HOP Housing for Older Persons Zone [Added 1-10-2005 by
Ord. No. 723]
I-R Restricted Industrial Zone
I-G General Industrial Zone
MUI Mixed Use Infill Zone
N-C Neighborhood Commercial Zone
P-I Planned Industrial Zone (floating zone)
PD-4 Planned Development-4 Zone (floating zone)
PD-9 Planned Development-9 Zone (floating zone)
PRSC Planned Regional Shopping Center Zone
A.
Said districts or zones shall be of the number, size and shape with
appropriate symbols, legends and explanatory matter thereon as shown
on the Zoning Maps of Westminster.
B.
In addition to placement in one of the foregoing zones, certain areas of
the City may also be placed in the Compatible Neighborhood Overlay
Zone, the Historic District Zone, or the Arts and Culture Overlay
District. [Amended 7-10-2006 by Ord. No. 745; 11-8-2010 by Ord.
No. 815]
C.
§ 164-8 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-9
150:477
§ 164-9. Zoning District Map. [Amended 7-9-2001 by Ord. No. 665;
6-12-2006 by Ord. No. 754]
The map entitled “City of Westminster Zoning Map,” dated July 1, 2006,
is hereby adopted as the Zoning District Map for the City and made a
part of this chapter. Said map as adopted and as henceforth amended
shall henceforth be known as the “Zoning Map of the City of Westminster,
Maryland.” Said map and its sections, notations, dimensions, designations,
references and other data shown thereon is hereby made a part of this
chapter to the same extent as if the information set forth on said map were
fully described and incorporated herein. After map amendment actions are
taken by the Common Council, the Zoning Administrator shall update the
map from time to time to reflect the Common Council’s actions. As evidence
of authenticity, said map and any amendments thereof shall be signed by
the Zoning Administrator upon adoption.
§ 164-10. Interpretation of boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any of the zones
established in this chapter as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules
shall apply:
Zoning boundary lines are intended to follow street, alley or lot lines or
lines parallel or perpendicular thereto, unless such zone boundary lines
are otherwise identified on the Zoning Map.
A.
Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center line of
streets, highways, alleys or streams shall be construed to follow such
center lines.
B.
Boundaries indicated as approximately following property lines or
platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.
C.
Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits shall be
construed as following City limits.
D.
In unsubdivided property or where a zone boundary divides a lot,
the location of any such boundary, unless the same is indicated by
dimensions shown on such maps, shall be determined by the use of the
map scale shown thereon and scaled to the nearest foot.
E.
If all or any portion of any public street, alley, right-of-way, easement
or land which is not included in any zone shall ever revert to or come
into private ownership or shall ever be used for any purpose other than
a public purpose, at such time the land and any buildings or other
structures which are included within such public street, alley, right-ofway,
easement or land or portion thereof shall be subject to all of these
regulations which apply within the zone immediately adjacent thereto
or within the most restricted of the immediately adjacent zones, if there
is more than one.
F.
§ 164-9 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-10
150:478
ARTICLE III
C Conservation Zone
§ 164-11. General provisions.
The following regulations shall apply in all C Conservation Zones.
§ 164-12. Uses permitted.
No building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure
shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered, enlarged or maintained,
except for one or more of the following uses:
§ 164-13. Special exceptions. [Amended 10-26-1998 by Ord. No.
631]
The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions in accordance
with the provisions of Article XXII:
Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to any permitted
use in this section.
A.
Agriculture, as defined in § 164-3, except that woodland intended to
be cleared for cultivation or pasturing shall be subject to review by
the Board of Appeals, and provided that any greenhouse heating plant
or any building or feeding pens in which farm animals are kept shall
comply with the distance requirements specified in § 164-140.
B.
C. Dwelling, single-family detached.
D. Forests, forestation and wildlife preserves.
E. Publicly owned or government-operated buildings and uses.
Publicly owned or private parks of a nonprofit nature, including
campgrounds, golf courses, riding trails, summer or winter resort
areas, hunting, fishing or country clubs, game preserves and similar
uses for the purpose of preserving and enjoying the natural resources
of the property.
F.
Schools and colleges, subject to the approval of a site development plan
by the Commission.
G.
Water supply works, flood control or watershed protection works and
fish and game hatcheries.
H.
A. Antique shops.
B. Home occupations.
Public utility structures, other than essential utility equipment as
enumerated in § 164-139.
C.
§ 164-11 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-13
150:479
§ 164-14. Dimensional requirements.
Riding stables, as defined in § 164-3, which are noncommercial and
private in use and are located in a rear yard subject to the distance
requirements specified in § 164-140.
D.
Telecommunications facilities, subject to the requirements of
§ 164-139.1.
E.
Trap, skeet, rifle or archery ranges, including gun clubs, provided
that such use shall be five times the distance requirement specified in
§ 164-140.
F.
Veterinary clinics, animal hospitals or kennels, with or without
runways, provided that the minimum area is 10 acres for any of the
aforesaid uses, and provided that any structure or area used for such
purposes shall be subject to twice the distance requirements as
specified in § 164-140. In any event, such structure or use shall not
be located closer than 200 feet from any property line of the subject
property.
G.
H. Tourist homes (bed/breakfast).
Net lot area. Each single-family detached dwelling hereafter erected,
together with its accessory buildings, shall be located on a lot or tract
of land having an area of at least three acres. All other uses, including
together principal structures and accessory buildings, shall be located
on a lot or tract of land having an area of at least five acres.
A.
Percentage of lot coverage. Not more than 25% of the net area of the
lot or tract of land may be covered by buildings, including accessory
buildings.
B.
Lot width and yard requirements.
The following minimum requirements shall be observed:
Use
Lot Width
at
Building
Line
(feet)
Front
Yard
Depth
(feet)
Side Yard
Width
(each)
(feet)
Rear
Yard
Depth
(feet)
Single-family
detached
300 50 50 0
All other uses,
except as
otherwise
provided in this
section
300 50 50 50
(1)
C.
§ 164-13 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-14
150:480
§ 164-15. Building height.
No principal structure shall exceed 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet in height, and no
accessory building shall exceed two stories or 20 feet in length, except in
the case of agricultural buildings, which shall have no height limitations.
§ 164-16. Off-street parking.
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Article XVI of this
chapter.
§ 164-17. Signs.
Signs shall be permitted subject to the provisions of Article XVII of this
chapter.
A corner lot shall have a minimum width of 300 feet measured at
the building line along each street front and shall have two front
yards.
(2)
§ 164-14 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-17
150:481

ARTICLE IV
A Agricultural Residential Zone
§ 164-18. General provisions.
The following regulations shall apply in all A Agricultural Residential Zones.
§ 164-19. Uses permitted.
No building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure
shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered, enlarged or maintained,
except for one or more of the following uses:
§ 164-20. Special exceptions. [Amended 10-12-1998 by Ord. No.
632]
The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions in accordance
with the provisions of Article XXII:
Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to any permitted
use in this section.
A.
Agriculture, as defined in § 164-3, including commercial or
noncommercial nurseries and greenhouses, provided that any
greenhouse heating plant or any building or feeding pens in which farm
animals are kept shall comply with the distance requirements specified
in § 164-140.
B.
Circuses, carnivals or similar transient enterprises, provided that such
use shall not exceed 10 days at any one time and involves no permanent
structure.
C.
D. Dwellings, single-family detached.
E. Day-care facilities for not more than six children or elderly persons.
F. Farm tenant houses.
G. Game, wildlife and nature study preserves and reservations.
Recreation facilities and centers (public or private noncommercial),
including country clubs, swimming pools, golf courses and summer
camps.
H.
Riding stables, subject to the distance requirements specified in
§ 164-140.
I.
Utilities, pipelines, electric power and energy transmission and
distribution lines, telephone and telegraph lines and railroad tracks,
but not a railroad yard, except overhead electric power and energy
transmission and distribution lines suspended from multilegged
structures, aboveground pipelines and accessory structures.
J.
A. Antique and arts and crafts shops.
§ 164-18 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-20
150:483
B. Airparks, airports or landing fields, public or private.
C. Beauty parlors or barbershops.
D. Boarding- (lodging) or rooming houses.
Cemeteries, mausoleums or memorial gardens, churches, convents,
monasteries, parish houses and other places of worship.
E.
F. Dairy products or milk plants.
G. Eleemosynary and philanthropic institutions.
H. Funeral homes and mortuaries.
I. Home occupations.
J. Hospitals and nursing and care homes.
K. Libraries, museums and similar institutions of a noncommercial nature.
L. Medical and dental clinics.
M. Noncommercial research institutions.
Offices to conduct mail order and catalog-type operations where
operated by a resident of the property, provided that no inventory
or merchandise is kept on the premises for sale, except samples and
the like, and provided that there are no more than two nonresident
employees.
N.
The professional office of a resident realtor, attorney, accountant,
insurance agent or other similar professional office of the resident,
provided that there are no more than two nonresident employees.
O.
Public buildings, structures and properties of the cultural, educational,
administrative and public-service type, including fire, ambulance or
rescue service.
P.
Telecommunications facilities, subject to the requirements of
§ 164-139.1.
Q.
Recreational year-round campground or recreational establishments of
a commercial nature.
R.
S. Rifle, pistol or skeet-shooting ranges.
Roadside stands which do not operate in excess of six months per year
for the sale of fresh fruits, vegetables and other farm produce in season.
T.
Schools and colleges, including nursery schools or day-care facilities for
up to eight children or elderly persons.
U.
V. Theaters, outdoor.
W. Tourist homes (bed/breakfast).
§ 164-20 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-21
150:484
§ 164-21. Dimensional requirements.
§ 164-22. Building height.
No principal structure shall exceed 2 1/2 stories or a height of 35 feet,
except in the case of agricultural buildings, which shall have no height
limitations.
Net lot area. Each single-family detached dwelling hereafter erected,
together with its accessory buildings, shall be located on a lot having
an area of at least five acres.
A.
Percentage of lot coverage. Not more than 25% of the net area of the
lot may be covered by buildings, including accessory buildings.
B.
Lot width and yard requirements.
The following minimum requirements shall be observed:
Use
Lot Width
at
Building
Line
(feet)
Front
Yard
Depth
(feet)
Side Yard
Width
(each)
(feet)
Rear Yard
Depth
(feet)
Principal
structures
100 40 20 50
(1)
A corner lot shall have a minimum width of 125 feet, measured at
the building line along each street front, and shall have two front
yards.
(2)
An accessory building or any enclosure, coop or run or any part
thereof used for housing, shelter or sale of animals or fowl shall
be located at least 50 feet from any building used for dwelling
purposes and shall conform to the rear and side yard requirements
set forth in Subsection C(1) above.
(3)
C.
§ 164-21 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-22
150:485

ARTICLE V
R-20,000 Residential Zone
§ 164-23. General provisions.
The following regulations shall apply in all R-20,000 Residential Zones.
§ 164-24. Uses permitted.
No building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure
shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered, enlarged or maintained,
except for one or more of the following uses:
§ 164-25. Special exceptions.
The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions in accordance
with the provisions of Article XXII:
Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to any permitted
use in this section.
A.
Dwellings, single-family detached, including accessory buildings
incidental to the permitted use.
B.
Agriculture and accessory buildings, provided that no building for
housing animals or fowl, except household pets, shall be erected nor
any manure stored within 100 feet of any dwelling, and in no case in the
front or side setbacks of a dwelling or within 25 feet of the side lines
of a lot, and provided further that no animals or fowl, except household
pets, shall be permitted on a lot of less than two acres.
C.
D. Day-care facilities for not more than six children or elderly persons.
Churches, convents, monasteries, parish houses and all other places of
worship.
A.
B. Home occupations.
C. Hospitals and nursing and care homes.
Public buildings, structures and properties of the recreational, cultural,
educational, administrative or public-service type, including fire,
ambulance or rescue service.
D.
Public utility buildings, structures or uses not considered essential
utility equipment, as enumerated in § 164-139.
E.
Recreational areas and centers (public or private noncommercial),
including country clubs, swimming pools, golf courses and summer
camps.
F.
Schools and colleges, including nursery schools or day-care facilities for
up to eight children or elderly persons.
G.
§ 164-23 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-25
150:487
§ 164-26. Dimensional requirements.
§ 164-27. Building height.
No principal structure shall exceed 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet in height, and no
accessory building shall exceed two stories or 20 feet in height.
Telecommunications facilities, if located on a school site. [Added
3-25-2013 by Ord. No. 84287]
H.
I. Tourist homes (bed/breakfast).
Net lot area. Each single-family detached dwelling unit or special
exception use hereafter erected, together with its accessory buildings,
shall be located on a lot having an area of at least 20,000 square feet.
Each special exception shall be located on a lot having an area of at
least two acres.
A.
Percentage of lot coverage. Not more than 25% of the net lot area may
be covered by buildings, including accessory buildings.
B.
Lot width and yard requirements.
The following per unit minimum requirements shall be observed:
Use
Lot Width
at Building
Line
(feet)
Front
Yard
Depth
(feet)
Side Yard
Width
(each)
(feet)
Rear Yard
Depth
(feet)
Principal
structures
100 40 20 50
(1)
A corner lot shall have a minimum width of 125 feet, measured at
the building line along each street front, and shall have two front
yards.
(2)
C.
87.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection H as Subsection I.
§ 164-25 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-27
150:488
ARTICLE VI
R-10,000 Residential Zone
§ 164-28. General provisions.
The following regulations shall apply in all R-10,000 Residential Zones.
§ 164-29. Uses permitted.
No building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure
shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered, enlarged or maintained,
except for one or more of the following uses:
§ 164-30. Special exceptions. [Amended 4-10-2000 by Ord. No. 650]
The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions in accordance
with the provisions of Article XXII:
Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to any permitted
use in this section.
A.
Dwellings, single-family detached, including accessory buildings
incidental to the permitted use.
B.
Agriculture and accessory buildings, provided that no building for
housing animals or fowl, except household pets, shall be erected nor
any manure stored within 100 feet of any dwelling, and in no case in the
front or side setbacks of a dwelling or within 25 feet of the side lines
of a lot, and provided further that no animals or fowl, except household
pets, shall be permitted on a lot of less than two acres.
C.
D. Colleges and universities.
E. Day-care facilities for not more than six children or elderly persons.
A. Boarding- (lodging) or rooming houses.
Churches, convents, monasteries, parish houses and all other places of
worship.
B.
Dwellings, single-family semidetached, provided that on parcels of land
in excess of five acres no more than 20% of the net buildable land area
may be devoted to semidetached single-family dwellings.
C.
D. Home occupations.
E. Hospitals and nursing and care homes.
Off-street parking for churches, convents, monasteries, parish houses
and all other places of worship.
F.
Schools, including nursery schools but not including colleges or
universities, and day-care facilities for up to eight children or elderly
persons.
G.
§ 164-28 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-30
150:489
§ 164-31. Dimensional requirements.
H. Social clubs, fraternal organizations and community meeting halls.
Public buildings, structures and properties of the recreational, cultural,
educational, institutional, administrative and public-service type,
including fire, ambulance or rescue squad.
I.
Telecommunications facilities, if located on a school site. [Added
3-25-2013 by Ord. No. 84288]
J.
K. Tourist homes (bed/breakfast).
Net lot area. Each single-family detached dwelling unit or special
exception use hereafter erected, together with its accessory buildings,
shall be located on a lot having an area of at least 10,000 square feet.
Each semidetached building shall be located on a lot having an area of
at least 10,000 square feet.
A.
Percentage of lot coverage. Not more than 30% of the net lot area may
be covered by buildings, including accessory buildings.
B.
Lot width and yard requirements.
The following per family unit minimum requirements shall be
observed.
Use
Lot
Width
(feet)
Lot Area
Per
Family
(square
feet)
Front
Yard
(feet)
Least
Side
Yard
(feet)
Sum of
Side
Yards
(feet)
Rear
Yard
(feet)
Singlefamily
detached
80 10,000 35 10 30 25
Semidetached
dwelling,
per family
40 5,000 35 10 10 25
All other
principal
structures
100 — 40 20 40 50
(1)
A corner lot for a single-family detached dwelling shall have a
minimum width of 100 feet, measured at the building line along
each street front, and shall have two front yards.
(2)
A corner lot for a single-family semidetached dwelling shall have a
minimum width of 50 feet for each dwelling unit, measured at the
building line along each street front, and shall have two front yards.
(3)
C.
88.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection J as Subsection K.
§ 164-30 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-32
150:490
§ 164-32. Building height. [Amended 12-8-1997 by Ord. No. 624]
Except as provided in § 164-146B, no principal structure shall exceed 2 1/
2 stories or 35 feet in height, and no accessory building shall exceed two
stories or 25 feet in height.
§ 164-33. Reclassification.
All R-10,000 Residential Zones are eligible for consideration for
reclassification to the PD-4 Zone.
§ 164-32 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-33
150:491

ARTICLE VII
R-7,500 Residential Zone
§ 164-34. General provisions.
The following regulations shall apply in all R-7,500 Residential Zones.
§ 164-35. Uses permitted. [Amended 10-25-1999 by Ord. No. 639;
9-24-2001 by Ord. No. 672; 9-13-2004 by Ord. No. 722]
No building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure
shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered, enlarged or maintained,
except for one or more of the following uses:
A. All uses listed in § 164-29.
Dwellings, single-family semidetached, including accessory buildings
incidental to the permitted uses.
B.
C. Day-care facilities for not more than six children or elderly persons.
The replacement of any multiple-family dwelling existing prior to July
1, 1999, by a new multiple-family dwelling with an increased bonus
density of 20% subject to the provisions of § 164-153.1. However, an
historically significant structure may be replaced under this subsection
only if said structure was destroyed by fire, windstorm, flood, explosion,
any cause of nature or any other cause not attributable to the
negligence or misconduct of its owner. For purposes of this subsection,
an "historically significant structure" is defined as any structure that is:
(1) Included in the survey of historic structures for Westminster;
(2) Described in The Building of Westminster by Christopher Weeks;
(3) Located in the local Historic District;
(4) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places;
Is a contributing structure in the Westminster National Register
District.
(5)
D.
Medical and dental offices which were legal nonconforming uses as of
July 1, 2003, as certified by the Zoning Administrator and which are
located in an area designated by the Common Council of Westminster.
E.
Pregnancy-related care, newborn parenting services or counseling,
provided that the use is located in a building of less than 1,500 square
feet of above-grade living area, on or contiguous to a parcel that is 25
acres or larger, on which parking for the use may be provided, and
used for a public, quasi-public, institutional, educational, charitable, or
religious purpose, and operates only Monday through Friday between
the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 7:30 p.m. In the case of the conversion of an
existing building and premises for the purpose of establishing such use,
F.
§ 164-34 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-35
150:493
§ 164-36. Special exceptions.
The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions in accordance
with the provisions of Article XXII:
§ 164-37. Dimensional requirements.
the lot width, setbacks, and other dimensional requirements otherwise
specified herein shall not apply to those improvements or conditions
existing at the time of such conversion. [Added 1-14-2019 by Ord.
No. 901]
A. All uses listed in § 164-30.
Conversion dwellings subject to the requirements of § 164-150 and the
County Health Department.
B.
Public buildings, structures and properties of the recreational, cultural,
institutional, educational, administrative or public-service type,
including fire, ambulance or rescue squad.
C.
Housing for older persons and other customary accessory uses and
structures, which are clearly incidental to the principal structure and
use, subject to the requirements of § 164-153.2. [Added 9-24-2001 by
Ord. No. 672]
D.
Net lot area.
Single-family detached dwelling. Each single-family detached
dwelling hereafter erected, together with its accessory buildings,
shall be located on a lot having a net area of at least 7,500 square
feet.
(1)
Single-family semidetached dwelling. Each single-family
semidetached dwelling hereafter erected, together with its
accessory buildings, shall be located on a lot having a net area of
at least 3,500 square feet per dwelling.
(2)
A.
Lot coverage. No more than 40% of the net area of a lot may be covered
by buildings, including accessory buildings.
B.
Lot width and yard requirements.
The following per family unit minimum requirements shall be
observed:
(1)
C.
§ 164-35 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-37
150:494
§ 164-38. Building height.
No principal structure shall exceed 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet in height, and no
accessory building shall exceed two stories or 25 feet in height.
§ 164-39. Reclassification.
All R-7,500 Residential Zones are eligible for consideration for
reclassification to the PD-4 and PD-9 Zones.
Use
Lot
Width
(feet)
Lot Area
Per Family
(square
feet)
Front
Yard
(feet)
Least
Side
Yard
(feet)
Sum
of
Side
Yards
(feet)
Rear
Yard
(feet)
Singlefamily
detached
70 7,500 30 8 16 25
Semidetached
dwelling
per family
35 3,500 30 8 8 25
All other
principal
structures
100 — 40 20 40 50
A corner lot for a single-family detached dwelling shall have a
minimum width of 90 feet, measured at the building line along each
street front, and shall have two front yards.
(2)
A corner lot for a single-family semidetached dwelling shall have a
minimum width of 45 feet for each dwelling unit, measured at the
building line along each street front, and shall have two front yards.
(3)
§ 164-37 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-39
150:495

ARTICLE VIIA
Mixed Use Infill Zone
[Added 1-12-2004 by Ord. No. 710]
§ 164-39.1. Purpose.
§ 164-39.2. Uses permitted.
It is the purpose of this zone to provide a method for the orderly
development of commercial, office, and residential uses on properties
located proximate to the intersection of two major streets located in
the following zones: B Business, N-C Neighborhood Commercial, C-B
Central Business, and/or D-B Downtown Business. The zone is intended
to provide suitable sites for the development of integrated commercial,
office, and residential facilities, while at the same time maintaining
reasonable limitations upon their design, size, and operation. Said
suitable sites are intended to allow for appropriate development in
a convenient location without adversely affecting the physical
development pattern of neighboring uses. [Amended 2-11-2013 by
Ord. No. 840]
A.
The following objectives are sought in providing for the Mixed Use Infill
Zone:
To provide a more attractive and varied commercial, office, and
residential environment than would be possible through the strict
application of Euclidean zonal district requirements.
(1)
To encourage developers to use a more creative approach in the
development of land.
(2)
To encourage the development and redevelopment of land located
within or near the downtown area through the provision of
integrated and compatible commercial, office, and residential uses.
[Amended 2-11-2013 by Ord. No. 840]
(3)
(4) To encourage combined trips for shopping and employment.
(5) To encourage pedestrian and bicycle trips.
To foster the development and continuance of mixed uses with
special development standards designed to protect residential use
within and adjoining developments from any possible adverse
effect from nonresidential uses.
(6)
B.
The fact that an application complies with all specific requirements and
purposes set forth herein shall not be deemed to create a presumption
that the application is, in fact, compatible with surrounding land uses
and, in itself, shall not be sufficient to require the granting of any
application.
C.
D. The following regulations shall apply in all Mixed Use Infill Zones.
§ 164-39.1 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-39.2
150:497
No building, structure, or land shall be used and no building or
structure shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered, enlarged or
maintained, except for one or more of the uses listed in this Subsection
A of this section and one or more of the uses listed in Subsection B of
this section. [Amended 9-25-2017 by Ord. No. 869; 2-12-2018 by
Ord. No. 886]
Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to any
permitted uses in this section.
(1)
(2) Antique/collectible shops and arts and craft shops.
(3) Art galleries/studios.
(4) Auto accessory stores.
(5) Bakery shops.
Banks and savings and loan institutions without drive-through
service.
(6)
(7) Beauty parlors or barbershops.
(8) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
(9) Bookstores.
(10)Candy stores.
(11)Clothing stores.
(12)Coffee houses.
(13)Custom printing and reproduction shops.
(14)Dairy product stores.
(15)Day-care facilities.
(16)Department stores of 25,000 square feet or less.
(17)Dress or millinery shops.
(18)Drugstores.
(19)Dry goods or variety shops.
(20)Florist shops.
(21)Food and grocery stores containing 25,000 square feet or less.
(22)Furniture stores.
(23)Gift or jewelry shops.
(24)Hardware stores.
A.
§ 164-39.2 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-39.2
150:498
(25)Home occupations.
Laundry or dry-cleaning establishments without drive-through
service.
(26)
(27)Meat markets.
(28)Photographic studios and photographic supply stores.
(29)Physical fitness facilities.
(30)Public buildings, structures and properties.
(31)Radio and television repair shops.
(32)Restaurants and lunchrooms, without drive-through service.
(33)Dance or music studios.
(34)Shoe repair shops.
Signs, with the exception of outdoor advertising signs, subject to
the provisions of Article XVII.
(35)
(36)Specialty shops.
(37)Sporting goods or hobby shops.
(38)Stationery stores.
(39)Tailor establishments.
(40)Tattoo parlors.
(41)Taverns and nightclubs.
Telecommunications installations, subject to the facility limitations
in § 139-28.2A(3)(a) through (f) and the screening requirements for
modern appurtenances in § 164-131.3.
(42)
(43)Theaters and private assembly halls.
(44)Upholstery shops.
Video rental establishments, with the exception of adult
entertainment.
(45)
In addition to at least one use listed in Subsection A of this section,
at least one office or residential use conforming to the following
requirements shall be required.
(1) Professional, business and medical offices are permitted.
Residential uses permitted. Multifamily dwellings are permitted
with a maximum density of 25 units per acre. The Planning
Commission may approve an increase in density of no more than
(2)
B.
§ 164-39.2 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-39.2
150:499
§ 164-39.3. Special exceptions.
§ 164-39.4. Conditions for uses.
20% of the maximum permitted density upon finding that such an
increase is consistent with the goals of the Comprehensive Plan
and that adequate public facilities exist to service the proposed
development.
(3) Radio and television studios.
(4) Artist live/work space.
Uses listed in Subsection B of this section may occupy the street-level
floor of any structure with the approval of the Planning and Zoning
Commission. [Amended 2-11-2013 by Ord. No. 840]
C.
The buying, selling or trading of firearms shall not be allowed under
any of the uses permitted under this section.
D.
Automated vending devices and automated teller machines shall not
count towards the two-use minimum requirement in Subsection A of
this section.
E.
Uses reasonably related to the primary use, such as a rental office for
on-site dwelling units, shall not count towards the two-use minimum
requirement in Subsection A of this section.
F.
The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions in
accordance with the provisions of Article XXII.
Banks and savings and loan institutions with drive-through service
existing on or before July 1, 2003, provided the applicant proves
the use will not adversely affect pedestrian travel.
(1)
(2) Department stores of greater than 25,000 square feet.
(3) Hotels.
Microbreweries and pub breweries licensed under Article 2B of the
Annotated Code of Maryland.
(4)
(5) Pet shops.
(6) Social clubs, fraternal organizations and community meeting halls.
(7) Visitor's centers.
A.
Goods shall consist primarily of new or reconditioned merchandise or
bona fide antiques.
A.
Processes and equipment employed and goods processed or sold shall
be limited to those which are not objectionable by reason of odor, dust,
smoke cinders gas, fumes, noise, vibration, refuse matter or water-
B.
§ 164-39.2 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-39.4
150:500
§ 164-39.5. Design standards.
carried waste or otherwise create a nuisance under the provisions of
Chapter 100, Nuisances, of the Code of Westminster.
For the purposes of this section, any side of the building(s) facing a
public street, public access easement, or residential property is defined
as a facade. All facades of a building that are visible from adjoining
properties and/or public streets shall contribute to the community
integration by featuring characteristics that reflect the architectural
style of the buildings within a one-half-mile radius of the subject site
and shall include the following:
Facades greater than 20 feet in length must incorporate recesses
and projections along at least 20% of the length of the facade.
(1)
Facades must include windows totaling at least 80% of the first
floor of the structure and 30% of each additional floor. Credit may
be given for up to 20% of this requirement for awnings or arcades.
No portion of the facade shall be of highly reflective glass with a
reflectance factor of 0.25 or greater.
(2)
Facade color must be of low-reflective, subtle, neutral or earth-tone
colors. The use of high-intensity colors, metallic colors, black or
fluorescent colors is prohibited.
(3)
Building trim may feature brighter colors, but neon tubing is not
permitted as an accent material.
(4)
Facade building materials must include brick, wood, native stone
or tinted/textured concrete masonry units. Smooth-faced concrete
block, wood or vinyl siding, tilt-up concrete panels or prefabricated
steel or metal panels are prohibited for exterior facades.
(5)
A.
Architectural character shall be incorporated into the building(s) by use
of a repeating pattern of change in color, texture and material modules,
and at least one of these elements shall repeat at intervals of no more
than 30 feet, either horizontally or vertically.
B.
Variations in rooflines must be incorporated at intervals of 20 feet or
at each break in retail frontage, whichever is less. Rooftop mechanical
equipment must be fully screened from view, including the view from
above. Variations should incorporate roofline elements similar in
character to nearby structures.
C.
Solid or permanently enclosed or covered storefronts will not be
permitted, and all elements of the storefront, including awnings, signs,
show windows, etc., shall be located within the area between the
pavement and the second-story window-sill line.
D.
Awnings shall be soft, retractable, and flame-proofed. Awnings shall not
interfere with street trees, lamp posts, etc., and shall terminate against
E.
§ 164-39.4 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-39.5
150:501
the building at a height not higher than one inch below the second-floor
window sill.
Signs.
All flashing, fluttering, undulating, swinging, rotating, or otherwise
moving signs, and pennants, banners and streamers or other
decorations are prohibited.
(1)
All other provisions of Article XVII shall apply, except that to the
extent that there are any discrepancies between this section and
Article XVII, the provisions of this section shall control.
(2)
F.
Each principal building must have a clearly defined and highly visible
customer entrance with features such as canopies or porticos, arcades,
wing walls and integral planters.
G.
Loading docks, trash collections, outdoor storage and similar facilities
and functions shall be incorporated into the overall design of the
building(s) and layout of the site so that the visual and acoustic impacts
of these functions are fully contained and out of view from adjacent
properties and public streets. Use of screening materials that are
different from or inferior to the principal materials of the building and
landscape is prohibited. Trash removal is prohibited after 5:00 p.m. and
before 7:00 a.m.
H.
Weather-protection features, such as awnings, shall be provided as
appropriate and practical near all customer entrances.
I.
J. (Reserved)
Lighting fixtures used on the exterior of buildings, signs, parking areas,
and pedestrian walkways shall be architecturally compatible with the
style, materials, colors, and detail of the building.
K.
Utilities. Existing utilities shall be relocated to the rear of the structure.
All new utility lines shall be placed underground.
L.
Interparcel access. Where topographic and other conditions are
reasonably usable, provisions shall be made for travelway connections
to adjoining lots of similar existing or potential use when such driveway
connection will facilitate vehicular access between sites without the
need to travel upon a public street.
M.
Pedestrian accommodations. Pedestrian walkways and connections
must be provided to any trail or other pedestrian paths, such as
sidewalks, from adjoining areas.
N.
Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Article
XVI of this chapter, with the following modifications:
No off-street parking shall be permitted between the front facade of
the principle building and the primary abutting street. One row of
(1)
O.
§ 164-39.5 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-39.5
150:502
parallel parking spaces is permitted between one side facade of the
principle building and a secondary abutting public street, provided
that a sidewalk is constructed between the parking spaces and the
building.
The benefit assessment charge and annual maintenance fee
provided for in § 164-111C is available for application in this zone.
(2)
Sharing of facilities.
Upon approval of the Planning Director, development
incorporating one or more residential uses and one or more
office uses may, in a common parking facility, share up to 50%
of the parking spaces required for the use with the smallest
base requirement in accordance with the following example:
[Amended 1-28-2008 by Ord. No. 774]
[1] Twelve multifamily units: 18 required spaces.
[2] Four offices (one doctor's office): 12 required spaces.
[3] Base requirement: 30 required spaces.
[4] Fifty percent smallest base (office): credit six spaces.
[5] Requirement with shared spaces: 24 required spaces.
(a)
Parking lots created under this subsection may not contain
spaces designated as reserved for a specific use.
(b)
(3)
Every off-street parking area, except where the public street is the
approved drive aisle, for more than five vehicles shall be located at
least three feet from any public walkway, five feet from any street
or curb and five feet from every residential lot line.
(4)
The Planning Director may approve compact parking spaces in
accordance with the standards outlined in § 164-115F for up to
50% of the total required spaces for residential uses. [Amended
1-28-2008 by Ord. No. 774]
(5)
Bicycle parking shall be provided in accordance with the following
standards:
At least five bicycle parking spaces or 10% of the required off-street
parking spaces, whichever is greater.
(1)
Bicycle parking facilities shall provide for storage and locking of
bicycles in which both the bicycle frame and the wheels may be
locked by the user; be designed so as not to cause damage to
the bicycle; facilitate easy locking without interference from or to
adjacent bicycles; and consist of racks or lockers anchored so that
they cannot be easily removed and of solid construction, resistant
to rust, corrosion, hammers and saws.
(2)
P.
§ 164-39.5 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-39.5
150:503
§ 164-39.6. Operating standards.
Bicycle parking facilities shall be consistent with the site in color
and design and be incorporated whenever possible into building or
street furniture designs.
(3)
Bicycle parking facilities shall be located in convenient, highly
visible, active, well-lighted areas but shall not interfere with
pedestrian or vehicular movements.
(4)
Modifications to design standards.
The standards contained in this section are intended to foster
development of integrated commercial and shopping facilities
while at the same time maintaining reasonable limitations upon
their design, size and operation. Conditions may arise when full
compliance with the design standards is impractical, impossible or
under circumstances where maximum achievement of the City's
objectives can only be obtained through modified requirements. In
specific cases, modification of these standards may be permitted by
the Director, subject to the approval of the Council, upon a finding
that such modification more fully achieves the objectives of this
zone and that any such modification would not have an adverse
impact upon adjoining properties or the general character of the
proposed development plan.
(1)
All requests for modifications must be submitted to the Director
in writing and shall be accompanied by sufficient explanation and
justification, written and/or graphic, to allow appropriate
evaluation and decision by the Director, subject to the approval of
the Council.
(2)
Modification to design standards shall be limited to the specific
project under consideration and shall not establish any precedent
for use or approval in any other application.
(3)
Q.
Illumination. All outdoor illumination shall meet the following
conditions:
All outdoor lighting shall be aimed, located, designed, fitted and
maintained so as not to present a disabling glare hazard to drivers
or pedestrians or a nuisance glaze concern to neighboring
properties.
(1)
Lighting fixtures shall not be mounted in excess of 20 feet above
grade unless the fixture illuminates the structure to which the
fixture has been installed.
(2)
All facades facing a public right-of-way shall incorporate adequate
lighting to provide for the safety of pedestrians and to discourage
vandalism. Such lighting shall be directed toward the face of the
(3)
A.
§ 164-39.5 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-39.6
150:504
§ 164-39.7. Building height.
No structure shall exceed five stories in height, and no structure shall be
less than three stories in height.
§ 164-39.8. Dimensional requirements.
The following requirements shall be observed. Special fire-resistance-rated
construction practices may be required for setbacks of less than five feet.
building rather than the area around it and shall not exceed five
footcandles.
No outdoor illumination may be used in any manner that could
interfere with the safe movement of motor vehicles on public
streets, including a fixture that may be confused with or construed
as a traffic control device.
(4)
Blinking, flashing, or changing intensity lights, except for
temporary holiday displays which are permitted between
November 15 and January 7, are prohibited.
(5)
No person shall install, illuminate or maintain an beacon or
searchlight.
(6)
Maintenance following project completion. All design standards
approved as part of the site plan by the Planning Commission shall run
with the land and shall be maintained in good repair and condition all
subsequent owners of the property. Substantive changes shall require
approval by the Commission.
B.
A. (Reserved)89
Building or use setback.
Front. No front yard setback is required. The maximum front yard
setback permitted is five feet. The sidewalk shall be constructed
to be continuous and contiguous from the public street to the
front facade of the structure along the entire length of the facade.
Landscaping pits may be included along the facade for a distance
not to exceed 50% of the length of the facade.
(1)
Side. Where the side line is along an alley or public right-of-way,
the maximum side yard setback permitted is five feet or equal to
the setbacks of the immediately adjacent buildings, whichever is
less, but in no instance shall adequate site distances be encroached
upon. Side yards not located along an alley or public right-ofway
shall have a maximum permitted setback of three feet. Where
neither side line is located along an alley or public right-of-way, at
least one side yard setback must be equal to zero feet.
(2)
B.
89.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, Location requirement, was repealed 2-11-2013 by
Ord. No. 840.
§ 164-39.6 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-39.8
150:505
§ 164-39.9. Compatibility with adjacent uses; procedure for
designation as floating zone. [Amended 2-11-2013 by Ord. No. 840]
(3) Rear: a minimum setback of five feet.
For parking lots: a minimum setback of one foot from the rightof-
way or adjacent lots subject to the provisions contained in
§ 164-39.5O.
(4)
From the R-20,000, R-10,000, R-7,500, PD-4, PD-9, PD-15
residential districts, or similar residential districts that may
hereafter be adopted: a minimum setback of 10 feet.
(5)
The owner of a property located in an area eligible to be designated
as a Mixed Used Infill Zone but not so designated on the City's
Comprehensive Zoning Map may make application for the application
of the Mixed Used Infill Zone to the subject property as a floating zone.
A.
All uses permitted and special exceptions shall achieve the purposes
set forth in § 164-39.1 and be compatible with other uses existing or
proposed adjacent to and in the vicinity of the area covered by the
proposed development.
B.
An application for the application of the Mixed Use Infill Zone as
a floating zone must be accompanied by a site development plan
prepared in accord with the provisions of § 164-188 of this chapter.
C.
In addition to all other standards and criteria, when considering an
application for the designation of a floating Mixed Use Infill Zone, the
Common Council shall also consider the adequacy of schools, streets
and highways, the availability of public water and wastewater systems,
and the adequacy of all other public facilities intended to serve the
project.
D.
All floating Mixed Use Infill Zone projects shall be subject to site plan
approval as provided in Article XXV.
E.
§ 164-39.8 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-39.9
150:506
ARTICLE VIII
B Business Zone
§ 164-40. General provisions.
The following regulations shall apply in all B Business Zones.
§ 164-41. Uses permitted.
No building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure
shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered, enlarged or maintained,
except for local retail business or service shops, including: [Amended
9-25-2017 by Ord. No. 869; 2-12-2018 by Ord. No. 886]
Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to any
permitted use in this section, including one-dwelling units
incidental to any permitted business use in this section.
(1)
(2) Alcoholic beverage package stores.
Animal hospitals, veterinary clinics and kennels without exterior
runways.
(3)
(4) Antique and arts and crafts shops.
(5) Appliance stores.
(6) Art, trade, business or nursery schools.
Automobile, trailer and implement sales and services, except
automobile car washes and including motorcycle shops and auto
accessory stores.
(7)
(8) Bakery shops.
(9) Banks and savings and loan institutions.
(10)Beauty parlors or barbershops.
(11)Building materials sales and storage yards which are enclosed.
(12)Candy stores.
(13)Carpentering shops containing 500 square feet or less.
Churches, convents, monasteries, parish houses and all other
places of worship.
(14)
(15)Clothing stores.
(16)Commercial parking lots.
(17)Custom printing and reproduction shops.
(18)Dairy product stores.
A.
§ 164-40 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-41
150:507
(19)Day-care facilities.
(20)Department stores.
(21)Dress or millinery shops.
(22)Drugstores.
(23)Dry-goods or variety shops.
(24)Florist or garden shops.
(25)Food and grocery stores.
(26)Fruit or vegetable stores.
(27)Furniture and upholstering stores.
(28)Gift or jewelry shops.
(29)Hardware stores.
(30)Home occupations.
(31)Hotels and motels.
(32)Laundromats.
(33)Laundry or dry-cleaning establishments and pickup stations.
(34)Meat markets.
(35)Newspaper publishing establishments.
(36)Offices, professional and business.
(37)Pet shops.
(38)Photographic studios.
Public buildings, structures and properties of the recreational,
cultural, institutional, educational, administrative or public-service
type, including fire, ambulance or rescue squad.
(39)
(40)Radio and television studios.
(41)Radio and television repair shops.
(42)Restaurants and lunchrooms.
(43)Retirement, nursing or boarding homes.
Schools: business, dancing, music, trade or others of a commercial
nature.
(44)
(45)Sheet metal shops containing 500 square feet or less.
(46)Shoe repair shops.
§ 164-41 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-41
150:508
§ 164-42. Special exceptions. [Amended 10-26-1998 by Ord. No.
631; 12-10-2001 by Ord. No. 673]
The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions in accordance
with the provisions of Article XXII:
(47)Sign-painting shops.
Signs and outdoor advertising, subject to the provisions of Article
XVII.
(48)
Single-family attached dwellings and multiple-family dwellings for
four or fewer dwelling units.
(49)
(50)Social clubs, fraternal organizations and community meeting halls.
(51)Specialty shops.
(52)Sporting goods or hobby shops.
(53)Stationery stores.
(54)Tailor establishments.
(55)Tattoo parlors.
(56)Taverns and nightclubs.
(57)Taxi stations.
Telecommunications installations, subject to the facility limitations
in § 139-28.2A(3)(a) through (f) and the screening requirements for
modern appurtenances in § 164-131.3.
(58)
(59)Telephone central offices or service centers.
(60)Theaters and private assembly halls.
(61)Tourist homes.
All uses authorized as permitted uses or special exceptions in this zone
which are to be located within structures in excess of three stories but
not in excess of six stories.
A.
All other uses of the same general character as uses permitted under
§ 164-41.
B.
C. Adult entertainment activities.
D. Amusement centers.
E. Animal hospitals, veterinary clinics and kennels, with runways.
F. Automobile car washes.
G. Building materials sales and storage yards which are unenclosed.
§ 164-41 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-42
150:509
§ 164-43. Conditions.
Circuses, carnivals or similar transient enterprises, provided that such
uses shall not exceed 10 days at any one time and involve no permanent
structure.
H.
I. Drive-in eating establishments.
Conversion dwellings, subject to the requirements of § 164-150 and the
County Health Department.
J.
Feed and grain sales, milling and/or storage shall be screened when
adjoining a residential use of zone.
K.
L. Funeral homes and mortuaries.
M. Golf driving ranges.
N. Mobile home sales.
Housing for older persons and other customary accessory uses and
structures, which are clearly incidental to the principal structure and
use subject to the requirements of § 164-153.2 and which is located on
three acres of land or less.
O.
P. Multiple-family dwellings, subject to the provisions of § 164-153.
Q. Outdoor drive-in theaters.
Public utility buildings, structures or uses, including radio, television
and other communication facilities not considered essential utility
equipment, as enumerated in § 164-139.
R.
S. Service stations, subject to the provisions of § 164-149.
Single-family detached dwellings and single-family semidetached
dwellings, subject to the provisions of § 164-154.
T.
Swimming pools, parks and recreation areas, provided that such uses
shall be two times the distance requirements for residential uses as
specified in§ 164-140.
U.
Telecommunications facilities, subject to the requirements of
§ 164-139.1.
V.
Goods shall consist primarily of new or reconditioned merchandise or
bona fide antiques.
A.
Processes and equipment employed and goods processed or sold shall
be limited to those which are not objectionable by reason of odor, dust,
smoke, cinders, gas, fumes, noise, vibration, refuse matter or watercarried
waste or otherwise create a nuisance under the provisions of
Chapter 100, Nuisances, of the Code of Westminster.
B.
§ 164-42 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-44
150:510
§ 164-44. Building height.
No structure shall exceed the height of three stories or the height of an
adjacent structure on the block, whichever is the greater.
§ 164-45. Dimensional requirements.
For all uses in the B Business Zone, the following requirements shall apply:
The following maximum limitations shall apply:
Floor area ratio: 2.0. The total building floor area cannot be greater
than twice the total area of the lot.
(1)
A.
The following minimum requirements shall be observed:
Building or use setback:
Front: 30 feet or equal to the setbacks of immediately adjacent
buildings, whichever is less, from the public street.
(a)
Side: where the side line is along an alley or public right-ofway,
10 feet or equal to the setbacks of immediately adjacent
buildings, whichever is less.
(b)
For parking uses: five feet from the right-of-way or adjacent
lots.
(c)
(d) From residential districts: 30 feet.
(1)
B.
§ 164-44 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-45
150:511

ARTICLE VIIIA
C-C Central Commerce Zone
[Added 12-20-1999 by Ord. No. 649]
§ 164-45.1. General provisions.
The following regulations shall apply in all C-C Central Commerce Zones.
§ 164-45.2. Uses permitted. [Amended 2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 758;
9-25-2017 by Ord. No. 869; 2-12-2018 by Ord. No. 886]
No building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure
shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered, enlarged or maintained,
except for one or more of the following uses:
(1) Antique and arts and crafts shops.
(2) Bakery shops.
Banks and savings and loan institutions without drive-through
service.
(3)
(4) Beauty parlors or barbershops.
(5) Candy stores.
(6) Clothing stores.
(7) Commercial parking lots.
(8) Custom printing and reproduction shops.
(9) Dairy product stores.
(10)Dress or millinery shops.
(11)Drugstores.
(12)Dry goods or variety shops.
(13)Florist shops.
(14)Food and grocery stores containing 5,000 square feet or less.
(15)Fruit or vegetable stores.
(16)Furniture stores.
(17)Gift or jewelry shops.
Laundry or dry-cleaning establishments without drive-through
service.
(18)
(19)Meat markets.
(20)Offices, professional and business.
A.
§ 164-45.1 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-45.2
150:513
§ 164-45.3. Special exceptions. [Amended 2-12-2007 by Ord. No.
758]
(21)Photographic studios.
(22)Public buildings.
(23)Radio and television studios.
(24)Radio and television repair shops.
(25)Restaurants and lunchrooms, without drive-through service.
(26)Shoe repair shops.
Signs, with the exception of outdoor advertising signs, subject to
the provisions of Article XVII.
(27)
(28)Sporting goods or hobby shops.
(29)Stationery stores.
(30)Tailor establishments.
(31)Tattoo parlors.
(32)Taverns and nightclubs. [Added 11-26-2018 by Ord. No. 89990]
Telecommunications installations, subject to the facility limitations
in § 139-28.2A(3)(a) through (f) and the screening requirements for
modern appurtenances in § 164-131.3.
(33)
(34)Telephone central offices or service centers.
The buying, selling or trading of firearms shall not be allowed under
any of the uses permitted under this section.
B.
The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions in
accordance with the provisions of Article XXII:
(1) Department stores.
(2) Hotels.
Microbreweries and pub breweries licensed under Article 2B of the
Annotated Code of Maryland.
(3)
(4) Pet shops.
Public utility buildings, structures or uses, including radio,
television and other communication facilities not considered
essential utility equipment, as enumerated in § 164-139.
(5)
A.
90.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection
A(32) and (33) as Subsection A(33) and (34), respectively.
§ 164-45.2 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-45.3
150:514
§ 164-45.4. Building height.
No structure shall exceed an elevation of 800 feet in height based on
United States Geological Survey datum as shown on Carroll County
photogrammatic maps, but in no event shall any structure exceed eight
stories in height. No structure shall be less than two stories in height.
§ 164-45.5. Dimensional requirements.
The following requirements shall be observed. Special fire-resistance-rated
construction practices may be required for setbacks of less than five feet.
§ 164-45.6. Conditions.
The buying, selling or trading of firearms shall not be allowed under
any of the special exceptions permitted under this section.91
B.
Building or use setback:
Front: no front yard setback is required. The maximum front yard
setback permitted is five feet.
(1)
Side: where the side line is along an alley or public right-of-way, 10
feet or equal to the setbacks of the immediately adjacent buildings
or as provided in § 164-145, whichever is less, but in no instance
shall adequate site distances be encroached upon. Where neither
side line is located along an alley or public right-of-way, at least one
side yard setback must be equal to zero feet. No setback is required
for the second side yard; however, if a side yard is provided, the
setback must be no less than three feet and no greater than 10 feet.
(2)
(3) Rear: a minimum setback of five feet.
For parking lots: a minimum setback of five feet from the right-ofway
or adjacent lots. Private parking lots are permitted only in rear
yards.
(4)
(5) From residential districts: a minimum setback of 20 feet.
A.
Goods shall consist primarily of new or reconditioned merchandise or
bona fide antiques.
A.
Processes and equipment employed and goods processed or sold shall
be limited to those which are not objectionable by reason of odor, dust,
smoke, cinders, gas, fumes, noise, vibration, refuse matter or watercarried
waste or otherwise create a nuisance under the provisions of
Chapter 100, Nuisances, of the Code of Westminster.
B.
91.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, which pertained to tattoo parlors, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 2-12-2018 by Ord. No. 886.
§ 164-45.3 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-45.6
150:515
The front facades of new and remodeled buildings shall be designed
with windows on all stories. The size and placement of the windows
shall be compatible with the size, scale and character of the facade.
C.
§ 164-45.6 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-45.6
150:516
ARTICLE VIIIB
D-B Downtown Business Zone
[Added 12-20-1999 by Ord. No. 649]
§ 164-45.7. General provisions.
The following regulations shall apply in all D-B Downtown Business Zones.
§ 164-45.8. Uses permitted. [Amended 2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 758;
9-25-2017 by Ord. No. 869; 2-12-2018 by Ord. No. 886]
No building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure
shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered, enlarged or maintained,
except for one or more of the following uses:
Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to any
permitted use in this section.
(1)
(2) Antique and arts and crafts shops.
(3) Art, trade, business or nursery schools.
(4) Auto accessory stores.
(5) Bakery shops.
Banks and savings and loan institutions without drive-through
service.
(6)
(7) Beauty parlors or barbershops.
(8) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
(9) Candy stores.
Churches, convents, monasteries, parish houses and all other
places of worship.
(10)
(11)Clothing stores.
(12)Commercial parking lots.
(13)Custom printing and reproduction shops.
(14)Dairy product stores.
(15)Day-care facilities.
(16)Dress and millinery shops.
(17)Drugstores.
(18)Dry goods or variety shops.
(19)Florist or garden shops.
A.
§ 164-45.7 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-45.8
150:517
(20)Food and grocery stores containing 5,000 square feet or less.
(21)Fruit or vegetable stores.
(22)Funeral homes and mortuaries.
(23)Furniture stores.
(24)Gift or jewelry shops.
(25)Hardware stores.
(26)Home occupations.
Laundry or dry-cleaning establishments without drive-through
service.
(27)
(28)Meat markets.
(29)Offices, professional and business.
(30)Photographic studios.
(31)Physical fitness facilities.
Public buildings, structures and properties of the recreational,
cultural, institutional, educational, administrative or public-service
type, including fire, ambulance or rescue squad.
(32)
(33)Radio and television studios.
(34)Radio and television repair shops.
(35)Restaurants and lunchrooms, without drive-through service.
(36)Retirement, nursing or boarding homes.
Schools: business, dancing, firearms safety training not including
the discharge of firearms or the handling of live ammunition,
music, trade or others of a commercial nature. [Amended
2-26-2018 by Ord. No. 885]
(37)
(38)Shoe repair shops.
(39)Sign-painting shops.
Signs, with the exception of outdoor advertising signs, subject to
the provisions of Article XVII.
(40)
Single-family attached dwellings and multiple-family dwellings for
four or fewer dwelling units.
(41)
(42)Social clubs, fraternal organizations and community meeting halls.
(43)Sporting goods or hobby shops.
(44)Stationery stores.
§ 164-45.8 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-45.8
150:518
§ 164-45.9. Special exceptions. [Amended 2-12-2007 by Ord. No.
758; 2-12-2018 by Ord. No. 886; 11-12-2018 by Ord. No. 898;
1-14-2019 by Ord. No. 903]
(45)Tailor establishments.
(46)Tattoo parlors.
(47)Taverns and nightclubs.
(48)Taxi stations, for the pickup and discharge of customers.
Telecommunications installations, subject to the facility limitations
in § 139-28.2A(3)(a) through (f) and the screening requirements for
modern appurtenances in § 164-131.3.
(49)
(50)Telephone central offices or service centers.
(51)Theaters and private assembly halls.
(52)Tourist homes.
(53)Upholstery shops.
Video rental establishments, with the exception of adult
entertainment.
(54)
The buying, selling or trading of firearms shall not be allowed under
any of the uses permitted under this section.
B.
The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions in
accordance with the provisions of Article XXII:
All uses authorized as permitted uses or special exceptions in this
zone which are to be located within structures in excess of three
stories but not in excess of six stories.
(1)
All other uses of the same general character of uses permitted
under § 164-45.2.
(2)
(3) Alcoholic beverage package stores.
(4) Amusement centers.
(5) Appliance stores.
Automobile, trailer and implement sales and services, except
automobile car washes and including motorcycle shops.
(6)
Automobile car wash, which may be approved only as an accessory
use to § 164-45.9A(6), regarding automobile, trailer and implement
sales and services, or as an accessory use to § 164-45.9A(21),
regarding service stations, when automobiles are repaired on the
premises, but excluding repairs and services that utilize petroleumbased
products. Commercial car washes for use by the general
(7)
A.
§ 164-45.8 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-45.9
150:519
§ 164-45.10. Building height.
No structure shall exceed the height of three stories or the height of an
adjacent structure on the block, whichever is greater, nor shall any building
be less than two stories in height.
public are not included nor permitted by this special exception use
category.
Banks and savings and loan institutions with drive-through service,
provided that the applicant proves that the use will not adversely
affect pedestrian travel.
(8)
(9) Carpentering shops containing 500 square feet or less.
(10)Department stores.
Conversion dwellings, subject to the requirements of § 164-150 and
the County Health Department.
(11)
(12)Firearms sales, subject to the provisions of § 164-155.3.
(13)Hotels and motels.
(14)Laundromats.
Laundry or dry-cleaning establishments with drive-through service,
provided that the applicant proves that the use will not adversely
affect pedestrian travel.
(15)
Microbreweries and pub breweries licensed under the Annotated
Code of Maryland, Alcoholic Beverages Article.
(16)
(17)Multiple-family dwellings, subject to the provisions of § 164-153.
(18)Newspaper publishing establishments.
(19)Pet shops.
Public utility buildings, structures or uses, including radio,
television and other communication facilities not considered
essential utility equipment, as enumerated in § 164-139.
(20)
(21)Service stations, subject to the provisions of § 164-149.
(22)Sheet metal shops containing 500 square feet or less.
Single-family detached dwellings and single-family semidetached
dwellings, subject to the provisions of § 164-154.
(23)
Swimming pools, parks and recreation areas, provided that such
uses shall be two times the distance requirements for residential
uses as specified in § 164-140.
(24)
B. (Reserved)
§ 164-45.9 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-45.11
150:520
§ 164-45.11. Dimensional requirements.
The following requirements shall be observed. Special fire-resistance-rated
construction practices may be required for setbacks of less than five feet.
§ 164-45.12. Conditions.
Building or use setback:
Front: no front yard setback is required. The maximum front yard
setback permitted is five feet.
(1)
Side: where the side line is along an alley or public right-of-way, 10
feet or equal to the setbacks of the immediately adjacent buildings
or provided in § 164-145, whichever is less, but in no instance shall
adequate site distances be encroached upon. Where neither side
line is located along an alley or public right-of-way, at least one side
yard setback must be equal to zero feet. No setback is required
for the second side yard; however, if a side yard is provided, the
setback must be no less than three feet and no greater than 10 feet.
(2)
(3) Rear: a minimum setback of five feet.
For parking lots: a minimum setback of five feet from the right-ofway
or adjacent lots. Private parking lots are permitted only in rear
yards.
(4)
(5) From residential districts: a minimum setback of 20 feet.
A.
Goods shall consist primarily of new or reconditioned merchandise or
bona fide antiques.
A.
Processes and equipment employed and goods processed or sold shall
be limited to those which are not objectionable by reason of odor, dust,
smoke, cinders, gas, fumes, noise, vibration, refuse matter or watercarried
waste or otherwise create a nuisance under the provisions of
Chapter 100, Nuisances, of the Code of Westminster.
B.
The front facades of new and remodeled buildings shall be designed
with windows on all stories. The size and placement of the windows
shall be compatible with the size, scale and character of the facade.
C.
§ 164-45.11 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-45.12
150:521

ARTICLE VIIIC
Compatible Neighborhood Overlay Zone
[Added 7-10-2006 by Ord. No. 745]
§ 164-45.13. Introduction.
The Compatible Neighborhood Overlay Zone (CN Zone) is intended to
provide for the infill development of land in certain older neighborhoods and
to afford flexibility to allow property owners to take advantage of the unique
development opportunities which are presented in those neighborhoods.
The CN Zone is a mapped zone which is superimposed over the R-7,500
Residential Zone in certain older neighborhoods that provides some
alternative requirements for development within that underlying zone.
Once property is placed in this zone, applicants may request that
development therein be subject to the approval of the Commission and the
Planning Director in accordance with the standards and procedures of this
article. The CN Zone provides a flexible basis for development which could
not occur under the requisites of the underlying zone.
§ 164-45.14. Purpose.
It is the purpose of the CN Zone to provide suitable sites for infill
development within certain older neighborhoods and to allow new and
redevelopment projects which are integrated with the existing character,
land use pattern and infrastructure networks of those older neighborhoods.
The following objectives are sought in providing for this zone:
To encourage developers to use a more creative approach in the
development of land in older neighborhoods;
(1)
To encourage more efficient allocation and maintenance of common
open space when providing such housing through private initiative;
(2)
To encourage variety in the physical development of patterns of
such housing;
(3)
To encourage creativity in the site design, create housing that is
highly accessible to goods and services, and increase consumer
choice in housing by providing for a mix of housing types and lot
sizes;
(4)
To create a process which overcomes deficiencies in ordinary
planning processes and removes obstacles not addressed in those
processes;
(5)
To minimize the cost of extending or expanding public services and
facilities by encouraging appropriate development in certain older
neighborhoods;
(6)
(7) To attract an appropriate mix of land uses;
A.
§ 164-45.13 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-45.14
150:523
§ 164-45.15. Relationship to underlying zone. [Amended
11-12-2018 by Ord. No. 897]
The CN Zone shall be placed only over property located in the City's R-7,500
or R-10,000 Residential Zone. The requisites of the underlying zone are
modified and superseded by those contained in this article at the request of
the applicant and approval of a detailed site plan by the Commission and the
Planning Director. In the event of any conflict, the provisions of this article
shall control.
§ 164-45.16. (Reserved)
§ 164-45.17. Uses permitted.
Under this section, no building, structure or land shall be used and no
building or structure shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered,
enlarged or maintained, except for one or more of the following uses:
§ 164-45.18. Buildings, landscaping and other improvements.
To encourage development which complements and enhances the
character of the area, including its historic resources;
(8)
To ensure the developments within this zone possess a desired
urban design relationship with one another and adjoining areas;
(9)
To provide flexibility in the design and the layout of building
structures and to promote a coordinated and integrated
development scheme; and
(10)
To provide a wide range of houses available to all socioeconomic
groups.
(11)
The fact that an application complies with all specific requirements and
purposes set forth herein shall not be deemed to create a presumption
that the application is, in fact, compatible with surrounding land uses
and, in itself, shall not be sufficient to require the approval of a detailed
site plan.
B.
Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to any permitted
use in this section.
A.
B. Dwellings, single-family detached.
C. Dwellings, single-family semidetached.
D. Dwellings, single-family attached.
E. Dwellings, multiple-family.
The location, size, height, setback and lot coverage of all structural
improvements, as well as open spaces and green areas shown on an
approved detailed site plan shall constitute the regulations for these
A.
§ 164-45.14 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-45.18
150:524
§ 164-45.19. Compatibility.
All uses permitted and developments proposed shall achieve the purposes
set forth in § 164-45.14 and be compatible with other uses existing or
proposed adjacent to and in the vicinity of the area covered by the proposed
development.
§ 164-45.20. Procedure.
§ 164-45.21. Criteria for approval.
Submission of a detailed site plan commits the applicant to a greater degree
of authority by the Commission and Planning Director. In considering such
improvements and areas in the CN Zone. The detailed site plan shall
explicitly specify maximum values for heights, setbacks, and lot
coverages. The corresponding regulations of the underlying zone do not
apply to property developed under the provisions of the CN Zone unless
so specified elsewhere in this chapter.
Landscaping and screening of development within the CN Zone shall
be provided pursuant to the provisions of the City's Landscape Manual.
Additional buffering and screening may be required to satisfy the
purposes of the CN Zone and to protect the unique character of that
zone from adjoining land uses.
B.
An application for zonal classification to the CN Zone may be made by a
local, sectional or comprehensive amendment. [Amended 11-12-2018
by Ord. No. 897]
A.
Applicants seeking approval of a detailed site plan in the CN Zone
shall submit a conceptual plan to the Planning Director for review and
comment before acceptance of a detailed site plan for the project. The
conceptual plan should be submitted prior to the completion of detailed
engineering work.
B.
Applicants shall be required to obtain approval of the detailed site
plan from the Planning Director and Commission and comply with the
requisites of Article XXV of this chapter. Approval of the detailed site
plan shall also be subject to the provisions of § 164-198E, and a detailed
site plan shall serve as a preliminary plan.
C.
All proposed developments requiring a subdivision shall be required to
obtain final plat approval in accordance with §§ 164-199 and 164-200.
D.
For the purposes of this article, a detailed site plan shall contain all
of the information required for a site plan as provided in § 164-208,
as well as any other information required in procedures adopted by
the Planning Director and approved by resolution of the Mayor and
Common Council. Those procedures may also contain guidelines to
assist applicants in developing properties under the requirements of
this zone.
E.
§ 164-45.18 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-45.21
150:525
an application, the Commission and the Planning Director shall take into
account the extent to which the following goals are met:
The optimal density and mix of housing types for the neighborhood
is provided. In considering this criteria, the Commission and Planning
Director shall consider the following factors when determining the
appropriate permitted density:
The specific location of the property in relation to the distribution
of existing density and housing types in the area.
(1)
The current and maximum potential capacity of the local roadway,
water, sewer, and storm drain networks.
(2)
The unique character of the property in regard to topography, sight
lines, access, valuable environmental features, and the underlying
zoning district, and any other factor deemed relevant by the
Commission or the Planning Director.
(3)
A.
The configuration of lots, lot widths, lot coverages, and setbacks are
compatible with the character of the neighborhood.
B.
The height, orientation, and architectural character of structures are
compatible with the neighborhood's housing stock. The Commission
and Planning Director shall approve architectural elevation drawings
of all street-facing facades as part of the application. The Commission
and Planning Director may require certain materials, architectural
treatment, and locations of windows and doors for these facades in
accordance with the established architectural vernacular in the
neighborhood.
C.
The development is served with safe, efficient, and adequate pedestrian
and vehicular networks.
The existing pedestrian and vehicular networks shall be seamlessly
extended through the site whenever possible. The widths and
corner radii of streets, alleys, sidewalks, and paths shall be
specified by the Commission or the Planning Director.
(1)
The number of parking spaces required and the locations,
dimensions, and setbacks of parking areas shall be determined
by the Commission and the Planning Director. In all cases there
shall be a minimum of one parking space per dwelling unit. The
Commission or Planning Director may require parking to be
satisfied through any combination of on-site parking, on-street
parking, and off-site parking guaranteed through long-term lease
agreements or easements. In no case shall the number of parking
spaces required exceed the requirements specified in § 164-111.
(2)
If the Planning Director determines that the size, configuration or
other physical characteristic of the site of the planned use makes it
impossible for the user to provide adequate on-site parking thereby
(3)
D.
§ 164-45.21 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-45.21
150:526
§ 164-45.22. Action and findings.
§ 164-45.23. Validity and amendments.
creating a hardship, the Planning Director may, in the Planning
Director's discretion, upon application from the applicant, allow
a reduction in the number of spaces; provided, however, that the
applicant shall pay the City a one-time benefit assessment charge
as provided in the General Fee Ordinance.92 [Amended
11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 792]
The project accounts for and implements the recommendations of
adopted comprehensive and neighborhood plans.
E.
The Commission and Planning Director shall approve, subject to
conditions, or disapprove the application for a detailed site plan and
notify the applicant in writing.
A.
In considering an application for a detailed site plan, the Commission
and Planning Director shall consider whether the application and the
detailed site plan fulfill the purposes and requisites set forth in this
article. In doing so, the Commission and Planning Director shall make
the following specific findings, in addition to any other findings which
may be found to be necessary and appropriate to the evaluation of a
proposed detailed site plan:
That the proposed development would comply with the purposes,
standards and regulations of the CN Zone, would provide the
maximum safety, convenience and amenity to the residents of the
development and would be compatible with adjacent development.
In making that determination, the Commission and Planning
Director shall consider the location, size and design of buildings,
signs, other structures, open spaces, landscaping, pedestrian and
vehicular circulation systems, parking and loading areas.
(1)
Each structure and use, in the manner proposed, is compatible with
other structures and uses in the proposed development and with
existing and proposed adjacent development.
(2)
B.
An approved detailed site plan or amendment thereof shall remain valid
for a period of one year from final plat approval. An applicant may
petition the Planning Director and Commission for up to a four-to-sixmonth
extension with a showing of extraordinary circumstances.
A.
An approved detailed site plan may be amended upon application by
the developer, the property owner, the Commission or the Planning
Director. Any application for an amendment to an approved detailed
site plan shall be filed with the Planning Director and subject to all of
the procedures and requirements contained in this chapter pertaining
B.
92.Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art.II, General Fees.
§ 164-45.21 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-45.23
150:527
§ 164-45.24. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Commission or Planning
Director, or any taxpayer or any officer, department head, board or bureau
of the City may appeal the same to the Circuit Court for Carroll County.
Such appeal shall be taken in accordance with applicable provisions of the
Maryland Rules that are in effect at that time.
to the CN Zone, except as provided in Subsection C. The Commission
and the Planning Director shall approve, approve with modifications or
disapprove the application for amendment of an approved detailed site
plan.
The Planning Director is authorized to approve applications for minor
amendments to a detailed site plan to allow for the construction of
decks, porches or other small additions. The Planning Director, in the
Planning Director's discretion, may determine that the application
requires the review and approvals provided in Subsection B.
C.
The Commission and Planning Director may modify the requisites for
minimum street and right-of-way widths provided in § 164-194 where
they determine that there are extraordinary circumstances relating to
the proposed development.
D.
§ 164-45.23 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-45.24
150:528
ARTICLE VIIID
Neighborhood Preservation Overlay Zone (NP Zone)
[Added 11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 816]
§ 164-45.25. Introduction.
The Neighborhood Preservation Overlay Zone is intended to provide for
the preservation of the historic character and physical setting of the City's
traditional neighborhoods by promoting residential uses and directing
more-intense uses to other suitable locations. The Neighborhood
Preservation Overlay Zone is a mapped zone which is superimposed over
properties included in the R-7,500 Residential Zone and R-10,000
Residential Zone in certain traditional residential neighborhoods. Once
properties are included in the Neighborhood Preservation Overlay Zone,
any development or use of such properties is subject to its provisions.
§ 164-45.26. Purpose; objectives.
It is the purpose of the Neighborhood Preservation Overlay Zone to
protect the historical and architectural character of the City's
traditional residential neighborhood by promoting the use of land and
development that is compatible with Westminster's heritage and is in
keeping with the spirit and intent of Westminster's Comprehensive
Plan.
A.
The objectives of the Neighborhood Preservation Overlay Zone are:
To preserve and promote the use of land that is respectful of the
residential character of the City's traditional neighborhoods;
(1)
To promote the preservation of neighborhood identity and visual
character;
(2)
To guide the use of land and development to reflect Westminster's
heritage and to foster a sense of community pride;
(3)
To protect Westminster's quality of life, community character and
City identity;
(4)
To use the historic character of Westminster as a tool to unify the
community;
(5)
To encourage more-intensive use of land on sites in other suitable
locations in the City;
(6)
To create a "sense of place" in which the residential character of
the City's traditional neighborhoods is enhanced and encouraged;
(7)
To ensure the use of land and development is compatible with the
neighborhood's vision for the future; and
(8)
B.
§ 164-45.25 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-45.26
150:529
§ 164-45.27. District designated.
The Neighborhood Preservation Overlay Zone shall apply to all properties
included in the zone as designated on the City of Westminster Zoning Map
as "Neighborhood Preservation Overlay Zone."
§ 164-45.28. Relationship to underlying zones.
The Neighborhood Preservation Overlay Zone shall be placed over property
located in either the R-7,500 Residential Zone or R-10,000 Residential
Zone only. The permitted uses and special exception uses authorized in the
underlying zones are modified and superseded by those contained in this
article. All other provisions of the underlying zones shall apply and remain
in force and effect. In the event of any conflict, the provisions of this article
shall control.
§ 164-45.29. Uses permitted.
To recognize the importance of a positive community image and
quality community design to assist the City in instilling a sense of
pride and well-being in the community.
(9)
For properties with an underlying zone of R-7,500 Residential Zone:
Uses permitted. No building, structure or land shall be used and
no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, structurally
altered, enlarged or maintained, except for one or more of the
following uses:
Dwellings, single-family detached, including accessory
buildings incidental to the permitted use.
(a)
Dwellings, single-family semidetached, including accessory
buildings incidental to the permitted use.
(b)
(1)
Special exceptions. The following uses may be permitted as a
special exception in accordance with the provisions of Article XXII:
Churches, convents, monasteries, parish houses and all other
places of worship.
(a)
(b) Public buildings and structures.
(2)
A.
For properties with an underlying zone of R-10,000 Residential Zone:
Uses permitted. No building, structure or land shall be used and
no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, structurally
altered, enlarged or maintained, except for one or more of the
following uses:
Dwellings, single-family detached, including accessory
buildings incidental to the permitted use.
(a)
(1)
B.
§ 164-45.26 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-45.29
150:530
§ 164-45.30. Reclassification.
Notwithstanding any provisions in the underlying zones to the contrary,
properties included in the Neighborhood Preservation Overlay Zone are
not eligible for consideration for reclassification to either the PD-4 Planned
Development 4 Zone or the PD-9 Planned Development 9 Zone, as provided
for in the underlying zones.
§ 164-45.31. Procedure for classification.
An application for zonal classification in the Neighborhood Preservation
Overlay Zone may be made only by a sectional map amendment.
§ 164-45.32. Inclusion of additional neighborhoods.
The City will partner with its Historic District Commission and other boards
and commissions of the City, the Historical Society of Carroll County, and
other state, county and local organizations and groups to identify additional
traditional residential neighborhoods for potential inclusion in the
Neighborhood Preservation Overlay Zone as an integral component of an
overall preservation plan for Westminster. This important work not only
helps to implement the City's Comprehensive Plan by focusing attention
on the preservation and improvement of the City's traditional residential
neighborhood but also by initiating a dialog among City government and its
residents about the look, feel and character of Westminster.
Special exceptions. The following uses may be permitted as a
special exception in accordance with the provisions of Article XXII:
Dwellings, single-family semidetached, provided that on
parcels of land in excess of five acres no more than 20% of
the net buildable land may be devoted to semidetached singlefamily
dwellings.
(a)
Churches, convents, monasteries, parish houses and all other
places of worship.
(b)
(c) Public buildings and structures.
(2)
§ 164-45.29 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-45.32
150:531

ARTICLE IX
C-B Central Business Zone
[Amended 9-25-1995 by Ord. No. 602; 1-27-1997 by Ord. No. 615;
12-20-1999 by Ord. No. 649]
§ 164-46. General provisions.
The following regulations shall apply in the C-B Central Business Zones.
§ 164-47. Uses permitted. [Amended 2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 758;
9-25-2017 by Ord. No. 869; 2-12-2018 by Ord. No. 886]
No building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure
shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered, enlarged or maintained
except for one or more of the following uses:
Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to any
permitted use in this section.
(1)
(2) Antique and arts and crafts shop.
(3) Appliance stores.
(4) Art, trade, business or nursery schools.
(5) Bakery shops.
Banks and savings and loan institutions without drive-through
service.
(6)
(7) Beauty parlors or barbershops.
(8) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
(9) Building materials sales and storage yards which are enclosed.
(10)Candy stores.
Churches, convents, monasteries, parish houses and all other
places of worship.
(11)
(12)Clothing stores.
(13)Commercial parking lots.
(14)Custom printing and reproduction shops.
(15)Dairy product stores.
(16)Day-care facilities.
(17)Department stores.
(18)Dress or millinery shops.
A.
§ 164-46 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-47
150:533
(19)Drugstores.
(20)Dry goods or variety shops.
(21)Florist or garden shops.
(22)Food and grocery stores containing 5,000 square feet or less.
(23)Fruit or vegetable stores.
(24)Furniture stores.
(25)Gift or jewelry shops.
(26)Hardware stores.
(27)Home occupations.
(28)Hotels and motels.
(29)Laundromats.
Laundry or dry-cleaning establishments without drive-through
service.
(30)
(31)Meat markets.
(32)Multiple-family dwellings not in excess of seven stories.
(33)Offices, professional and business.
(34)Pet shops.
(35)Photographic studios.
(36)Physical fitness facilities.
Public buildings, structures and properties of the recreational,
cultural, institutional, education, administrative or public-service
type, including fire, ambulance or rescue squad.
(37)
(38)Radio and television studios.
(39)Radio and television repair shops.
(40)Restaurants and lunchrooms, without drive-through service.
(41)Retirement, nursing or boarding homes.
Schools: business, dancing, music, trade or others of a commercial
nature.
(42)
(43)Shoe repair shops.
(44)Sign-painting shops.
§ 164-47 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-47
150:534
§ 164-48. Special exceptions. [Amended 2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 758]
Signs, with the exception of outdoor advertising signs, subject to
the provisions of Article XVII.
(45)
Single-family attached dwellings and multiple-family dwellings for
four or fewer dwelling units.
(46)
Social clubs, fraternal organizations and community meetings
halls.
(47)
(48)Sporting goods or hobby shops.
(49)Stationery stores.
(50)Tailor establishments.
(51)Tattoo parlors.
(52)Taverns and nightclubs.
(53)Taxi stations, for pickup and discharge of passengers.
Telecommunications installations, subject to the facility limitations
in § 139-28.2A(3)(a) through (f) and the screening requirements for
modern appurtenances in § 164-131.3.
(54)
(55)Telephone central offices or service centers.
(56)Theaters and private assembly halls.
(57)Tourist homes.
(58)Upholstery shops.
Video rental establishments, with the exception of adult
entertainment.
(59)
The buying, selling or trading of firearms shall not be allowed under
any of the uses permitted under this section.
B.
The following uses may be permitted as a special exception in
accordance with the provisions of Article XXII:
All other uses of the same general character of uses permitted
under § 164-47.
(1)
Banks and savings and loan institutions with drive-through service,
provided that the applicant proves that the use will not adversely
affect pedestrian travel.
(2)
(3) Building materials sales and storage yards which are unenclosed.
Conversion dwellings, subject to the requirements of § 164-150 and
the County Health Department.
(4)
A.
§ 164-47 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-48
150:535
§ 164-49. Building height.
No structure shall exceed an elevation of 800 feet in height based on
United States Geological Survey datum as shown on Carroll County
photogrammatic maps, but in no event shall any structure exceed eight
stories in height nor shall any building be less than two stories in height.
§ 164-50. Dimensional requirements.
Lot area, lot width and yard requirements shall be observed. Special fireresistance-
rated construction practices may be required for setbacks of less
than five feet.
Laundry or dry-cleaning establishments with drive-through service,
provided that the applicant proves that the use will not adversely
affect pedestrian travel.
(5)
Microbreweries and pub breweries licensed under Article 2B of the
Annotated Code of Maryland.
(6)
(7) Multiple-family dwellings, subject to the provisions of § 164-153.
(8) Newspaper publishing establishments.
Public utility buildings, structures or uses, including radio,
television and other communication facilities not considered
essential utility equipment, as enumerated in § 164-139.
(9)
Single-family semidetached dwellings, subject to the provisions of
§ 164-154.
(10)
The buying, selling or trading of firearms shall not be allowed under
any of the special exceptions permitted under this section.93
B.
Building or use setback:
Front: no front yard setback is required. The maximum front yard
setback permitted is five feet.
(1)
Side: where the side line is along an alley or public right-of-way, 10
feet or equal to the setbacks of the immediately adjacent buildings
or as provided in § 164-145, whichever is less, but in no instance
shall adequate site distances be encroached upon. Where neither
side line is located along an alley or public right-of-way, at least one
side yard setback must be equal to zero feet. No setback is required
for the second side yard; however, if a side yard is provided, the
setback must be no less than three feet and no greater than 10 feet.
(2)
(3) Rear: a minimum setback of five feet.
A.
93.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, which pertained to tattoo parlors, was repealed
2-12-2018 by Ord. No. 886.
§ 164-48 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-50
150:536
§ 164-51. Conditions.
For parking lots: a minimum setback of five feet from the right-ofway
or adjacent lots. Private parking lots are permitted only in rear
yards.
(4)
(5) From residential districts: a minimum setback of 20 feet.
Goods shall consist primarily of new or reconditioned merchandise or
bona fide antiques.
A.
Processes and equipment employed and goods processed or sold shall
be limited to those which are not objectionable by reason of odor, dust,
smoke, cinders, gas, fumes or noise.
B.
The front facades of new and remodeled buildings shall be designed
with windows on all stories. The size and placement of the windows
shall be compatible with the size, scale and character of the facade.
C.
§ 164-50 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-51
150:537

ARTICLE IXA
Historic District Zone
[Added 10-12-1992 by Ord. No. 551; amended 1-27-1997 by Ord. No.
614]
§ 164-51.1. Purpose; construal of provisions.
The preservation of sites, structures and districts of historic,
archeological and architectural value, together with their
appurtenances and environmental settings, is declared by the Mayor
and Common Council to be a public purpose in the City.
A.
The purposes of this article are as follows:
To safeguard the heritage of the City of Westminster by preserving
sites, structures or districts therein which reflect elements of its
cultural, social, economic, political, archeological or architectural
history.
(1)
To stabilize and improve property values of such sites, structures
or districts.
(2)
(3) To foster civic beauty.
(4) To strengthen the local economy.
To promote the preservation and appreciation of the sites,
structures and districts for the education and welfare of the
residents of the City of Westminster.
(5)
B.
This article is adopted pursuant to Article XI-E of the Maryland
Constitution, Article 66B, § 8.01 et seq. of the Annotated Code of
Maryland (1995 Replacement Vol.), Art. 23A of the Annotated Code
of Maryland (1994 Replacement Vol.), and § 15 et seq. of the City's
Charter.
C.
In this article, "structure" means a combination of material to form a
construction that is stable; including, among other things, buildings,
stadiums, reviewing stands, platforms, stagings, observation towers,
radio towers, water tanks and towers, trestles, piers, paving,
bulkheads, wharves, sheds, coal bins, shelters, fences and display signs
visible or intended to be visible from a public way. The term also
includes natural land formations and appurtenances and environmental
settings. The term shall be construed as if followed by the words "or
part thereof." "Appurtenances" and "'environmental settings" include
walkways and driveways (whether paved or not), trees, landscaping,
pastures, croplands, waterways and rocks. In this article, "demolition"
includes any willful neglect in maintenance and repair of a structure,
not including any appurtenances and environmental settings, held or
used in a trade or business or for the production of income, that does
not result from financial inability to maintain and repair the structure
D.
§ 164-51.1 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-51.1
150:539
§ 164-51.2. District designated.
The Westminster Historic District shall include the area as shown on the
Zoning Maps adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of Westminster in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 164-51.3. Creation and composition of Historic District
Commission; appointment and term of members; vacancies.
and that threatens to result in any substantial deterioration of the
exterior features of the structure.
In this article, "district" means a significant concentration, linkage
or continuity of sites, structures or objects united historically or
aesthetically by plan or physical development. "Site" means the location
of an event of historical significance or a structure, whether standing
or ruined, which possesses historical, archeological or cultural
significance.
E.
In this article, "routine maintenance" means work that does not alter
the exterior fabric or features of a site or structure and has no material
effect on the historical, archeological or architectural significance of
the historical site or structure.
F.
The Historic District Commission is hereby created. It shall consist
of seven members, all of whom are qualified by special interest,
knowledge or training in such fields as history, architecture,
architectural history, planning, archeology, anthropology, curation,
conservation, landscape architecture, historic preservation, urban
design or related disciplines. The members shall be appointed by the
Mayor subject to confirmation by the Common Council. At least four of
the members of the Historic District Commission shall be residents of
the City. The remainder of the members may be nonresidents, but any
members who are not residents of the City shall be the owners of real
property in the City. Members shall be appointed for a term of three
years. Members shall be eligible for reappointment. Any vacancy on the
Historic District Commission shall be filled as set forth herein for the
remainder of the unexpired term. The Mayor and Common Council may
consult private societies or agencies to request the names of possible
members for the Historic District Commission. [Amended 9-15-2010
by Ord. No. 814; 12-10-2012 by Ord. No. 836]
A.
The Historic District Commission may designate the Maryland Historic
Trust to make an analysis of and recommendation concerning the
preservation of sites, structures or districts of historic, archeological,
architectural or cultural significance within the area served by the
Historic District Commission. Such report may include proposed
boundaries of sites, structures and districts as well as make
recommendations for the identification and designation of particular
sites, structures or districts to be preserved.
B.
§ 164-51.1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-51.3
150:540
§ 164-51.4. Application procedure; duties of Historic District
Commission.
The Historic District Commission shall have the right to accept and use
gifts for the exercise of its functions as approved by the Mayor and
Common Council.
C.
Before the construction, alteration, reconstruction, moving or
demolition of any site or structure is made within an historic district,
if any exterior changes are involved which affect the historic,
archeological or architectural significance of a site or structure within
a designated district, any portion of which is visible or intended to be
visible from a public way, the person, individual, firm or corporation
proposing to make the construction or change shall file with the Zoning
Administrator an application for permission to construct, alter,
reconstruct, move or demolish the site or structure. Every such
application shall be referred to and considered by the Historic District
Commission and accepted or rejected by the Commission. An
application which is identical to a rejected application shall not be
resubmitted within a period of one year after the rejection. No permit
for any such change may be granted until the Historic District
Commission has acted thereon as hereinafter provided.
A.
In reviewing the plans for any such construction or change, the Historic
District Commission shall give consideration to:
The historic, archeological or architectural value and significance
of the site or structure and its relationship to the historic,
archeological or architectural significance of the surrounding area.
(1)
The relationship of the exterior architectural features of a structure
to the remainder of the structure and to the surrounding area.
(2)
The general compatibility of exterior design, scale, proportion,
arrangement, texture and materials proposed to be used.
(3)
(4) The economic impact of compliance.
Any other factors, including aesthetic factors, which the Historic
District Commission deems to be pertinent.
(5)
B.
The Historic District Commission shall consider only exterior features
of a structure and shall not consider any interior arrangements. Also,
the Historic District Commission shall not disapprove an application
except with respect to the several factors specified in Subsection B of
this section.
C.
The Historic District Commission shall be strict in its judgment of
plans for sites or structures determined by research to be of historic,
archeological or architectural significance. The Historic District
Commission shall be lenient in its judgment of plans for sites or
structures of little historic value or for plans involving new
D.
§ 164-51.3 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-51.4
150:541
§ 164-51.5. Design guidelines.
The Historic District Commission shall adopt rehabilitation and new
construction or design guidelines for designated sites, structures and
construction, unless such plans would seriously impair the historic,
archeological or architectural value of the surrounding site or
structure. The Historic District Commission is not required to limit
construction, reconstruction or alteration to the architectural style of
any one period.
If an application is submitted for construction, reconstruction or
alterations affecting the site or the exterior of a structure or for the
moving or demolition of a structure, the preservation of which the
Historic District Commission deems of unusual importance to the City
or the county or of unusual importance to the entire state or nation,
the Historic District Commission shall attempt, with the owner of the
structure, to formulate an economically feasible plan for the
preservation of the site or structure. Unless in these circumstances
the Historic District Commission is satisfied that the proposed
construction, alteration or reconstruction will not materially impair
the historic, archeological or architectural significance of the site or
structure, the Historic District Commission shall reject the application
for reconstruction or alteration, filing a copy of its rejection with the
Zoning Administrator, stating the specific reasons therefor.
E.
If an application is submitted for construction, reconstruction,
alteration or for moving or demolition of a site or structure that the
Historic District Commission deems of unusual importance and no
economically feasible plan can be formulated, the Historic District
Commission shall have 90 days from the time it concludes that no
economically feasible plan can be formulated to negotiate with the
owner and other parties in an effort to find a means of preserving the
site or structure.
F.
In the case of a site or structure deemed to be valuable for its historic,
archeological or architectural significance, the Historic District
Commission may approve the proposed construction, reconstruction,
alteration, moving or demolition despite the fact that the changes come
within the provisions of Subsection E of this section if:
The site or structure is a deterrent to a major improvement
program which will be of substantial benefit to the City or county;
(1)
Retention of the site or structure would cause undue financial
hardship to the owner;
(2)
The retention of the site or structure would not be to the best
interests of a majority of persons in the community; or
(3)
The structure has been condemned because of a health or fire
hazard or a building code violation.
(4)
G.
§ 164-51.4 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-51.5
150:542
districts which are consistent with those generally recognized by the
Maryland Historic Trust, which may include design characteristics intended
to meet the needs of particular types of sites, structures and districts
and may identify categories of changes that are so minimal in nature that
they do not affect historic, archeological or architectural significance and
require no review by the Historic District Commission. These guidelines
shall be utilized by the Historic District Commission in its review of
applications. These guidelines are subject to review and approval by
resolution of the Mayor and Common Council of Westminster.
§ 164-51.6. Meetings of Historic District Commission.
§ 164-51.7. Action of Historic District Commission upon
applications.
The Historic District Commission shall file with the Zoning Administrator
a certificate of its approval, modification or rejection of all applications
and plans submitted to it for review. Work shall not be commenced on any
such project until such a certificate of approval has been filed, and the
Zoning Administrator and the Director of Planning shall not sign off on the
building permit for such change or construction unless and until the Zoning
Administrator has received such a certificate of approval. If the Historic
District Commission rejects any applications or plans, it shall forthwith
notify the applicant, stating its reasons for so doing. The Historic District
Commission shall so advise the applicant of any proposed modifications.
If the applicant so desires, the applicant may make the suggested
modifications, and the Historic District Commission shall thereupon
approve them and file a certificate of approval with the Zoning
Administrator. The failure of the Historic District Commission to act upon
a completed application within 45 days from the date the completed
application was filed shall be deemed to constitute automatic approval of
the proposed changes unless an extension of this forty-five-day period is
agreed upon mutually by the applicant and the Historic District Commission
or the application has been withdrawn. An application is deemed to be
The Historic District Commission shall be organized and its rules shall
be adopted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Meetings
of the Historic District Commission shall be held at the call of the
Chairman and at such other times as the Historic District Commission
may determine. The Chairman or, in his absence, the Acting Chairman
may administer oaths and preside at meetings.
A.
All meetings of the Historic District Commission shall be open to the
public. Any interested person or a representative of an interested party
is entitled to appear and be heard by the Historic District Commission
before it reaches a decision on any matter. The Historic District
Commission shall keep a record of its resolutions, proceedings and
actions which shall be kept available for public inspection at the office
of the Director of Planning and Public Works during reasonable
business hours.
B.
§ 164-51.5 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-51.7
150:543
completed when it has been accepted as such by the Historic District
Commission at a meeting.
§ 164-51.8. Activities not prohibited in districts.
Nothing in this article shall be taken or construed to prevent routine
maintenance, painting, customary farming operations or landscaping which
will have no material effect on the historic, archeological or architectural
significance of a designated site, structure or district. Nothing in this article
affects the right to complete any work covered by a permit or authorization
issued prior to January 1, 1997.
§ 164-51.9. Architectural easements.
The Historic District Commission may acquire easements in connection
with individual sites or structures or with sites or structures located in or
adjacent to a locally designated Historic District subject to approval by the
Mayor and Common Council. Such easement shall grant to the City, the
Historic District Commission, the residents of the Historic District and the
general public the right to ensure that any site or structure and surrounding
property upon which it is applied is protected in perpetuity from changes
which would affect its historic, archeological or architectural significance.
§ 164-51.10. Appeal from Historic District Commission decision.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Historic District Commission
on an application or any officer, department or board of the City may appeal
the same to the Circuit Court for Carroll County. Any such appeal shall be
taken in accordance with the Maryland Rules of Procedure as set forth in
Chapter 200 of Title 7.
§ 164-51.7 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-51.10
150:544
ARTICLE IXB
Housing for Older Persons Zone
[Added 1-10-2005 by Ord. No. 723]
§ 164-51.11. Purpose.
It is the purpose of the Housing for Older Persons Zone to provide suitable
sites for multiple-family housing for older persons within certain areas of
the City which would permit the optimum amount of freedom and variety in
the design and layout of such type of use.
§ 164-51.12. Uses permitted.
The following uses are permitted in the Housing for Older Persons Zone:
§ 164-51.13. Location and dimensional requirements.
The following objectives are sought in providing for this zone:
To provide a more attractive and varied living environment for
housing for older persons than would be possible through the strict
application of residential Euclidean zonal district requirements.
(1)
To encourage developers to use a more creative approach in the
development of land for housing for older persons.
(2)
To encourage more efficient allocation and maintenance of common
open space in providing such housing through private initiative.
(3)
To encourage variety in the physical development patterns of such
housing.
(4)
To encourage developers to create an independent, self-reliant and
pleasant living atmosphere for older persons.
(5)
A.
The fact that an application complies with all specific requirements and
purposes set forth herein shall not be deemed to create a presumption
that the application is, in fact, compatible with surrounding land uses
and, in itself, shall not be sufficient to require the granting of any
application.
B.
The following regulations shall apply in all housing for older persons
zones.
C.
Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to any permitted
use in this section.
A.
B. Multiple-family housing for older persons as defined in § 164-3.
Places of public assembly, recreational buildings and accessory
buildings, if included in an approved development plan wherein it has
been deemed that they are advantageous for the purpose of serving the
development and the local community.
C.
§ 164-51.11 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-51.13
150:545
§ 164-51.14. Building height.
No principal structure shall exceed three stories or 40 feet in height, and no
accessory building shall exceed two stories or 20 feet in height.
§ 164-51.15. Open space.
At least 10% of the site shall be kept for open space.
§ 164-51.16. Off-street parking.
Spaces for off-street parking and for loading and unloading shall be
provided in accordance with requisites of Article XVI, except that standard
perpendicular or angled parking spaces shall be a rectangle, having
minimum dimensions of 10 feet by 18 feet.
Sites eligible for consideration for the Housing for Older Persons Zone
must be recommended for such zone in the City's Comprehensive Plan.
A.
Sites eligible for consideration for the Housing for Older Persons Zone
shall be for a tract of land of not more than ten acres, classified in
the R-7,500 Zone or B-Business Zone prior to reclassification to the
Housing for Older Persons Zone.
B.
Density.
Residential density shall be approved generally on the capabilities
of the existing and/or planned utilities and such other standards
and requirements as enumerated in this chapter, but in no case
shall the density exceed 16 dwelling units per net acre, prior to any
dedications.
(1)
Calculation of net acreage shall include all land within the project,
except floodplain areas and slopes in excess of 25%.
(2)
C.
The following minimum requirements shall apply:
Dwelling Type
Lot Width
At
Building
(feet)
Front
Yard
(feet)
Side Yard
(feet)
Rear Yard
(feet)
All principal and
accessory structures
100 40 20 50
D.
For the purpose of administering this Article, any room other than a
living room, kitchen, dinette or dining room, bathroom and closet shall
be construed as a bedroom.
E.
§ 164-51.13 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-51.17
150:546
§ 164-51.17. Signs.
Signs shall be permitted subject to the provisions of Article XVII of this
chapter.
§ 164-51.18. Architectural design.
The architectural design of all buildings shall be consistent with the
creation of an independent, self-reliant and pleasant living atmosphere for
a group of older persons requiring indoor and outdoor privacy participation
in social and community activities and who may have limited mobility.
§ 164-51.19. Dedication of land.
Such land as may be required for public streets, parks, schools and other
public uses shall be dedicated in accordance with the requirements of the
laws of the city and the adopted general plan and Master Plans and other
plans as may be applicable. The land to be dedicated shall be so identified
upon development plans and site plans required under the provisions of this
chapter and any other laws of the city.
§ 164-51.20. Compatibility.
All permitted uses shall achieve the purposes set forth in § 164-51.11 and
be compatible with the other uses existing or proposed adjacent to and
in the vicinity of the area covered by the proposed development. Further,
the applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed use is compatible with
any abutting dissimilar land uses which may include provisions to mitigate
impacts upon adjacent properties.
§ 164-51.21. Procedure.
An application for zonal classification in the Housing for Older Persons
Zone shall be accompanied by a development plan prepared in
accordance with the provisions of § 164-188 of this chapter.
A.
In addition to all other standards and criteria, in considering an
application for the Housing for Older Persons Zone, the Common
Council shall also consider the present or potential adequacy of the
street or road system, highway and road access, the availability and
capability of existing water and sewage systems and the availability and
capability of all other public facilities.
B.
All housing for olderpersons projects shall be subject to site plan
approval as provided in Article XXV of this chapter.
C.
§ 164-51.17 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-51.21
150:547

ARTICLE IXC
Arts and Culture Overlay District
[Added 11-8-2010 by Ord. No. 815]
§ 164-51.22. Purpose.
§ 164-51.23. District designated.
The Arts and Culture Overlay District shall apply to all properties located
within the district as designated on the City of Westminster Zoning Map as
"Arts and Cultural Overlay District."
§ 164-51.24. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ARTIST LIVE/WORK SPACE — A single-family dwelling unit in which up to
50% of the floor area is used by the resident for the production, showing,
and sale of art.
ARTIST or ARTISAN — A person regularly engaged in the creation of art.
ART or ARTISTIC WORKS — Works of beauty or other special aesthetic
significance produced by means of the exercise of human creative skill,
including:
The purpose of the Arts and Culture Overlay District is to facilitate
improvements to land and structures within the district and to
encourage artistic, cultural and creative resources therein.
A.
For uses not otherwise permitted in the underlying zone in which a
property is located, this article imposes requirements in addition to
those imposed by this chapter upon uses in the underlying zone.
B.
The overlay district is designed to achieve the following goals:
(1) To promote development and interest in the district.
(2) To allow a mix of artistic, cultural and creative uses.
(3) To allow flexibility of uses and development standards.
To implement and complement the goals of the 2009 Tri-Street
Area Advisory Committee Report.
(4)
C.
A. Written works, such books, poetry, journalism, plays or screenplays.
Multimedia images generated through the use of computers, software
and applications to combine text, high-quality sound, graphics and
animation or video.
B.
Images, forms or sounds generated for aesthetic reasons rather than
solely for commercial or functional use, including drawings, paintings,
C.
§ 164-51.22 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-51.24
150:549
§ 164-51.25. Artisan workshop and/or gallery requirements.
A workshop for the production of art or for art instruction and/or a gallery
for the performance, display and/or sale of art is permitted in the Arts and
Culture Overlay Zone, provided that:
printmaking or sculpture, using materials such as paper, plaster, stone,
glass, clay, wood, metal, or textile.
The application of aesthetic designs to everyday functional objects,
including works in photography, industrial design, graphic design,
fashion design or interior design.
D.
Performance art in traditional varieties, such as theater, music, and
ballet.
E.
New media and contemporary forms of expression, such as assemblage,
collage, conceptual, as well as photography and film-based images.
F.
The gross floor area of the workshop or gallery does not exceed 50% of
the total square footage of the principal dwelling unit;
A.
Works of art displayed, performed or sold have been written, composed,
created or executed for limited production and not for industry-oriented
distribution;
B.
Instruction in the creation of works of art or in music, dance, and other
forms of performance art shall be limited to a maximum of six students
at a time (including the number of persons waiting on the property to
receive such instruction);
C.
The work displayed, performed or sold has been written, composed,
created or executed or the instruction given in art, music, dance or
other forms of performance art is provided by a person whose primary
residence is in the premises; and
D.
Signage for the workshop or gallery meets the following restrictions:
The premises may have no more than:
One hanging sign, which may not exceed three square feet in
area; or
(a)
One ground sign, which may not exceed four square feet in
area and may not exceed 36 inches in height.
(b)
(1)
All signage must be approved by the Zoning Administrator. In
determining whether or not to approve a sign application, the
Zoning Administrator shall find that the proposed sign will achieve
a maximum degree of compatibility with the neighborhood and will
further the interests of efficiency and attractiveness to the greatest
practicable extent, in consideration of the following factors:
(a) Traffic and pedestrian safety;
(2)
E.
§ 164-51.24 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-51.25
150:550
(b) Size, configuration, elevation and location of the property;
(c) Existing signs on neighboring properties;
(d) Aesthetics; and
Any other factors relating to the location, design, composition
and specific character of the proposed sign deemed
appropriate by the Zoning Administrator.
(e)
§ 164-51.25 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-51.25
150:551

ARTICLE X
I-R Restricted Industrial Zone
§ 164-52. General provisions.
The following regulations shall apply in the I-R Restricted Industrial Zones.
§ 164-53. Uses permitted. [Amended 8-9-1993 by Ord. No. 579]
No building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure
shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered, enlarged or maintained,
except for uses of a light industrial nature, including but not limited to the
following:
Manufacture and assembly of aircraft, automobiles, house trailers or
other vehicles.
A.
Manufacture and assembly of electrical appliances, electronics and
communication equipment, professional, scientific and controlling
instruments and photographic or optical products.
B.
Manufacturing, compounding, assembling or treatment of articles or
merchandise from previously prepared materials, such as but not
limited to bone, cloth, fur, cork, fiber, canvas, leather, cellophane,
paper, glass, plastics, stone, shells, tobacco, other light metal, light
metal mesh, pipe, rods, shapes, strips, wire or similar component parts.
C.
Manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of
cosmetics, pharmaceuticals and food products, except rendering or
refining of fats and oils.
D.
Manufacturing of musical instruments, novelties and molded rubber
products, including tire manufacture, recapping and treading.
E.
Manufacture of pottery or other similar ceramic products using only
previously pulverized clay and kilns fired only by electricity or gas.
F.
G. Laboratories: chemical, physical and biological.
H. Clothing and shoe manufacture.
I. Carpet and rug cleaning plants.
J. Blacksmith, welding, machine or similar shops.
Heliports, subject to standards recommended or required by the
Federal Aviation Agency.
K.
L. Self-service storage facilities, subject to the provisions of § 164-155.
M. Truck or motor freight terminals or warehouses.
Aircraft storage, service and repair hangars on parcels abutting any
publicly owned airport. [Added 1-24-2005 by Ord. No. 72794]
N.
§ 164-52 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-53
150:553
§ 164-54. Special exceptions. [Amended 2-27-1995 by Ord. No. 594;
10-26-1998 by Ord. No. 631]
The following uses may be permitted as a special exception in accordance
with the provisions of Article XXII:
Office, professional, business-nonresidential. [Added 11-25-2013 by
Ord. No. 848-A95]
O.
Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to any permitted use
in this section.
P.
Any use permitted in § 164-41A(7), (9), (11), (17), (19), (33), (35), (39),
(40), (41), (42), (45), (47), (48) and (49). [Amended 10-13-2003 by
Ord. No. 706; 11-25-2013 by Ord. No. 848-A; 9-25-2017 by Ord.
No. 869]
A.
Concrete and concrete products manufacture, including ready-mixed
concrete plants.
B.
C. Contractor's equipment and storage yards.
Petroleum products storage tanks above ground, provided also that
there is compliance with all state and federal laws, as well as the
National Fire Underwriters' Codes.
D.
E. Sawmills, commercial.
Indoor shooting ranges, subject to the provisions of § 164-155.1 of this
chapter, and including, as accessory thereto, the sale, on-site rental
and/or repair of firearms, ammunition, archery equipment and the like
in accordance with and subject to all applicable laws, ordinances and
regulations.
F.
Nontrade schools for which an application for a special exception has
been filed on or before October 1, 2003. [Added 10-13-2003 by Ord.
No. 70696]
G.
Telecommunications facilities, subject to the requirements of
§ 164-139.1.
H.
I. Trade schools. [Added 10-13-2003 by Ord. No. 706]
J. Funeral homes and mortuaries. [Added 5-23-2011 by Ord. No. 824]
Private indoor recreational facilities, subject to the requirements of
§ 164-155.2. [Added 12-14-2015 by Ord. No. 861]
K.
94.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection N
as Subsection O.
95.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection O
as Subsection P.
96.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection G as Subsection H.
§ 164-53 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-54
150:554
§ 164-55. Dimensional requirements.
The following minimum requirements shall be observed:
Use
Front Yard
Depth
(feet)
Side Yard Width
(each)
(feet)
Rear Yard Depth
(each)
All buildings 50 30 30
§ 164-56. Building height.
No structure shall exceed 50 feet in height.
§ 164-57. Landscaping.
Landscaping shall meet the following minimum requirements. A thirty-footwide
minimum landscaped edge shall be required along any residential
district or external right-of-way, to be planted with a minimum of two-andone-
half-inch caliper trees at a minimum of 30 feet on center and a similarly
landscaped earth mound at least three feet high between the parking area
and any adjacent residential district or public right-of-way.
§ 164-58. Additional distance requirements. [Amended 2-27-1995
by Ord. No. 594]
All special exception uses except those provided in § 164-54A must be
located three times the distance requirements specified in § 164-140;
provided, however, that indoor shooting ranges must be located five times
the distance requirements specified in § 164-140. All other uses are subject
to the provisions of § 164-140.
§ 164-59. Signs.
Signs shall be permitted subject to the provisions of Article XVII of this
chapter.
Indoor dog training and event facilities. [Added 2-27-2018 by Ord.
No. 873]
L.
§ 164-54 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-59
150:555

ARTICLE XI
I-G General Industrial Zone
§ 164-60. General provisions.
The following regulations shall apply in all I-G General Industrial Zones.
§ 164-61. Uses permitted.
Uses of a heavy industrial nature, including but not limited to the following:
Manufacture and assembly of aircraft, automobiles, house trailers or
other vehicles.
A.
B. Manufacture and bottling of alcoholic beverages.
C. Machine shops and structural steel fabricating.
D. Coal yards.
E. Copper works. [Amended 4-24-2017 by Ord. No. 878]
F. Crematories.
Manufacture or processing of chemicals, except sulfuric, nitric or other
corrosive or offensive acids.
G.
H. Manufacture of dyes or dyestuffs and printing ink.
I. Electric generating or steam power plants.
J. Flour mills, grain milling or drying.
Manufacture of felt, shoddy, hair products, feathers, emery cloth,
sandpaper or sand blasting and/or products therefrom.
K.
L. Enameling, japanning, lacquering, galvanizing and plating.
Manufacture or processing of meat or food products, except
slaughterhouses.
M.
N. Manufacture of paper, pulp or cloth.
Petroleum products storage underground, except at retail service
stations.
O.
Manufacture of pickle, sauerkraut, vinegar, yeast, soda or soda
compounds.
P.
Q. Manufacture of rayon or similar products.
R. Manufacture of starch, glucose, dextrin or spice.
S. Manufacture of soap, oil, paints or turpentine.
T. Manufacture of wire or wire products.
§ 164-60 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-61
150:557
§ 164-62. Special exceptions. [Amended 10-26-1998 by Ord. No.
631]
The following uses may be permitted as a special exception in accordance
with the provisions of Article XXII, provided that the location of such uses
shall not be less than 1,000 feet from any residential zone and 100 feet from
all other zones:
Agriculture, provided that any building or feeding pens in which farm
animals are kept shall comply with the distance requirements of
§ 164-140.
U.
Solid waste and street maintenance facilities and other associated
public facilities and uses. [Amended 4-24-2017 by Ord. No. 878]
V.
Wastewater treatment plants and other associated public facilities and
uses. [Amended 4-24-2017 by Ord. No. 878]
W.
Water treatment plants and other associated public facilities and uses.
[Added 4-24-2017 by Ord. No. 878]
X.
Accessory uses customarily incidental to any permitted use in this
section. [Added 4-24-2017 by Ord. No. 878]
Y.
Any governmental use and its associated facilities and uses. [Added
4-24-2017 by Ord. No. 878]
Z.
A. Abattoirs, slaughterhouses and stockyards.
B. Acid or heavy chemical manufacture, processing or storage.
C. Blast furnace or boiler works.
D. Manufacture of rubber or rubber products.
E. Bituminous concrete mixing plants.
F. Manufacture of perfume.
G. Cement, lime gypsum or plaster of paris manufacturing.
Distillation of bones, fat rendering, grease, lard or tallow
manufacturing or processing.
H.
I. Explosive manufacture or storage.
J. Extractive-type industry.
K. Fertilizer, potash, insecticide, glue, size or gelatin manufacture.
L. Foundries.
M. Garbage, offal or dead animal reduction.
N. Gas manufacture or storage for heat or illumination.
§ 164-61 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-62
150:558
§ 164-63. Dimensional requirements. [Amended 4-24-2017 by Ord.
No. 878]
The following minimum requirements shall be observed:
Use Front Yard
Depth
(feet)
Side Yard Width
(feet)
Rear Yard
Depth
(feet)
Buildings and
structures
10 0 5
Parking and
vehicle storage
0 0 0
Storage open and
outdoor
0 0 0
§ 164-64. Building height. [Amended 4-24-2017 by Ord. No. 878]
No structure shall exceed 60 feet in height, except that ventilating towers
and any other mechanical equipment required for the operation of water
or wastewater treatment plants or any facility operated by a governmental
entity shall be excepted from the height restriction.
Junkyards, provided that the area shall not exceed five acres, shall
be totally enclosed with adequate fencing and that no operations,
including storage or sale of parts, shall be closer than 300 feet to
any public highway. Junkyards are subject to further restrictions and
regulations as outlined in § 164-151.
O.
Petroleum products refining or storage above ground, provided also
that there is compliance with state and federal laws and National Fire
Underwriters' Codes.
P.
Telecommunications facilities, subject to the requirements of
§ 164-139.1.
Q.
Telecommunications installations, subject to the facilities limitations in
§ 139-28.2A(3)(a) through (f). [Added 9-25-2017 by Ord. No. 869]
R.
§ 164-62 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-64
150:559

ARTICLE XIA
N-C Neighborhood Commercial Zone
[Added 9-25-2000 by Ord. No. 638]
§ 164-64.1. Purpose.
§ 164-64.2. Uses permitted. [Amended 3-12-2007 by Ord. No. 762]
It is the purpose of this zone to provide a method for the orderly
grouping and spacing of limited commercial development on properties
outside of the City's downtown with design and operating standards
that require larger land areas. It is intended to provide suitable sites
for development of integrated commercial and shopping facilities while
at the same time maintaining reasonable limitations upon their design,
size and operation. Said suitable sites are intended to allow for
appropriate commercial development in a convenient location without
adversely affecting the physical development pattern of nearby
residential areas.
A.
The following objectives are sought in providing for the N-C
Neighborhood Commercial Zone:
To provide a more attractive and varied commercial environment
than would be possible through the strict application of commercial
Euclidean zonal district requirements.
(1)
To encourage developers to use a more creative approach in the
development of land.
(2)
To encourage small or local businesses designed to serve the
surrounding neighborhood to locate in these areas.
(3)
(4) To encourage shopping by pedestrian and bicycle access.
B.
The fact that an application complies with all specific requirements and
purposes set forth herein shall not be deemed to create a presumption
that the application is, in fact, compatible with surrounding land uses
and, in itself, shall not be sufficient to require the granting of any
application.
C.
The following regulations shall apply in all N-C Neighborhood
Commercial Zones.
D.
No building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure
shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered, enlarged or maintained,
except for one or more of the following uses. Drive-through facilities
are prohibited in this zone except as provided in § 164-64.3B and D.
Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to any
permitted use in this section.
(1)
(2) Alcoholic beverage package stores.
A.
§ 164-64.1 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-64.2
150:561
Animal hospitals, veterinary clinics and accessory kennels without
exterior runways.
(3)
(4) Antique and crafts shops.
(5) Art shops, art galleries and/or art and craft supplies.
Household appliance and equipment and home electronic sales,
lease and service containing 10,000 gross square feet or less.
(6)
(7) Art, trade and business schools.
(8) Auto accessory stores containing 10,000 gross square feet or less.
(9) Bakery shops.
(10)Banks, savings and loan and financial institutions.
(11)Beauty parlors, barbershops and tanning, toning and nail salons.
Bed-and-breakfast establishments and/or tourist homes containing
10 rooms or fewer.
(12)
Bicycle sales, lease and services, including sale of bicycling
accessories.
(13)
(14)Bookstores.
(15)Cafeterias, lunchrooms, snack bars and automats.
(16)Candy stores.
(17)Card, stationery and related paper products supply stores.
(18)Carpet or flooring material retail sales.
(19)Carpentering shops containing 500 gross square feet or less.
(20)Catalog sales center, without showrooms.
(21)Catering sales and commercial kitchen for off-premises service.
(22)China and glassware stores.
(23)Clock shops, sales and repairs.
(24)Clothing apparel stores.
(25)Commercial artist studios.
(26)Computer stores.
Custom printing, reproduction and copy shops containing 5,000
gross square feet or less.
(27)
(28)Cultural arts centers.
§ 164-64.2 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-64.2
150:562
(29)Dancing, gymnastics instruction and exercise studios.
(30)Data and computer services.
(31)Day-care facilities for adults or children and nursery schools.
(32)Dress or millinery shops.
(33)Drugstores or pharmacies.
(34)Dry cleaners.
(35)Fabric stores.
(36)Florist or garden shops with no exterior storage.
(37)Food and grocery stores.
(38)Furniture stores, including ancillary upholstery service.
(39)Furriers.
(40)Gift or jewelry shops, including engraving and repairs.
(41)Hardware stores with no exterior storage.
(42)Health clubs.
(43)Hobby or craft shops and supplies.
(44) Institutes for special education and training.
(45) Interior design and decorating shops.
(46)Locksmith shops.
Magazine, comic books and periodicals shops, which shall not
include adult entertainment activities.
(47)
Medical or dental offices and clinics, including ancillary
laboratories.
(48)
(49)Medical supply sales.
Music stores, including sales of records, tapes, and instruments,
instrument repairs and musical and voice instruction.
(50)
(51)Newsstands.
(52)Offices, professional and business.
(53)Office supplies, equipment sales, lease and service.
(54)Optical and eye care facilities.
(55)Package, telecommunications and courier service.
(56)Paint and wallpaper supply sales.
§ 164-64.2 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-64.2
150:563
§ 164-64.3. Special exceptions. [Amended 3-12-2007 by Ord. No.
762]
The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions in accordance
with the provisions of Article XXII, and provided that no individual use and/
or tenant space in a project shall occupy more than 15,000 square feet of
gross floor area. Drive-through facilities are prohibited except as provided
in Subsection B.
(57)Pet grooming service that does not include on-site boarding.
(58)Picture framing shops.
Photography studios, retail sales of photographic equipment and
supplies and film processing laboratory service.
(59)
Public buildings, structures and properties of the recreational,
cultural, institutional, educational, administrative or public-service
type, including fire, ambulance or rescue squad.
(60)
(61)Radio and television sales and repair.
Restaurants and lunchrooms, which may include live entertainment
and dancing, provided that it is interior to a building and does not
constitute adult entertainment activities.
(62)
(63)Shoe sales and repair shops.
(64)Social clubs, fraternal organizations and community meeting halls.
Sporting goods and related outdoor hobby shops with the exception
of firearms.
(65)
(66)Stamp, coin and other collectibles stores.
(67)Tack and leather goods stores.
(68)Tailor and seamstress establishments.
Theaters for movies and performing arts, containing three screens
or fewer.
(69)
(70)Tobacconists.
(71)Toy stores.
(72)Travel agencies.
Video rental establishments with the exception of adult
entertainment activities.
(73)
Amusement centers, excluding bowling alleys and the sale of alcoholic
beverages.
A.
§ 164-64.2 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-64.3
150:564
§ 164-64.4. Conditions.
§ 164-64.5. Design standards.
Banks, savings and loan and financial institutions with drive-through
service.
B.
Microbreweries and pub breweries licensed under Article 2B of the
Annotated Code of Maryland.
C.
D. Drugstores or pharmacies with drive-through service.
E. Sign-painting shops.
Swimming pools, parks and recreation areas, provided that such uses
shall be two times the distance requirements for residential uses as
specified in § 164-140.
F.
Telecommunications facilities, subject to the requirements of
§ 164-139.1.
G.
Goods shall consist primarily of new or reconditioned merchandise or
bona fide antiques.
A.
Processes and equipment employed and goods processed or sold shall
be limited to those which are not objectionable by reason of odor, dust,
smoke, cinders, gas, fumes, noise, vibration, refuse matter or watercarried
waste or otherwise create a nuisance under the provisions of
Chapter 100, Nuisances, of the Code of Westminster.
B.
For the purposes of this section, any side of the building(s) facing a
public street or residential property is defined as a facade. All facades
of a building that are visible from adjoining properties and/or public
streets shall contribute to the community integration by featuring
characteristics that reflect the architectural style of the buildings
within a one-half-mile radius of the subject site and shall include the
following:
Facades greater than 100 feet in length must incorporate recesses
and projections along at least 20% of the length of the facade.
(1)
Facades must include windows, awnings and arcades which total
at least 60% of the facade; however, no portion of the facade shall
be of highly reflective glass with a reflectance factor of 0.25 or
greater.
(2)
Facade color must be of low-reflective, subtle, neutral or earth-tone
colors. The use of high-intensity colors, metallic colors, black or
fluorescent colors is prohibited.
(3)
Building trim may feature brighter colors, but neon tubing is not
permitted as an accent material.
(4)
A.
§ 164-64.3 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-64.5
150:565
Facade building materials must include brick, wood, native stone
or tinted/textured concrete masonry units. Smooth-faced concrete
block, tilt-up concrete panels or prefabricated steel or metal panels
are prohibited for exterior facades.
(5)
Architectural character shall be incorporated into the building(s) by
use of a repeating pattern of change in color, texture and material
modules: and at least one of these elements shall repeat horizontally,
and shall repeat at intervals of no more than 30 feet, either horizontally
or vertically.
B.
Variations in rooflines must be incorporated and include features such
as overhanging eaves, sloped roofs and three or more roof slope planes.
Rooftop mechanical equipment must be completely and fully screened
from view, including the view from above.
C.
All sides of a principal building that directly face an abutting public
street shall feature at least one customer entrance. Where a principle
building directly faces more than two abutting public streets, this
requirement shall apply only to two sides of the building.
D.
Each principal building must have a clearly defined and highly visible
customer entrance with features such as canopies or porticos, arcades,
wing walls and integral planters.
E.
Loading docks, trash collections, outdoor storage and similar facilities
and functions shall be incorporated into the overall design of the
building(s) and layout of the site so that the visual and acoustic impacts
of these functions are fully contained and out of view from adjacent
properties and public streets. Use of screening materials that are
different from or inferior to the principal materials of the building and
landscape is prohibited. Trash removal is prohibited after 9:00 p.m. and
before 7:00 a.m.
F.
Weather-protection features, such as awnings, shall be provided as
appropriate and practical near all customer entrances.
G.
Internal pedestrian walkways must be distinguished from driving
surfaces through the use of special pavers, bricks or scored concrete to
enhance pedestrian safety and the attractiveness of the walkways.
H.
Lighting fixtures used on the exterior of buildings, signs, parking areas
and pedestrian walkways shall be architecturally compatible with the
style, materials, colors and detail of the building.
I.
J. Utilities. All new utility lines shall be placed underground.
Buffer requirement.
Along a side or rear property line abutting residential or public
property other than a public street, a vegetated buffer shall be
provided, 50 feet in width, containing hedges, evergreens and
shrubbery. or suitable vegetation of sufficient planted density to
(1)
K.
§ 164-64.5 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-64.5
150:566
produce total year-round visual screening consistent with the
topography, the existing vegetation and the use of the adjacent
land. Wherever possible, every effort shall be made to protect and
retain the existing natural vegetation.
Where the facade faces adjacent residential uses, provide an
earthen berm of at least six feet in height that will be planted with
evergreen trees at intervals of 20 feet on center, or in clusters.
(2)
Signs. An integrated sign program shall be submitted for approval by
the Commission, which shall address materials, colors, shapes, sizes
and compatibility with architecture. Individual signs shall be reviewed
for conformity with the approved sign program.
Materials, colors and shapes of proposed signs shall be compatible
with the related building.
(1)
Every individual sign shall be designed as an integral architectural
element of the building and site to which it principally relates.
(2)
Each sign shall be compatible with other signs on the site and shall
not compete for attention.
(3)
All flashing, fluttering, undulating, swinging, rotating, or otherwise
moving signs, and pennants, banners and streamers or other
decorations are prohibited.
(4)
All other provisions of Article XVII shall apply, except that to the
extent that there are any discrepancies between this section and
Article XVII, the provisions of this section shall control.
(5)
L.
Interparcel access. Where topographic and other conditions are
reasonably usable, provision shall be made for travelway connections
to adjoining lots of similar existing or potential use when such driveway
connection will facilitate vehicular access between sites without the
need to travel upon a public street.
M.
Pedestrian accommodations. Pedestrian walkways and connections
shall be provided to any trail or other pedestrian paths such as
sidewalks from the adjoining areas.
N.
Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Article
XVI of this chapter, together with the following requirements:
No more than 50% of the off-street parking area for the entire
project shall be located between the front facade of the principle
building and the primary abutting street.
(1)
Parking lot landscape islands shall equal at least 10% of the total
area of the parking lot. All other requirements of the Landscape
Manual shall apply, except that to the extent that there are any
discrepancies between this section and the Manual, the provisions
of this section shall control.
(2)
O.
§ 164-64.5 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-64.5
150:567
Bicycle parking shall be provided in accordance with the following
standards:
At least three bicycle parking spaces or 10% of the required offstreet
parking spaces, whichever is greater. After the first 50
bicycle parking spaces are provided, the required number of
additional bicycle parking spaces is 5% of the required off-street
parking spaces.
(1)
Bicycle parking facilities shall provided for storage and locking of
bicycles in which both the bicycle frame and the wheels may be
locked by the user; be designed so as not to cause damage to
the bicycle: facilitate easy locking without interference from or to
adjacent bicycles; and consist of racks or lockers anchored so that
they cannot be easily removed and of solid construction, resistant
to rust, corrosion, hammers and saws.
(2)
Bicycle parking facilities shall be consistent with the site in color
and design and be incorporated whenever possible into building or
street furniture designs.
(3)
Bicycle parking facilities shall be located in convenient, highly
visible, active, well-lighted areas but shall not interfere with
pedestrian or vehicular movements.
(4)
P.
Modifications to design standards.
The standards contained in this section are intended to foster
development of integrated commercial and shopping facilities
while at the same time maintaining reasonable limitations upon
their design, size and operation. Conditions may arise when full
compliance with the design standards is impractical, impossible or
under circumstances where maximum achievement of the City's
objectives can only be obtained through modified requirements. In
specific cases, modification of these standards may be permitted by
the Planning Director, subject to the approval of the Council, upon
a finding that such modification more fully achieves the objectives
of this zone and that any such modification would not have an
adverse impact upon adjoining properties or the general character
of the proposed development plan. [Amended 1-28-2008 by Ord.
No. 774]
(1)
All requests for modifications must be submitted to the Planning
Director in writing and shall be accompanied by sufficient
explanation and justification, written and/or graphic, to allow
appropriate evaluation and decision by the Planning Director,
subject to the approval of the Council. [Amended 1-28-2008 by
Ord. No. 774]
(2)
Modification to design standards shall be limited to the specific
project under consideration and shall not establish any precedent
for use or approval in any other application.
(3)
Q.
§ 164-64.5 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-64.6
150:568
§ 164-64.6. Operating standards.
Illumination. All outdoor illumination shall meet the following
conditions:
Unless otherwise permitted, lighting shall be controlled by
automatic switching devices, such as timers, motion detectors and/
or photocells, to extinguish offending sources between 10:00 p.m.,
or one hour after the end of the business hours of the business
served, whichever is later and dawn, to mitigate glare and skylighting
consequences.
(1)
All outdoor lighting shall be aimed, located, designed, fitted and
maintained so as not to present a disabling glare hazard to drivers
or pedestrians or a nuisance glare concern to neighboring
properties. All exterior lighting shall be hooded and/or screened so
as not to permit the source of illumination or lenses to be seen from
off the premises.
(2)
The amount of illumination projected onto a neighboring
residential use shall not exceed 0.1 vertical footcandle at the
property line.
(3)
Lighting fixtures shall not be mounted in excess of 20 feet above
grade.
(4)
Exterior lighting of a building and/or grounds for security
surveillance purposes is permitted. Such lighting shall be arranged
and of sufficient illumination to enable the detection of suspicious
movement rather than the recognition of definitive detail. For
security lighting of grounds and parking lots, the level of
illumination shall not exceed one footcandle. Security lighting for
buildings/structures shall be directed toward the face of the
building/structure rather than the area around it and shall not
exceed five footcandles.
(5)
No outdoor illumination may be used in any manner that could
interfere with the safe movement of motor vehicles on public
streets, including any fixture that may be confused with or
construed as a traffic control device.
(6)
Blinking, flashing or changing intensity lights, except for
temporary holiday displays which are permitted between
November 15 and January 7, are prohibited.
(7)
No person shall install, illuminate or maintain any beacon or
searchlight.
(8)
A.
Maintenance following project completion. All design standards
approved as part of the site plan by the Commission shall run with
the land and shall be maintained in good repair and condition by all
B.
§ 164-64.6 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-64.6
150:569
§ 164-64.7. Building height.
No structure shall exceed the height of three stories.
§ 164-64.8. Area, size and dimensional requirements.
For all uses in the N-C Neighborhood Commercial Zone, the following
requirements shall apply:
§ 164-64.9. Compatibility.
All uses permitted and special exceptions shall achieve the purposes set
forth in § 164-64.1 and be compatible with the other uses proposed for the
subsequent owners of the property. Substantive changes shall require
approval by the Commission.
A site eligible for consideration as a N-C Neighborhood Commercial
Zone development shall meet and comply with one of the two
requirements and limitations:
A tract of land not more than five acres, provided that no individual
use and/or tenant space in a project shall occupy more than 15,000
square feet of gross floor area, unless otherwise limited to a lesser
amount in § 164-64.2.
(1)
A tract of land more than five acres, and less than 15 acres,
provided that no more than one individual use and/or tenant space
in a project shall occupy more than 55,000 square feet of gross
floor area, and all other uses shall not exceed 15,000 square feet
of gross floor area, unless otherwise limited to a lesser amount in
§ 164-64.2.
(2)
A.
The following minimum limitations shall be observed:
Lot size and width:
(a) Lot size: one acre.
(b) Lot width: 200 feet.
(1)
Building or use setback:
(a) Front: 30 feet.
(b) Side or rear: 15 feet.
(c) For parking use: 10 feet from the right-of-way or adjacent lots.
(d) From residential districts: 50 feet, if adjoining.
(2)
Direct access to state roads is not permitted unless the property
has an existing access prior to the adoption of this chapter.
[Amended 12-8-2014 by Ord. No. 851]
(3)
B.
§ 164-64.6 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-64.9
150:570
planned development and with other uses existing or proposed adjacent
to and in the vicinity of the area covered by the proposed planned
development.
§ 164-64.10. Procedure.
An application for zoning classification in the N-C Neighborhood
Commercial Zone shall be accompanied by a development plan
prepared in accordance with the provisions of § 164-188 of this chapter.
A.
In addition to all other standards and criteria in considering an
application for the N-C Neighborhood Commercial Zone, the Common
Council shall also consider the present or potential capability of the
street or road system, highway and road access and the availability,
capability of existing water and sewage systems and the availability and
capability of all other public facilities.
B.
All N-C Neighborhood Commercial Zone projects shall be subject to site
plan approval as provided in Article XXV.
C.
No property rezoned into the Neighborhood Commercial Zone shall
be subdivided or resubdivided except as shown on an approved
development plan or an amendment thereof.
D.
§ 164-64.9 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-64.10
150:571

ARTICLE XII
P-I Planned Industrial Zone
§ 164-65. Purpose.
It is the purpose of the P-I Planned Industrial Zone to provide a parklike
setting for a community of industries wishing to mutually maintain
aesthetically pleasing appearances and operations having no nuisance
factors as a means of protecting investments within the zone and reducing
the impact of industrial uses on surrounding zones. Tracts within the
district are to be planned, promoted and developed for industries within the
protection of performance standards herein provided
§ 164-66. Uses permitted. [Amended 7-8-1996 by Ord. No. 612]
The following uses are permitted in the Planned Industrial Zone:
The following objectives are sought in providing for the one or more
types of industrial zoning in the Planned Industrial Zone:
To provide a more attractive and varied showcase location on tracts
of land generally open to constant and extensive public viewing in
the City than would be possible through the strict applications of
industrial Euclidean zonal district requirements.
(1)
To encourage developers to use a more creative approach in the
development of land.
(2)
To encourage more efficient allocation and maintenance of common
open space in industrial areas through private initiative.
(3)
To encourage variety in the physical development patterns of
industrial areas.
(4)
A.
The fact that an application complies with all specific requirements and
purposes set forth herein shall not be deemed to create a presumption
that the application is, in fact, compatible with surrounding land uses
and, in itself, shall not be sufficient to require the granting of any
application.
B.
All of the uses permitted in §§ 164-53 and 164-61, except:
(1) All residential and retail commercial uses.
(2) The manufacture, testing, distribution or other use of explosives.
Wholesale distribution of fuels, such as but not limited to coal,
coke, gasoline, diesel fuel and propane.
(3)
(4) Truck or motor freight terminals or warehouses.
Brickyards, manufacture of pottery, tile, terra cotta or clay
products.
(5)
A.
§ 164-65 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-66
150:573
§ 164-66.1. Special exceptions. [Added 7-8-1996 by Ord. No. 612;
amended 10-26-1998 by Ord. No. 631; 9-9-2013 by Ord. No. 846]
The following uses may be permitted as a special exception in accordance
with the provisions of Article XXII:
(6) Electric or steam generating plants.
(7) Extractive uses.
(8) Flour mills, grain or feed drying or processing.
(9) Sawmills.
(10)Signs and billboards, except as authorized herein.
Office buildings for governmental agencies, regional and home
corporate offices. These may include offices of insurance companies,
investment concerns, trade associations, manufacturing companies and
engineers, but do not include any kind of retail facilities, except as
provided in Subsections F and G herein.
B.
C. Research, experimental and testing laboratories.
D. Warehousing and wholesale distribution centers.
Any use of an industrial nature not prohibited in this section that can
meet the performance standards and other guides and limitations set
forth in this section.
E.
Retail sales of the products or processes engaged in on the property,
provided that not more than 10% of the gross floor area is devoted to
such use.
F.
G. Motor inns, motels, restaurants and service stations.
Banks and savings and loan institutions with or without drive-through
facilities. [Amended 9-9-2013 by Ord. No. 846]
H.
Indoor and outdoor recreational facilities, cafeterias, clinics, libraries,
schools, meeting rooms and display rooms incidental or subordinate to
a principal use of the main building or related to or primarily restricted
to the industries located in the Planned Industrial Zone.
I.
Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to any permitted
use in this subsection.
J.
K. Trade schools. [Added 9-9-2013 by Ord. No. 846]
Telecommunications facilities, subject to the requirements of
§ 164-139.1.
A.
Telecommunications Installations, subject to the facility limitations in
§ 139-28.2A(3)(a) through (f) and the screening requirements for
B.
§ 164-66 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-66.1
150:574
§ 164-67. Performance standards.
It is the intent of these regulations to prevent land or buildings from
being used or occupied in any manner so as to create any dangerous,
injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable fire, explosive, radioactive or
other hazardous condition, noise or vibration, smoke, dust, odor or other
form of air pollution, electrical or other disturbances, glare or heat, liquid
or solid refuse or wastes, condition conducive to the breeding of rodent or
insects or other substances, condition or elements (all referred to herein
as "dangerous or objectionable elements") in a manner or amount so as to
adversely affect the surrounding area.
§ 164-68. Building height. [Amended 7-8-1996 by Ord. No. 612]
The height of buildings or structures shall not exceed 20 feet, plus 2/3 of the
horizontal distance (d) from the structure to the lot line (height = 20 feet +
2/3d).
§ 164-69. Dimensional requirements.
§ 164-70. Off-street parking.
modern appurtenances in § 164-131.3. [Added 9-25-2017 by Ord. No.
869]
Area requirements. Sites eligible for consideration for the Planned
Industrial Zone shall consist of a tract of land at least 10 acres in size
and classified in either the I-R or I-G Zone prior to reclassification to
the Planned Industrial Zone.
A.
Yard, landscaping and distance requirements.
Each lot shall have a minimum frontage of 150 feet on a street or
private way, provided that the Commission may approve a lesser
frontage to a minimum of 50 feet for lots located on culs-de-sac or
on street curves or having other extraordinary characteristics. The
Commission shall give due consideration to permitting access from
such sites only to major roadways.
(1)
The maximum ground area coverage of any lot by a principal
building or buildings shall not exceed 40% of the total lot area.
(2)
The yard, landscape and distance requirements shall be the same
as those contained in §§ 164-55, 164-57 and 164-58.
(3)
Any portion of a lot in a Planned Industrial Zone not used for
driveways, walkways, parking, loading or storage areas shall be
planted in grass or other suitable ground cover.
(4)
B.
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Article XVI,
except that for an industrial or manufacturing establishment or
warehouse or similar use, the minimum requirement shall be one
A.
§ 164-66.1 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-70
150:575
§ 164-71. Access and loading.
parking space for each 1 1/2 employees or one for each two employees
on combined major and second shifts, and in addition one visitor
parking space for every 10 employees; except that the Commission
may authorize fewer visitor parking spaces if it finds that a fewer
number will be sufficient for the operation anticipated. In addition to
the foregoing, one parking space shall be provided for each companyowned
or leased truck, passenger car or other vehicle located or
principally based on the premises. No parking spaces may be located
within required yards; except that an area equivalent to not more than
5% of the total area of all required parking spaces may be located
within a required yard for use as parking spaces for visitors, selected
personnel and minor deliveries. Off-street parking spaces may be
grouped in facilities serving more than one lot or establishment.
When the lot on which parking spaces are located abuts the rear or side
lot line of or is across the street from any land in a residential zone
other than publicly owned land, a wall, fence or evergreen planting
shall be maintained so as to screen substantially the parking lot from
view from the nearest property in the residential zone. The screening
shall be maintained in good condition at all times. In parking lots of one
acre or more, at least 5% of the area of the parking lot shall be devoted
to landscaping within the interior of the parking area. Luminaries on
parking lots shall be subject to approval by the Commission.
B.
Vehicular access to Planned Industrial Zones shall be permitted only
from a City- , county- or state-maintained highway and not directly with
any residential street.
A.
Road access to a Planned Industrial Zone may be at points prescribed
by the appropriate agency of jurisdiction and may be dedicated to
public use if constructed in accordance with City standards.
B.
Off-street loading berths shall be provided for all buildings in
accordance with the following schedule:
For a building with a floor area of 10,000 to 25,000 square feet: one
berth.
(1)
For each additional 25,000 square feet or fraction thereof up to
100,000 square feet: one berth.
(2)
(3) For each additional 50,000 square feet: one berth.
C.
Such loading berths shall be at least 14 feet wide, 48 feet long and
14 feet in height, unless the Planning Commission shall find that only
smaller trucks requiring less space will be used for a period of 10 years,
and may be located either within a building or in the open, but not
within required yards. If such berths are not enclosed, they shall be
located not less than 300 feet from any residence zone boundary and
effectively screened therefrom as in the case of parking areas above.
D.
§ 164-70 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-71
150:576
§ 164-72. Storage.
§ 164-73. Utilities.
All utilities shall be placed underground. Utilities shall include but are not
limited to gas mains, telephone lines and electrical lines.
§ 164-74. Signs.
Signs shall be permitted subject to the provisions of Article XVII of this
chapter.
§ 164-75. Procedures.
All access roads to loading berths shall be at least 14 feet wide; except
that if tractor-trailers would be accommodated, then the roads shall be
14 feet wide for one-way traffic and 22 feet wide for two-way traffic.
A. No outdoor storage shall be permitted in the front yard.
All permitted uses and accessory activities shall be confined within
completely enclosed buildings, with the exception of off-street parking
spaces, screened outdoor storage areas, off-street loading berths,
employee recreational facilities and those exceptions made elsewhere
within this section.
B.
An application for zonal classification in the Planned Industrial Zone
shall be accompanied by a development plan prepared in accordance
with the provisions of § 164-188 of this chapter.
A.
In addition to all other standards and criteria, in considering an
application for the Planned Industrial Zone the Common Council shall
also consider the capability of the street or road system, highway and
road access and the availability and capability of existing water and
sewage systems.
B.
All Planned Industrial Zone projects shall be subject to site plan
approvals provided in Article XXV.
C.
A person may apply, either as part of an original application for zoning
classification or as an amendment to a previously approved
development plan, to designate a certain area of the Planned Industrial
Zone for retail and commercial uses as part of the development plan,
subject to the conditions and restrictions delineated below: [Added
9-9-2013 by Ord. No. 846]
The gross acreage of such uses does not exceed 15% of the acreage
of the Planned Industrial Zone project.
The area of the retail uses shall be considered to include the
building area containing the retail uses and the supporting
(a)
(1)
D.
§ 164-71 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-75
150:577
parking lot area, but not required yard setbacks and open
space.
(b) No variance to the acreage limitation of 15% may be granted.
Uses allowed either as of right or by special exception in the PI
Planned Industrial Zone shall not be included in the acreage
limitation of 15%.
(c)
The size of any individual retail or commercial use may not exceed
a maximum of 6,000 square feet, except for day-care centers and
health clubs, which may not exceed a maximum of 12,000 square
feet. The area of a canopy over gasoline pumps shall not be
included in the size limitation of 6,000 square feet for a
convenience store with gasoline pumps.
(2)
The development of the retail or commercial space shall be phased
in with the development of the industrial uses such that the ratio
of retail or commercial space to industrial space that has been
constructed and for which a use and occupancy permit has been
issued may not exceed 25% at any time until the business park is
complete.
(3)
A retail or commercial use may not be approved under this section
if it would constitute a substantial change in the character of the
neighborhood.
(4)
The retail and commercial uses allowed under this subsection are
limited to the following uses:
Local retail business or service shops, including:
Alcoholic beverage package stores
Bakery shops
Banks, savings and loan institutions
Beauty shops and barbershops
Candy stores
Cellular or phone (wireless) sales and service
Clothing stores
Computer sales and repair shops
Convenience stores with or without gasoline pumps
Day-care facility
Dress or millinery shops
Drugstores
Dry cleaners
Dry goods or variety stores
Florist or garden shops
(a)
(5)
§ 164-75 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-75
150:578
§ 164-76. Conflicts.
Wherever any requirement or performance standard contained in this zone
is in conflict with any applicable state or federal requirement or
performance standard, the state or federal requirement or performance
standard shall control and supersede the provisions of this zone.
Food and grocery stores
Fruit or vegetable stores
Fuel stations
Furniture and upholstering stores
Gift or jewelry shops
Hardware stores
Health clubs
Laundromats
Laundry or dry-cleaning establishments and pickup stations
Office supply stores
Pharmacies with or without drive-throughs
Photographic studios
Planned business center
Radio and television studios or repair shops
Restaurants and lunch rooms with or without drive-throughs
(including fast food)
Shoe repair shops
Specialty shops
Sporting goods or hobby shops
Tailor establishments
Taverns
Video production facilities
§ 164-75 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-76
150:579

ARTICLE XIII
PD-4 Planned Development - 4 Zone
§ 164-77. Purpose.
It is the purpose of the PD-4 Planned Development - 4 Zone to provide
suitable sites for relatively low density types of residential structures
around the edge of the City which would permit the optimum amount of
freedom and variety in the design and layout of such varying types of use
of those public and nonpublic facilities required in connection with new
residential development.
§ 164-78. Uses permitted.
The following uses are permitted in the Planned Development - 4 Zone:
The following objectives are sought in providing for the planned
development:
To provide a more attractive and varied living environment than
would be possible through the strict application of residential
Euclidean zonal district requirements.
(1)
To encourage developers to use a more creative approach in the
development of land.
(2)
To encourage more efficient allocation and maintenance of common
open space in residential areas through private initiative.
(3)
To encourage variety in the physical development patterns of
residential areas.
(4)
A.
The fact that an application complies with all specific requirements and
purposes set forth herein shall not be deemed to create a presumption
that the application is, in fact, compatible with surrounding land uses
and, in itself, shall not be sufficient to require the granting of any
application.
B.
Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to any permitted
use in this section.
A.
B. Agriculture, as limited in § 164-24C of this chapter.
C. Day-care facilities for not more than six children or elderly persons.
D. Multiple-family dwellings up to three stories in height.
Places of public assembly, recreational buildings and accessory
buildings, if included in an approved development plan wherein it has
been deemed that they are advantageous for the purpose of serving the
planned unit development and the local community.
E.
F. Single-family attached dwellings.
§ 164-77 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-78
150:581
§ 164-79. Special exceptions.
The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions in accordance
with the provisions of Article XXII of this chapter:
§ 164-80. Dimensional requirements.
G. Single-family detached dwellings.
H. Single-family semidetached dwellings.
Retirement homes, if included in the approved development plan, and
provided that they are adequately located near necessary convenient
services. The Commission may evaluate each retirement home unit as
1/2 of a dwelling unit in the calculation of the total density where the
applicant can adequately demonstrate that such units require fewer
services per unit than an ordinary residential dwelling unit.
I.
A. All uses listed in § 164-30.
Multiple-family dwellings four stories in height and subject to all other
pertinent provisions of this chapter.
B.
Sites eligible for consideration as a Planned Development - 4 Zone shall
be for a tract of land of at least two acres and not more than 50 acres
in size, classified in the R-10,000 Zone or the R-7,500 Zone prior to
reclassification to the PD-4 Zone.
A.
Density.
Residential density shall be approved generally on the capabilities
of the existing and/or planned utilities and such other standards
and requirements as enumerated in this chapter, but in no case
shall the density exceed four dwelling units per net acre.
(1)
Calculation of net acreage shall include all land within the PD-4
Zone project, except floodplain areas and slopes in excess of 25%.
(2)
B.
Lot area, lot width and yard requirements.
The following minimum per unit requirements shall apply:
Dwelling Type
Lot
Width at
Building
Line
(feet)
Front
Yard
(feet)
Side Yard
(feet)
Rear
Yard
(feet)
Single-family
detached
70 30 8 25
Single-family
semidetached
35 25 8 25
(1)
C.
§ 164-78 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-80
150:582
§ 164-81. Building height.
The maximum principal building height shall be three stories, but not to
exceed 40 feet in height. No accessory structure shall exceed two stories or
20 feet in height.
§ 164-82. Open space.
In order that open space and sites for public use may be properly located
and preserved as the community develops and in order that the cost of
providing the open space and recreation sites necessary to serve the
additional families brought into the community by residential developments
may be most equitably apportioned on the basis of the additional need
created by residential development, the following provisions are
established:
Dwelling Type
Lot
Width at
Building
Line
(feet)
Front
Yard
(feet)
Side Yard
(feet)
Rear
Yard
(feet)
Single-family
attached
20 25 15 40
Multiple-family 70 25 15 40
Single-family attached and multiple-family dwellings must have a
common access or easement to the front and rear of the lot from a
public right-of-way.
(2)
There shall not be more than six single-family attached dwellings
in any one attached row. In any one row of single-family attached
dwellings there shall be no more than three continuous singlefamily
attached dwellings with the same building line, and the
variations in building line must be at least two feet.
(3)
A maximum of 12 multiple-family dwellings shall be contained in
one building structure. Building structures containing multiplefamily
dwellings may be attached to each other, but not more than
three such structures may be connected in a group.
(4)
Single-family detached dwellings, in all events, shall be on lots with
a minimum lot area of 7,000 square feet.
(5)
Twenty percent of the net project area shall be dedicated and deeded
without charge to the City for common open space. The City may
waive the right to such dedication to it and instead may require the
open space areas be deeded to, improved, operated and maintained by
a property owners' association consisting of the residents of a PD-4
Zone project. Land designated for this purpose shall be deeded to the
property owners' association or to the City, and recording references
A.
§ 164-80 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-82
150:583
to the Articles of Incorporation with respect to such property owners'
association or to the City shall be noted in the final plat prior to
recording. The City Attorney shall review, at the applicant's cost, and
approve any covenants relating to ownership and maintenance of such
lands prior to recording of the final plat.
When the required open space is deemed by the Planning Commission
to be inappropriate for the planned development based upon the size of
the development or other factors unique to the proposed development,
the dedication required by Subsection A above may be waived, and the
applicant/developer shall pay, in lieu of a dedication, a fee as provided
in the General Fee Ordinance97 in lieu of the actual establishment of
land areas for recreational purposes. Such payments shall be held in
escrow and used by the City for the purposes of acquiring, developing
and maintaining open space land in the general area of the PD-4 Zone
project and shall be used for this, and no other, purpose. [Amended
11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 792]
B.
In determining the type and location of common open space, the
Commission, in consultation with the City Parks Board, shall review
the area's needs for parks and recreational sites in the area. Open
space required in a PD-4 Zone project shall have access to a street
by a fee simple right-of-way or easement and be located so as to be
reasonably accessible from all dwellings within the PD-4 Zone project.
In all instances, a minimum of 50% of the recreational land shall be
suitable for dry-ground active recreational uses.
C.
Where the land is to be or had been adversely affected by development
operations such as clearing, grading or drainage, or a combination
thereof, a construction plan for a suitable recreational site shall be
approved by the Planning Director and such other appropriate
governmental agencies as determined by said Director. Changes or
improvements to a construction plan shall be in accordance with the
standards of the above agencies and approved by them. [Amended
1-28-2008 by Ord. No. 774]
D.
In addition to the minimum required open space, the applicant/
developer may offer additional contiguous open space such as
floodplains, steep slopes and wooded areas to the City for parkland. At
its discretion, the City can accept or reject this additional land.
E.
The approval by the Commission of a final subdivision plat shall not
be deemed to constitute or imply acceptance of the City of any park,
recreation or other public land shown on the plat until such land is
improved as contained in the development plan and site plan of the
PD-4 Zone project and deeded.
F.
97.Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
§ 164-82 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-83
150:584
§ 164-83. Off-street parking.
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Article XVI of this
chapter.
§ 164-84. Signs.
Signs shall be permitted subject to the provisions of Article XVII of this
chapter.
§ 164-85. Dedication of land.
Such land as may be required for public streets, parks, schools and other
public uses shall be dedicated in accordance with the requirements of the
laws of the City and the adopted general plan and Master Plans and other
plans as may be applicable. The lands to be dedicated shall be so identified
upon development plans and site plans required under the provisions of this
chapter and any other laws of the City.
§ 164-86. Compatibility.
All uses permitted and special exceptions shall achieve the purposes set
forth in § 164-77 and be compatible with the other uses proposed for
the planned development and with the other uses existing or proposed
adjacent to and in the vicinity of the area covered by the proposed planned
development.
§ 164-87. Procedure.
In order to assist in accomplishing such compatibility, the following
requirements shall apply where a PD-4 Zone project adjoins an existing
single-family detached dwelling neighborhood or land classified in the
R-10,000 or R-7,500 Zones, but compliance with these requirements
shall not in and of itself be deemed to create a presumption of
compatibility.
No building, other than a single-family detached dwelling, shall be
constructed within 200 feet of the nearest existing dwelling; and
(1)
All single-family detached dwellings constructed within 200 feet
of the nearest existing dwelling shall comply with the minimum
development standards of the zonal classifications of the adjoining
land.
(2)
A.
The Planning Commission shall have the discretion to increase or
decrease the strict application of the requirements contained in
Subsection A(1) and (2) hereof in instances in which the adjoining
property or properties will not be adversely affected by such increase
or decrease.
B.
§ 164-83 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-87
150:585
An application for zonal classification in the Planned Development -
4 Zone shall be accompanied by a development plan prepared in
accordance with the provisions of § 164-188 of this chapter.
A.
In addition to all other standards and criteria, in considering an
application for the Planned Development - 4 Zone, the Common Council
shall also consider the present or potential adequacy of schools, the
capability of the street or road system, highway and road access, the
availability and capability of existing water and sewage systems and the
availability and capability of all other public facilities.
B.
All PD-4 Zone projects shall be subject to site plan approval as provided
in Article XXV.
C.
§ 164-87 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-87
150:586
ARTICLE XIV
PD-9 Planned Development - 9 Zone
§ 164-88. Purpose.
It is the purpose of the PD-9 Planned Development - 9 Zone to provide
suitable sites for multifamily projects and more diverse types of residential
structures than would normally occur around the business district of the
City. In addition, this district is intended to permit the optimum amount of
freedom and variety in the design and layout of higher-density residential
areas.
§ 164-89. Uses permitted.
The following uses are permitted in the Planned Development - 9 Zone:
The following objectives are sought in providing for the one or more
types of residential dwellings in a planned development:
To provide a more attractive and varied living environment than
would be possible through the strict application of residential
Euclidean zonal district requirements.
(1)
To encourage developers to use a more creative approach in the
development of land.
(2)
To encourage more efficient allocation and maintenance of common
open space in residential areas through private initiative.
(3)
To encourage variety in the physical development patterns of
residential areas which are conducive to accommodating such
development.
(4)
A.
The fact that an application complies with all specific requirements and
purposes set forth herein shall not be deemed to create a presumption
that the application is, in fact, compatible with surrounding land uses
and, in itself, shall not be sufficient to require the granting of any
application.
B.
Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to any permitted
use in this section.
A.
B. Agriculture, as limited in Article V of this chapter.
C. Day-care facilities for not more than six children or elderly persons.
D. Home occupations.
E. Multiple-family dwellings.
Places of public assembly, recreational buildings and accessory
buildings, if included in an approved development plan wherein it has
been deemed that they are advantageous for the purpose of serving the
planned development.
F.
§ 164-88 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-89
150:587
§ 164-90. Special exceptions.
The following uses may be permitted as a special exception in accordance
with the provisions of Article XXII of this chapter:
§ 164-91. Dimensional requirements.
G. Single-family attached dwellings.
H. Single-family detached dwellings.
I. Single-family semidetached dwellings.
Retirement homes, if included in the approved development plan, and
provided that they are adequately located near necessary convenient
services. The Commission may evaluate each retirement home unit as
1/2 of a dwelling unit in the calculation of the total density where the
applicant can adequately demonstrate that such units require fewer
services per unit than an ordinary residential dwelling unit.
J.
A. All uses listed in § 164-30 of this chapter.
Multiple-family dwellings six stories in height and subject to all other
pertinent provisions of this chapter.
B.
Area requirements. A site eligible for consideration as a Planned
Development - 9 Zone shall consist of a tract of land not exceeding 10
acres in size, including particularly vacant tracts of land on which any
existing building or buildings are sufficiently obsolete and are not of
significant historic or architectural value so as to warrant replacement
and redevelopment and classified in the R-7,500 Zone prior to
reclassification to the PD-9 Zone.
A.
Density.
Residential density shall be approved generally on the capabilities
of the existing and/or planned utilities and such other standards
and requirements as enumerated in this chapter, but in no case
shall density exceed nine dwelling units per net acre.
(1)
Calculation of net acreage shall include all land within the planned
development, except floodplain areas and slopes in excess of 25%.
(2)
B.
Lot area, lot width and yard requirements.
(1) The following minimum per unit requirements shall apply:
C.
§ 164-89 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-91
150:588
§ 164-92. Building height.
Maximum principal building height shall not exceed three stories or 40 feet
in height. No accessory structure shall exceed two stories or 20 feet in
height.
§ 164-93. Open space.
In order that open space and sites for public use may be properly located
and preserved as the community develops and in order that the cost of
providing the open space and recreation sites necessary to serve the
additional families brought into the community by residential developments
may be most equitably apportioned on the basis of the additional need
created by residential development, the following provisions are
established:
Dwelling Type
Lot
Width at
Building
Line
(feet)
Front
Yard
(feet)
Side Yard
(feet)
Rear Yard
(feet)
Single-family
detached
60 20 8 25
Single-family
semidetached
35 20 8 25
Single-family
attached
18 20 15 40
Multiple-family 70 20 15 40
Single-family attached and multiple-family dwellings must have a
common access or easement to the front and rear of the lot from a
public right-of-way.
(2)
There shall not be more than six single-family attached dwellings
in any one attached row. In any one row of single-family attached
dwellings there shall be no more than three continuous singlefamily
attached dwellings with the same building line, and the
variations in building line must be at least two feet.
(3)
A maximum of 12 multifamily dwellings shall be contained in one
building structure. Building structures containing multiple-family
dwellings may be attached to each other, but not more than three
such structures may be connected in a group.
(4)
Single-family detached dwellings, in all events, shall be on lots with
a minimum lot area of 6,000 square feet.
(5)
Twenty percent of the net project area shall be dedicated and deeded
without charge to the City for common open space. The City may
A.
§ 164-91 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-93
150:589
waive the right to such dedication to it and instead may require the
open space areas be deeded to, improved, operated and maintained by
a property owners' association consisting of the residents of a PD-9
Zone project. Land designated for this purpose shall be deeded to the
property owners' association or to the City, and recording references
to the Articles of Incorporation with respect to such property owners'
association or the City shall be noted in the final plat prior to recording.
The City Attorney shall review, at the applicant's cost, and approve any
covenants relating to ownership and maintenance of such lands prior to
recording of the final plat.
When the required open space is deemed by the Planning Commission
to be inappropriate for the planned development based upon the size
of the development, the dedication required by Subsection A above
may be waived, and the applicant/developer shall pay, in lieu of a
dedication, a fee as provided in the General Fee Ordinance,98 in lieu of
the actual establishment of land areas for recreational purposes. Such
payments shall be held in escrow and used by the City for the purposes
of acquiring and developing and maintaining open space land in the
general area of the PD-9 Zone project and shall be used for this, and no
other, purpose. [Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 792]
B.
In determining the type and location of common open space, the
Common Council shall review the area's needs for parks and
recreational sites in the area. Open space land required in a PD-9 Zone
project shall have access to a street by a fee simple right-of-way or
easement and be located so as to be reasonably accessible from all
dwellings within the PD-9 Zone project. In all instances, a minimum
of 50% of the recreational land shall be suitable for dry-ground active
recreational uses.
C.
Where the land is to be or has been adversely affected by development
operations such as clearing, grading or drainage, or a combination
thereof, a construction plan for a suitable recreational site shall be
approved by the Planning Director and such other appropriate
governmental agencies as determined by said Director. Changes or
improvements to a construction plan shall be in accordance with the
standards of the above agencies and approved by them. [Amended
1-28-2008 by Ord. No. 774]
D.
In addition to the minimum required open space, the applicant/
developer may offer additional contiguous open space such as
floodplains, steep slopes and wooded areas to the City for parkland. At
its discretion, the City can accept or reject this additional land.
E.
The approval by the Commission of a final subdivision plat shall not
be deemed to constitute or imply acceptance by the City of any park,
recreation or other public land shown on the plat until such land is
F.
98.Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
§ 164-93 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-93
150:590
§ 164-94. Off-street parking.
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Article XVI of this
chapter.
§ 164-95. Signs.
Signs shall be permitted subject to the provisions of Article XVII of this
chapter.
§ 164-96. Dedication of land.
Such land as may be required for public streets, parks, schools and other
public uses shall be dedicated in accordance with the requirements of the
laws of the City and the adopted general plan and Master Plans and other
plans as may be applicable. The lands to be dedicated shall be so identified
upon development plans and site plans required under the provisions of this
chapter and any other laws of the City.
§ 164-97. Compatibility.
All uses permitted and special exceptions shall achieve the purposes set
forth in § 164-88 and be compatible with the other uses proposed for
the planned development and with the other uses existing or proposed
adjacent to and in the vicinity of the area covered by the proposed planned
development.
§ 164-98. Procedure.
improved as contained in the development plan and site plan of the
PD-9 Zone project and deeded.
In order to assist in accomplishing such compatibility, the following
requirements shall apply where a PD-9 Zone project adjoins an existing
single-family detached dwelling neighborhood or land classified in the
R-10,000 or R-7,500 Zones, but compliance with these requirements
shall not in and of itself be deemed to create a presumption of
compatibility.
No building, other than a single-family detached dwelling, shall be
constructed within 100 feet of the nearest existing dwelling; and
(1)
All single-family detached dwellings constructed within 100 feet
of the nearest existing dwelling shall comply with the minimum
development standards of the zonal classifications of the adjoining
land.
(2)
A.
The Commission shall have the discretion to increase or decrease the
strict application of the requirements contained in Subsection A(1) and
(2) hereof in instances in which the adjoining property or properties will
not be adversely affected by such increase or decrease.
B.
§ 164-93 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-98
150:591
An application for zonal classification in the PD-9 Zone shall be
accompanied by a development plan prepared in accordance with the
provisions of § 164-188 of this chapter.
A.
In addition to all other standards and criteria in considering an
application for the PD-9 Zone, the Common Council shall also consider
the present or potential adequacy of schools, the capability of the street
or road system, highway and road access and the availability, capability
of existing water and sewage systems and the availability and capability
of all other public facilities.
B.
All PD-9 Zone projects shall be subject to site plan approval as provided
in Article XXV.
C.
§ 164-98 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-98
150:592
ARTICLE XV
PRSC Planned Regional Shopping Center Zone
§ 164-99. Purpose.
§ 164-100. Uses permitted.
It is the purpose of this zone to provide a method for the orderly
grouping and spacing of commercial development on properties which
abut or front on and have access to heavily traveled major highways
with a planned or existing pavement of at least four lanes or on
properties which are recommended for such zoning on approved and
adopted Master Plans. This zone is intended to provide sites for
commercial activities that require large land areas and do not depend
only upon adjoining uses for reasons of comparison shopping and
pedestrian trade. At the same time, it also is intended that this zone
establish and preserve specialized commercial areas near highway
interchanges to serve regional or countywide consumer needs as well
as the needs of local City residents. Further, it is intended to provide
suitable sites for development of an integrated regional or countywide
shopping center or to promote commercial facilities to serve the needs
of county and City residents. Additionally, it is the intent that the
frequency, design and location of points of direct access to the highway
be controlled by restricting development and minimizing interference
with traffic movements.
A.
Commercial facilities contemplated by this zone are also to be provided
in relation to population growth and related residential development
and/or location of major thoroughfares; to prevent the proliferation
of strip or ribbon development along major thoroughfares; and to
encourage more efficient and more attractive development of
commercial facilities in a compact and convenient location without
adversely affecting the physical development patterns of residential
areas.
B.
The fact that an application complies with all specific requirements and
purposes set forth herein shall not be deemed to create a presumption
that the application is, in fact, compatible with surrounding land uses
and, in itself, shall not be sufficient to require the granting of any
application.
C.
No building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure
shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered, enlarged or maintained,
except for one or more of the following uses:
Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to any
permitted use in this section.
(1)
(2) Alcoholic beverage package stores.
(3) Antique and arts and crafts shops.
A.
§ 164-99 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-100
150:593
(4) Appliance stores.
(5) Bakery shops.
(6) Beauty parlors or barbershops.
(7) Building materials sales and storage yards which are enclosed.
(8) Candy stores.
(9) Clothing stores.
(10)Computer and electronics sales and service shops.
(11)Customer printing shops.
(12)Dairy product stores.
Department stores with or without auto accessory and service
stores.
(13)
(14)Dress or millinery shops.
(15)Drugstores.
(16)Dry-goods or variety shops.
(17)Financial institutions.
(18)Florist or garden shops.
(19)Food and grocery stores.
(20)Fruit or vegetable stores.
(21)Furniture and upholstering stores.
(22)Gift or jewelry shops.
(23)Hardware stores.
(24)Hotels and motels.
(25)Laundromats.
(26)Laundry or dry-cleaning establishments and pickup stations.
(27)Meat markets.
(28)Offices, professional and business.
(29)Pet shops.
(30)Photographic studios.
(31)Radio and television studios.
(32)Radio and television repair shops.
§ 164-100 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-100
150:594
(33)Restaurants and lunchrooms.
Schools: business, dancing, music, trade or others of a commercial
nature.
(34)
(35)Shoe sales and repair shops.
Single-family detached dwellings, single-family semidetached
dwellings, single-family attached dwellings and multiple-family
dwellings as provided in Subsection A(45).
(36)
(37)Social clubs, fraternal organizations and community meeting halls.
(38)Specialty shops.
(39)Sporting goods or hobby shops.
(40)Stationery stores.
(41)Tailor establishments.
(42)Taverns and nightclubs.
(43)Taxi stands.
(44)Theaters and private assembly halls.
Residential uses.
Residential dwelling unit uses shall be approved generally on
the capabilities of the existing and/or planned utilities and
such other standards and requirements as enumerated in this
chapter, but in no case shall more than 20% of the site of
the planned regional shopping center be devoted to residential
dwelling unit uses, and in no event shall residential uses be
permitted in the same building or structure with a commercial
use.
(a)
Calculation of the area permitted to be devoted to residential
dwelling unit use shall include all land within the planned
regional shopping center, except one-hundred-year floodplain
areas and slopes in excess of 25%.
(b)
(c) The following minimum per unit requirements shall apply:
(45)
§ 164-100 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-100
150:595
Dwelling Type
Maximum
Density
Allowable
(units per
acre)
Lot
Width
at
Building
Line
(feet)
Front
Yard
(feet)
Side
Yard
(feet)
Rear
Yard
(feet)
Single-family
detached
5 60 20 8 25
Single-family
semidetached
7 35 20 8 25
Single-family
attached
10 18 20 15 40
Multiple-family 18 70 20 15 40
Single-family attached and multiple-family dwellings must
have a common access or easement to the front and rear of the
lot from a public right-of-way.
(d)
There shall not be more than six single-family attached
dwellings in any one attached row. In any one row of singlefamily
attached dwellings there shall be no more than three
continuous single-family attached dwellings with the same
building line, and the variations in building line must be at
least two feet.
(e)
A maximum of 12 multifamily dwellings shall be contained
in one building structure. Building structures containing
multiple-family dwellings may be attached to each other, but
not more than three such structures may be connected in a
group.
(f)
Single-family detached dwellings, in all events, shall be on lots
with a minimum lot area of 6,000 square feet.
(g)
Single-family detached dwellings may be developed with a zero
lot line, wherein the dwelling is sited on one property line of
the lot with a totally private fifteen-foot side yard.
(h)
No principal dwelling unit structure shall exceed three stories
or 40 feet in height, and no accessory building thereto shall
exceed two stories or 20 feet in height.
(i)
Not more than 25% of the net area permitted to be devoted
to residential use may be covered by buildings, including
accessory buildings.
(j)
A corner lot for a dwelling unit shall have a minimum width of
125 feet, measured at the building line along each street front,
and shall have two front yards.
(k)
§ 164-100 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-100
150:596
§ 164-101. Special exceptions. [Amended 10-26-1998 by Ord. No.
631]
The following uses may be permitted as a special exception in accordance
with the provisions of Article XXII:
§ 164-102. Development mode.
The dominant form of development in the planned regional shopping center
shall be an enclosed commercial mall with a minimum gross leasable area
of 300,000 square feet, which includes department stores. The mall shall
be covered with a roof and have an interior courtyard onto which all retail
Outdoor carnivals, for the substantial benefit of bona fide
charitable, fraternal or municipal partnerships, not more than
three times per calendar year, subject to the property owner’s
compliance with any regulatory permit or licensing requirements
imposed by the City for carnival operations. [Added 4-11-2011 by
Ord. No. 823]
(46)
Animal hospitals, veterinary clinics and accessory kennels without
exterior runways. [Added 8-12-2013 by Ord. No. 845]
(47)
Telecommunications installations, subject to the facility limitations
in § 139-28.2A(3)(a) through (f) and the screening requirements for
modern appurtenances in § 164-131.3. [Added 9-25-2017 by Ord.
No. 869]
(48)
A. Adult entertainment activities.
B. Art, trade, business or nursery schools.
Auto accessory and service stores, if not part of or incidental to a
department store.
C.
D. Carpentering shops containing 500 square feet or less.
E. Churches and all other places of worship.
F. Drive-through eating establishments.
Public buildings, structures and properties of the recreational, cultural,
institutional, educational, administrative or public-service type,
including fire, ambulance or rescue squad.
G.
Public utility buildings, structures or uses, including essential utility
equipment, as enumerated in § 164-139.
H.
I. Retirement, nursing or boarding homes.
J. Service stations, subject to the provisions of § 164-149.
Telecommunications facilities, subject to the requirements of
§ 164-139.1.
K.
§ 164-100 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-102
150:597
establishments in the mall shall have their main point of egress and ingress.
The mall structure must be centrally located upon the site of the planned
regional shopping center. As used herein, "gross leasable area" is defined
as the total floor area designed for tenant occupancy and exclusive use,
including basements, mezzanines and the upper floors, if any, expressed in
square feet measured from the center lines of joint partitions and exteriors
of outside walls. This definition is limited to the mall and does not include
separate freestanding buildings or additional stores as may be approved for
the shopping center.
§ 164-103. Dimensional requirements.
§ 164-104. Building coverage and height. [Amended 11-26-2001 by
Ord. No. 674]
§ 164-105. Roads and sidewalks.
Area requirements. Sites eligible for consideration as a planned
regional shopping center shall consist of a tract of land containing not
less than 70 acres in size and classified in the B Business Zone prior to
reclassification to the Planned Regional Shopping Center Zone, unless
such zoning is granted by virtue of a sectional map amendment or by
the annexation procedures.
A.
Yard requirements. The following minimum requirements shall be
observed:
Except as provided in the following Subsection B(2), all
nonresidential structures shall be set back as follows:
(a) At least 50 feet from major streets and highways.
(b) At least 30 feet from interior streets and service roads.
(c) At least 10 feet from all other lot lines.
(1)
All nonresidential structures shall be set back from residential lot
lines at least 100 feet if the residential lot is not recommended for
commercial or industrial zoning on a land use plan.
(2)
B.
The total floor area ratio (FAR) of nonresidential structures, not
including parking areas, shall not exceed a floor area ratio of one.
A.
B. No nonresidential structure shall exceed 75 feet in height.
Access to the planned regional shopping center from an abutting major
highway shall be by way of channelized service drives providing for the
separation of all vehicular movements, acceleration, deceleration and
left-turn lanes, except where existing adjoining development makes it
unfeasible.
A.
§ 164-102 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-105
150:598
§ 164-106. Off-street parking.
§ 164-107. Landscaping.
A thirty-foot-wide minimum landscaped edge shall be required along all
external boundaries of the planned regional shopping center and along the
boundary between a residential component and the rest of the shopping
center. A landscape concept plan showing all landscape elements, including
earthen mounding, deciduous or evergreen planting and/or screen walls
or fences, appropriate to buffer or enhance the shopping center, designed
by a registered landscape architect, shall be approved as part of the
development plan for the planned regional shopping center and
implemented as part of the site plan for the shopping center.
§ 164-108. Utilities.
All internal vehicular circulation and internal roadways on the site of
the planned regional shopping center shall be in accordance with the
approved development plan.
B.
Internal pedestrian walkways shall be provided and shall form a logical,
safe and convenient system for pedestrian access to all facilities on the
site of the planned regional shopping center, including the enclosed
mall and including access between the center and any residential
component in the center. Construction standards for pedestrian
walkways shall be in accord with the approved development plan.
C.
All internal roadways and all internal pedestrian walkways shall be
paved and maintained in good repair.
D.
Nonresidential parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in
accordance with Article XVI of this chapter, with the following
exceptions:
The parking ratio shall be four spaces per 1,000 feet of gross
leasable area. [Amended 11-26-2001 by Ord. No. 674]
(1)
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 164-113, an area equal to 10%
of the area devoted to parking shall be landscaped islands. Said
landscaped islands shall be planted with a minimum of one twoand-
one-half-inch-caliper shade tree for each 350 square feet of
such islands. Said requirement is in addition to those provided in
§ 164-107, Landscaping.
(2)
The Planning Commission may approve up to 40% of the parking
spaces as parking for compact cars.
(3)
A.
Residential parking. Off-street parking for a residential component of a
planned regional shopping center shall be provided in accordance with
Article XVI of this chapter.
B.
§ 164-105 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-108
150:599
§ 164-109. Signs.
Signs shall be permitted subject to the provisions of Article XVII of this
chapter.
§ 164-110. Procedure.
All utility lines in the planned regional shopping center shall be placed
underground. The developer or subdivider shall ensure final and proper
completion and installation of utility lines as provided by subdivision
processing regulations.
A.
Street, road, service drive and pedestrian-walkway light standards shall
be provided by the developer or subdivider in accordance with the
approved site plan.
B.
Fire hydrants shall be provided by the developer or subdivider in
accordance with the approved site plan and, in all events, shall be
located along streets, roads or public ways readily accessible for Fire
Department use.
C.
An application for final classification in the Planned Regional Shopping
Center Zone shall be accompanied by a development plan prepared in
accordance with the provisions of § 164-188 of this chapter.
A.
In addition to all other standards and criteria, in considering an
application for the Planned Regional Shopping Center Zone, the
Common Council shall also consider the capability of the street or road
system, highway and road access and the availability and capability of
existing water and sewage systems.
B.
All planned regional shopping center projects shall be subject to site
plan approval as provided in Article XXV.
C.
§ 164-108 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-110
150:600
ARTICLE XVA
Medical Cannabis Overlay District
[Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 859]
§ 164-110.1. Purpose.
§ 164-110.2. Overlay District designated.
The Medical Cannabis Overlay District shall apply to all properties located
within the district as designated on the City of Westminster Zoning Map as
"Medical Cannabis Overlay District."99
§ 164-110.3. Relationship to underlying zone.
The purpose of the Medical Cannabis Overlay District is to implement
the provisions of the Annotated Code of Maryland, Health-General
Article, Title 13, Subtitle 33, and the Code of Maryland Regulations
(COMAR) 10.62.01 to 10.62.35, with respect to the location of facilities
for growing, processing and dispensing medical cannabis within the
City, in order to ensure that such uses are located in zones and subject
to conditions that serve the public interests in assuring the availability
of cannabis to qualified patients lawfully entitled to use cannabis for
medical purposes, while minimizing the potential for adverse impacts
on adjacent properties and neighborhoods.
A.
This article imposes requirements on medical cannabis growers,
processors and distributors in addition to those imposed by this chapter
upon other uses in the underlying zones upon which the medical
cannabis overlay zone is imposed.
B.
The overlay district is designed to achieve the following goals:
(1) To promote development in the district.
To promote the availability of medical cannabis to qualified patients
lawfully entitled to use and possess it.
(2)
To implement the goals of state law and the regulations of the
Natalie M. Laprade Medical Cannabis Commission permitting the
growing, processing, and dispensing of medical cannabis.
(3)
C.
Facilities for growers, processors or a dispensary may only be
permitted on property located in the Medical Cannabis Overlay District
upon the successful application and adoption by the Mayor and
Common Council of an ordinance designating a Medical Cannabis
Overlay District for the subject property. Such a designation is only
related to the permitted use on the property.
A.
All other requirements of underlying zoning districts remain applicable
to the subject property.
B.
99.Editor's Note: Said map is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 164-110.1 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-110.4
150:601
§ 164-110.4. Compatibility with adjacent uses; procedure for
designation as floating zone.
An owner of property located in an area eligible to be designated as a
Medical Cannabis Overlay District may make application for the subject
property as a floating zone.
A.
An application for a Medical Cannabis Overlay District must be
accompanied by a site development plan and shall be subject to site
plan approval as provided in Article XXV.
B.
Maryland state standards for facilities.
An application for a medical cannabis grower facility must include
written and graphic documentation showing the proposed facility
will meet state standards related to conspicuous display of license;
greatest achievable level of privacy and security, including
perimeter fencing and security gates to prevent unauthorized
entry; secured premises; security lighting; security alarm systems;
and video surveillance, as detailed in the Annotated Code of
Maryland, Health-General Article, Title 13, Subtitle 33, and the
Code of Maryland Regulations (COMAR) 10.62.10.
(1)
An application for a medical cannabis processor facility must
include written and graphic documentation showing the proposed
facility will meet state standards related to conspicuous display of
license; secure premises; security lighting; security alarm systems;
and video surveillance, as detailed in the Annotated Code of
Maryland Health-General Article, Title 13, Subtitle 33, and the
Code of Maryland Regulations (COMAR) 10.62.21.
(2)
An application for a medical cannabis dispensary must include
written and graphic documentation showing the proposed facility
will meet state standards related to separate premises from
processor; secure premises; secure room; secure entry; security
lighting; security alarm systems; and video surveillance, as detailed
in the Annotated Code of Maryland, Health-General Article, Title
13, Subtitle 33, and the Code of Maryland Regulations (COMAR)
10.62.27.
(3)
All applications must provide all other required submittals
pursuant to Maryland law.
(4)
C.
Any building or portion of a building that is subject to compliance with
this subsection shall be located at least 1,000 feet from any other lot
which contains a public school.
D.
In addition to all other standards and criteria, when considering an
application for the designation of a floating Medical Cannabis Overlay
District, the Common Council shall consider the proximity of public
schools; the adequacy of streets and highways; the availability of public
water and wastewater systems; and the adequacy of all other public
E.
§ 164-110.4 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-110.4
150:602
facilities and public services that would be needed to serve the
proposed use.
§ 164-110.4 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-110.4
150:603

ARTICLE XVI
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 164-111. General provisions and requirements.
For the following uses of buildings hereinafter erected or increased
from the size existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter, offstreet
parking facilities which are outside the public right-of-way shall
be required as provided herein.
A.
Parking standards. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided for
uses in zones, must not be more than 300 feet in distance from an
entrance to said uses, shall accommodate normal parking requirements
and shall meet the standards listed below.
B.
Parking facilities in Central Business Zone; benefit assessment charge
and annual maintenance fee. As to all construction or uses, including
residential uses, commenced in the Central Business Zone after the
effective date of this section, to the extent that the Planning Director
determines that the size, configuration or other physical characteristic
of the site of the planned use makes it impossible for the user to meet
the standards in this section, thereby creating a hardship, the Planning
Director may, in the Planning Director's discretion, upon application
from the user, allow a reduction in the number of spaces; provided,
however, that the user shall pay the City a one-time benefit assessment
charge and an annual maintenance fee for each space the user is not
able to provide under the standards in this section as provided in the
General Fee Ordinance.100 [Amended 2-27-1995 by Ord. No. 594;
4-14-1997 by Ord. No. 617; 9-24-2001 by Ord. No. 672; 7-12-2004
by Ord. No. 718; 1-28-2008 by Ord. No. 774; 11-24-2008 by Ord.
No. 792]
Type of Use
Parking Standards
(number of spaces)
Residential
Single-family detached and
semidetached
2 per dwelling unit, minimum of 9
x 18 feet in size per space
Single-family attached 3 per dwelling unit, minimum of 9
x 18 feet in size per space
Multiple-family units 1 per efficiency unit; 1 1/2 per
1-bedroom unit; 2 for 2- or morethan-
2-bedroom units
Multiple-family housing for older
persons
1 1/2 per dwelling unit up to 2
bedrooms, 2 per dwelling unit with
more than 2 bedrooms
Nonresidential
C.
100. Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
§ 164-111 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-111
150:605
Type of Use
Parking Standards
(number of spaces)
Airparks, airports and fields
requirements. Land uses
incidental to air flights are
subject to other parking
standards contained in this
chapter.
Subject to state and federal site
Animal hospitals, veterinary
clinics and kennels
1 per employee, plus 1 per
business vehicle, plus 1 for each
300 square feet of floor space used
for hospital, clinic, office, storage
or other purposes
Automobile service stations 2 per bay and 1 per employee shift
Barbershops and beauty shops 1 per employee, plus 2 per each
chair
Bowling centers 4 per lane and 1 per employee
Churches, parish houses or other
places of worship
1 for each 3 fixed seats, provided
that the number of spaces required
may be reduced by up to 50% if the
place of worship is within 500 feet
of any public parking lot or
commercial parking lot where
sufficient spaces are available, by
permission of the owner(s) without
charge, during the time of services
to make up the additional spaces
required
Commercial establishments
devoted to retail sales, trade,
merchandising or similar uses not
otherwise specified herein
1 for each 250 square feet of floor
area used for retail sales, trade or
merchandising, and 1 for each 300
square feet of floor space used for
office, storage or other purposes
Convents and monasteries 1 for each 250 square feet of floor
space, plus 1 per institutional
vehicle
Country clubs, private clubs,
social clubs and fraternal
organizations
1 per 4 persons of estimated
facility capacity, plus 1 per
employee and 1 per facility vehicle
and piece of mobile equipment
§ 164-111 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-111
150:606
Type of Use
Parking Standards
(number of spaces)
Fire stations, rescue stations and
ambulance services
1 per 1 1/2 employees on a major
shift, plus 1 per facility vehicle,
plus 1 per piece of mobile
equipment, plus 1 for visitor's use
per 5 employees on the maximum
shift
Food stores, supermarkets and
roadside stands
1 per 200 square feet of floor area
devoted to customer service
Funeral homes and mortuaries 1 for each 100 square feet of floor
area devoted to assembly room
purposes, plus 1 per 2 employees,
plus 1 for each vehicle used in
connection with the business
Furniture and appliance stores
and repair shops
1 per 500 square feet of floor area,
plus 1 for each employee
Government buildings and public
buildings
1 for each 250 square feet of floor
area or 2 per office, whichever is
greater
Home occupations 1 in addition to spaces devoted to
use by the residents
Hospitals, nursing, care or
retirement homes
1 for every 4 beds or 1 per 600
square feet of floor area, exclusive
of basement area not devoted to
patients, whichever is greater
Hotels, motels, lodging houses
and boarding- (lodging) or
rooming houses
1 for each rental room or suite. In
addition, if a restaurant in
connection with such use is open
to the public, the off-street parking
facilities for such restaurant shall
be those required for a restaurant
use.
Indoor shooting ranges 1 per employee and 2 per each
shooting and 1 for each 250 square
feet of floor area used for
accessory retail sales
Manufacturing establishments
not otherwise specified herein
1 per 1 1/2 employees on a major
shift, plus 1 per company vehicle
and piece of mobile equipment
Medical and dental offices and
clinics
4 per doctor, plus 1 per employee
or 1 for each 200 square feet of
office space, whichever is greater
§ 164-111 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-111
150:607
Type of Use
Parking Standards
(number of spaces)
Nightclubs and taverns 1 per 4 seats or 1 per 75 square
feet of floor area devoted to
customer service, plus 1 per
employee, whichever is greater
Offices: business, professional or
financial
1 for each 250 square feet of floor
area or 2 per office, whichever is
greater
Radio and television studios 1 for each 250 square feet of floor
area or 2 per office, whichever is
greater
Recreation facilities and centers 1 per 4 persons of estimated
facility capacity, plus 1 per
employee and 1 per facility vehicle
and piece of mobile equipment
Research and development
establishments, including
laboratories
1 per 1 1/2 employees based on the
occupancy load, plus 1 per
company vehicle
Restaurants and lunchrooms 1 per 4 seats, plus 1 per 2
employees
Schools Subject to State Board of
Education site requirements
Sport centers or arenas,
auditoriums not associated with
schools, theaters, private
assembly halls and community
meeting halls
1 per 3 seats or similar
accommodations provided, plus 1
per 2 employees
Swimming pools, commercial 1 per 4 persons of estimated pool
maximum capacity, plus 1 per
employee
Swimming pools, community 1 per 7 persons of estimated pool
maximum capacity, plus 1 per
employee
Taxi stations 1 for every 3 taxis using the station
Truck and motor freight
terminals
1 per motor vehicle to be serviced
by the facility, plus 1 per employee.
With the exception of parking
spaces for employees, all motor
vehicle spaces shall be of a size
adequate for the type of vehicle
serviced by the terminal.
§ 164-111 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-111
150:608
Type of Use
Parking Standards
(number of spaces)
Utility facilities, including
telephone offices and service
centers
1 per 1 1/2 employees on a major
shift, plus 1 per company vehicle
and piece of mobile equipment,
plus 1 for visitors use per 25
employees on the maximum shift,
or 1 per 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area
Warehouses, heavy equipment
storage yards, lumber- and
building materials yards and all
other industrial uses
1 per 1 1/2 employees on a major
shift, plus 1 per company vehicle
and piece of mobile equipment,
plus 1 for visitor's use per 25
employees on the maximum
shift,or 1 per 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area
Wholesale establishments 1 per 2 employees
101Parking facilities in Downtown Parking Area; benefit assessment
charge and annual maintenance fee. As to all construction or uses,
including residential uses, commenced in the Downtown Parking Area
after the effective date of this section, to the extent that the Planning
Director determines that the size, configuration or other physical
characteristic of the site of the planned use makes it impossible for the
user to meet the standards in this section, thereby creating a hardship,
the Director may, in the Director's discretion, upon application from
the user, allow a reduction in the number of spaces; provided, however,
that the user shall pay the City a one-time benefit assessment charge of
and an annual maintenance fee for each space the user is not able to
provide under the standards in this section as provided in the General
Fee Ordinance.102 Additionally, there is hereby granted a reduction in
the number of required parking spaces of 25% for all construction or
uses, commenced in the Downtown Parking Area after July 1, 2004.
The Downtown Parking Area shall be designated on a map adopted by
resolution of the Mayor and Common Council. [Added 7-12-2004 by
Ord. No. 718; amended 1-28-2008 by Ord. No. 774; 11-24-2008
by Ord. No. 792]
D.
All off-street parking and loading facilities required by this article for
any use shall be located on and entirely within the same record lot with
that use, unless otherwise provided for in this article.
E.
Requirements for the provision of parking facilities with respect to two
or more property uses of the same or different types may be satisfied by
the permanent allocation of the requisite number of spaces for each use
F.
101. Editor's Note: Former Subsections D, E and F were redesignated as Subsections E, F and G
to accommodate the addition of a new Subsection D.
102. Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
§ 164-111 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-111
150:609
§ 164-112. Compliance required.
in a common parking facility, cooperatively established and operated.
The number of spaces so designated may not be less than the sum of the
individual requirements for each use, except as hereinafter provided,
and all design requirements contained in this article must be met.
A common parking facility so established must be located so that a
major point of pedestrian access to such common facility is within a
five-hundred-foot walking distance of the entrance to each use served
thereby.
Required off-street parking spaces may be reduced in area by providing
designated parking spaces for bicycles, motorbikes or motorcycles, but
in no event shall such a reduction in area be permitted on more than
5% of the total number of required spaces.
G.
No land shall be used or occupied, no structure shall be designed,
erected, attached, used or occupied and no use shall be operated unless
the parking and loading facilities herein required are provided in at
least the amounts and in accordance with the design standards set forth
in this article.
A.
No automobile off-street parking area shall be reduced in area or
encroached upon by buildings, vehicle storage, loading or unloading or
any other use where such reduction or encroachment will reduce the
area below that required by this article.
B.
Parking facilities for one use shall not be considered as providing the
required parking facilities for any other use, except as provided in this
article.
C.
No parking area or loading space shall be used for the storage, sale,
repair, dismantling or servicing of any vehicles, equipment, materials
or supplies.
D.
For the purpose of this article, the number of employees for a use shall
be computed on the basis of the maximum number of persons to be
employed at any one time, other than at changes of shifts.
E.
All garage or other space allocated for parking of vehicles within
buildings or in basements or open spaces on the roofs of buildings shall
be considered part of the required off-street parking facilities and may
be included as such in computing the area requirements outlined in this
article.
F.
Off-street parking and loading facilities for commercial or industrial
uses that make it necessary for vehicles to back out directly into a
public road are prohibited.
G.
All off-street parking and loading facilities required by this article for
any use shall be established in accordance with all design standards
and maintained throughout the operation of that use; any additional off-
H.
§ 164-111 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-112
150:610
§ 164-113. Location and landscaping.
Every off-street parking area, except where the public street is the approved
drive aisle, for more than five vehicles shall be located at least five feet
from any public walkway, 10 feet from any street or curb and five feet from
every residential lot line. The edges of the parking area shall be curbed or
buffered, and the space between the parking area and street or lot line shall
be landscaped and maintained in a sightly condition. Where adjoining a
street, such landscaping shall consist of grass and low shrubs or ornamental
trees. Where adjoining a residential lot, it shall include a hedge of sufficient
type and height, not less than 30 inches, to protect and screen the adjoining
property. If an ornamental wall or fence is installed in lieu of such hedge and
accomplishes the same purpose, then the five-foot strip may be reduced to
three feet. In parking areas containing 12 or more parking spaces, the total
area of said parking area shall be a minimum of 10% of landscaped islands.
Said landscaped islands shall be planted with a minimum of one two-andone-
half-inch-caliper shade tree for each 350 square feet of such island.
§ 164-114. Maintenance and lighting.
street parking and loading facilities required as a result of an expansion
of or a change in any use shall be likewise established and maintained.
In all residential zones, off-street parking of motor vehicles shall be
limited to passenger cars, recreational vehicles and trucks not
exceeding a maximum gross weight of 18,000 pounds, which are not
truck tractors, trailers or truck-trailer combinations, as defined in the
Transportation Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
I.
Parking facilities shall be provided for the physically handicapped and
aged as specified in Article 41, § 257JK of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, entitled "Building code making buildings usable by
handicapped persons," or as that section may be hereinafter
amended.103 Such parking facilities may be counted in computing the
number of spaces required under this article.
J.
Any off-street parking area, including any commercial parking lot, for
more than five vehicles shall be surfaced or kept treated in such a
manner as may be necessary to prevent any dust or nuisance to the
neighboring property or the general public and shall be so arranged
and marked as to provide for orderly and safe loading or unloading and
parking and storage of self-propelled vehicles.
A.
Adequate lighting shall be provided for all parking facilities used at
night. Lighting of off-street parking facilities shall be installed and
maintained in a manner not to reflect or cause glare into abutting
or facing residential premises nor to cause reflection or glare which
adversely affects safe vision of operators of vehicles moving on roads
and highways.
B.
103. Editor's Note: See now § 6-102 of Art. 83B of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
§ 164-112 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-115
150:611
§ 164-115. Design standards.
Approval. Designs and plans for areas to be used for automobile offstreet
parking, including but not limited to the design of aisle widths,
stall lengths and widths, turning radii, flow patterns and paving, shall
be subject to approval by the Planning Director in accordance with the
purposes and requirements set forth in this section and Article XXV of
this chapter.
A.
Objectives of designs and plans. Said designs and plans shall
accomplish the following objectives:
The protection of the health, safety and welfare of those who use
any adjoining land or public road that abuts a parking facility. Such
protection shall include but shall not be limited to the reasonable
control of noise, glare or reflection from automobiles, automobile
perimeter, landscaping, plantings, walls, fences or other natural
features or improvements.
(1)
(2) The safety of pedestrians and motorists within a parking facility.
The optimum safe circulation of traffic within the parking facility
and the proper location of entrances and exits to public roads so as
to reduce or prevent traffic congestion.
(3)
The provision of appropriate lighting, if the parking is to be used
after dark.
(4)
B.
Arrangement and marking. All off-street parking areas shall be
arranged and marked so as to provide for orderly and safe loading,
unloading, parking and storage of vehicles. All nonparallel parking
spaces shall be striped to indicate parking areas. Standard parking
spaces less than 10 feet in width shall be double-striped between
each space to indicate the car width. Compact parking spaces shall be
striped around their entire perimeter. Individual parking spaces shall
be clearly defined, and directional arrows and traffic signs shall be
provided as necessary for traffic control.
C.
Size of spaces.
Each standard-size parallel parking space shall have minimum
dimensions of seven feet by 21 feet. A "parallel parking space" is
defined as one in which the long side of the space parallels the
travel lane.
(1)
Each standard-size perpendicular or angled parking space shall be
a rectangle having minimum dimensions of nine feet by 18 feet.
(2)
The size, clearance, area and other dimensional requirements of
off-street parking areas and parking places shall be determined by
the type of parking arrangement in accordance with the parking
chart and table stated below:
(3)
D.
§ 164-115 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-115
150:612
§ 164-116. Off-street loading.
Additionally, all off-street parking and loading areas shall be so graded,
drained and paved or surfaced as to prevent damage to abutting
properties or public streets and shall be approved by the Planning
Department. [Amended 1-28-2008 by Ord. No. 774]
E.
Modification by Planning Director. The Planning Director may approve
the use of compact parking spaces with minimum dimensions of eight
feet by 16 feet due to extraordinary situations or conditions peculiar
to a specific parcel of property. Any such compact parking spaces
shall not exceed 30% of the total number of spaces. The Director may
also approve changes in the dimensions of parking spaces in parking
garages consistent with nationally recognized design standards for
parking garages. No space in a parking garage shall have less than the
minimum dimensions of eight feet by 16 feet. [Amended 8-10-1998
by Ord. No. 629; 1-28-2008 by Ord. No. 774]
F.
Off-street loading and unloading spaces with appropriate and safe
access from a street or alley shall be provided on each lot where it is
deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator to adequately serve the
uses within the proposed structure.
A.
§ 164-115 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-116
150:613
Where off-street loading spaces are provided cooperatively for two or
more uses, all required off-street loading spaces shall be located on the
same lot as the use served.
B.
No loading space or berth shall be located within 40 feet of the nearest
point of intersection of the rights-of-way of two streets or roads.
C.
D. No loading space or berth shall be located in a required front yard.
No loading area shall be located so as to interfere with the circulation
of vehicles in any off-street parking area.
E.
§ 164-116 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-116
150:614
ARTICLE XVII
Signs
§ 164-117. Purpose and intent.
In addition to the purposes set forth in § 164-2 of this chapter, the purpose
of the requirements set forth in this article which regulate the location, size,
placement and certain features of signs is to enable the public to locate
goods, services and facilities without difficulty, danger or confusion, to
prevent wasteful use of natural resources in competition among businesses
for attention, to prevent hazards to life and property and to assure the
continued attractiveness of the City and the protection of property values.
§ 164-118. Compliance required.
No sign may be erected in any zone, nor a permit issued therefor, unless
such sign is specifically permitted by this article and complies with all of the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 164-119. General regulations.
In furtherance of the purpose and intent of this article as set forth in
§ 164-117, the following general requirements shall be applicable to all
signs except those erected by a governmental agency:
No sign shall be erected which obstructs any window, door, fire escape,
stairway, ladder or opening intended to provide light, air, ingress or
egress for any building or structure or which otherwise endangers the
safety of a building, premises or person.
A.
No sign shall be erected which, by reason of its position, size, shape or
color, may interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any
traffic sign, signal or device or railroad sign or signal or which makes
use of any word, phrase, symbol or character in such a manner as to
interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
B.
No sign which uses the word "stop" or "danger" or which presents or
implies the need or requirement of stopping or the existence of danger
shall be displayed.
C.
No sign shall be erected which utilizes rotating, blinking, flashing or
fluttering illumination or illumination which varies in color or intensity.
[Amended 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 860104]
D.
Variable electronic message signs (VEMS) are allowed as permitted
under § 164-121. [Added 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 860105]
E.
104. Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided that it would be effective retroactively to
2-23-2012, except to the extent that it would impair a vested right of a property owner.
105. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections E
through I as Subsections F through J, respectively, and further provided that it would be
effective retroactively to 2-23-2012, except to the extent that it would impair a vested
right of a property owner.
§ 164-117 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-119
150:615
§ 164-120. Signs not requiring permits.
The following signs are permitted without a permit in any zone, provided
that the following conditions are adhered to:
No sign shall be erected by or placed by any person on any public
property or right-of-way, including sidewalks.
F.
No sign shall be erected in such a location as to interfere with
pedestrian or vehicular circulation onto or off of the property on which
it is located.
G.
No motor vehicle shall be parked in any zone under circumstances
reasonably indicating an intent to make principal use of such motor
vehicle as a sign for any person, firm, group, organization, place,
commodity, product, service, business, profession, enterprise or
industry.
H.
No sign shall be permitted which contains statements, words or
pictures of an obscene, indecent or immoral character or such as will
offend public morals or decency.
I.
No sign shall be placed on rocks, trees or on poles maintained by public
utilities.
J.
Signs indicating the name and/or premises or accessory use of a home
for a home occupation, its residents or professional purposes, not
exceeding one square foot in area.
A.
Signs, not exceeding 30 square feet, on a farm advertising farm
products primarily grown on the premises, provided that they are
located off the highway right-of-way and do not interfere with traffic
visibility.
B.
Any directional or informational or historic marker of a public or quasipublic
nature, such as those containing the meeting date of a
community or civic club, the advertising of an event of public interest or
noncommercial information for the convenience of the traveling public.
C.
Temporary real estate signs, not exceeding eight square feet and
located on and advertising the subject property for sale or lease.
D.
Freestanding signs or signs attached to fences no larger than two
square feet warning the public against trespassing, dangerous animals
or the like.
E.
Seasonal displays and decorations not advertising a product, service or
entertainment.
F.
Building contractors' and professional persons' temporary signs on
buildings or subdivisions under construction, limited to a total area
for all such signs on said buildings or subdivisions of 150 square feet
during the period of construction.
G.
§ 164-119 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-120
150:616
§ 164-121. On-premises business signs.
Temporary signs, not exceeding 30 square feet in area, announcing
a campaign, drive or event of a civic, philanthropic, educational or
religious organization. Such signs may not be posted more than one
month before and may not be displayed beyond seven days after such
campaign, drive or event.
H.
Political campaign signs. Signs announcing candidates seeking public
political office and other data pertinent thereto shall be permitted up to
a total area of nine square feet for each premises in a residential zone
and 32 square feet in a commercial or industrial zone. The signs shall
be confined within private property and shall not be less than 15 feet
or the back edge of the sidewalk, whichever is greater, and 100 feet
from the nearest curb intersection of any street or road. [Amended
10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 789]
I.
Business signs pertaining to a use on the premises are permitted as an
accessory use in the Business Zone, except the Central Business Zone,
and in the I-R Restricted Industrial Zone, provided that they meet the
following provisions: [Amended 9-11-1995 by Ord. No. 601]
No such sign shall project over or into any street right-of-way or
project more than 12 inches above the parapet wall or roofline.
(1)
Any sign erected shall be located in such a manner that traffic
visibility is not impaired.
(2)
Such signs shall be integral with or attached to the building.
Additionally, one freestanding sign located at the street right-ofway
shall be permitted except as provided in Subsection A(5)
hereof. Said freestanding sign shall not exceed 20 feet in total
height. The area of all signs on the premises shall not exceed three
square feet for each linear foot of the front building wall. No one
sign shall exceed 64 square feet in total area except as provided in
Subsection A(5) hereof. [Amended 2-9-1998 by Ord. No. 626]
(3)
Where the lot adjoins any residential zone, a sign within 50 feet
shall be attached flat against the front of the building, and no
freestanding sign shall face any residential zone.
(4)
Any sign or signs for property adjacent to any divided street or
highway shall be permitted as follows. [Amended 9-28-2015 by
Ord. No. 860106]
Applications for signs which do not exceed 64 square feet in
total area and which do not exceed 12.5 feet in height shall be
approved by the Zoning Administrator. Applications for signs
up to and including 125 square feet and/or up to and including
(a)
(5)
A.
106. Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided that it would be effective retroactively to
2-23-2012, except to the extent that it would impair a vested right of a property owner.
§ 164-120 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-121
150:617
20 feet in height shall be approved by the Commission. In
determining whether or not to approve an application, the
Zoning Administrator or the Commission shall take into
consideration the following factors: traffic and pedestrian
safety; the size, configuration, elevation and location of the
property; existing signs on the property and neighboring
properties; aesthetics; and any other factors relating to the
location, size, design, composition and specific character of
the proposed sign deemed appropriate by the Zoning
Administrator or the Commission. No sign shall be approved if
the Zoning Administrator or the Commission finds that it would
not achieve a maximum of compatibility, safety, efficiency and
attractiveness.
One variable electronic message sign (VEMS) will be permitted
per approved development site, provided it meets the following
provisions:
Animated, flashing, blinking, reflecting, revolving, full
motion or any other similar message or transitional
movement is prohibited;
[1]
Only text messages shall be displayed, and the message
shall not change more than once every 30 seconds;
[2]
Advertisements for off-premises businesses or services are
prohibited;
[3]
A VEMS may only be used as part of a wall or monument
sign;
[4]
A VEMS must have automatic dimming capability that
adjusts brightness to ambient light at all times, not to
exceed 5,000 candelas per square meter during daylight
hours and 500 candelas per square meter between dusk
and dawn;
[5]
The VEMS shall present a maximum of three colors and
shall display a dark screen in the event of a sign
malfunction;
[6]
The VEMS shall not exceed 32 square feet, which area will
be counted toward the maximum sign allowance; and
[7]
The VEMS shall be subordinate to the business name
portion of the sign (the VEMS may not be the predominant
feature).
[8]
(b)
On properties used exclusively for, or including, drive-through
restaurants, service stations and other similar establishments
serving motorists, one VEMS, as permitted under Subsection
(c)
§ 164-121 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-121
150:618
A(5)(b) above, and one illuminated electronic display will be
permitted per establishment, provided that:
The illuminated electronic display does not exceed eight
inches in height or two feet in width or extend more than
five feet above the ground; and
[1]
Audio speakers shall not be audible beyond the property
boundary.
[2]
On property used exclusively by a single tenant in a freestanding
building with its own parking field, where the floor area of the
building exceeds 70,000 square feet, individual building signs that
exceed 125 square feet in area may be approved by the Planning
and Zoning Commission, upon the request of the property owner,
where such approval will not otherwise impair the purposes of this
article. The area of all signs on the premises shall not exceed three
square feet for each linear foot of the front building wall. [Added
10-24-2016 by Ord. No. 870]
(6)
Other standards.
Signs located in the Central Business Zone shall conform to the
standards set forth in the "Standards for Renovation Westminster,"
Chapter III, as adopted February 27, 1978, and as may be amended
from time to time.
(1)
Signs located outside of the Central Business Zone and within
the Westminster Historic District as designated in the National
Register of Historic Places shall conform to any and all standards
as may be hereinafter adopted and amended from time to time.
(2)
B.
Signs located in the Planned Regional Shopping Center Zone shall
be permitted, provided that they meet the following provisions :
[Amended 11-26-2001 by Ord. No. 674]
One freestanding identification sign shall be permitted per State
Highway Administration-approved vehicular access to parking
areas. Said freestanding sign shall not exceed 25 feet total height
and shall not exceed 125 square feet in area. [Amended
9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 860107]
(1)
A freestanding identification sign may include a VEMS, provided
that: [Added 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 860108]
Animated, flashing, blinking, reflecting, revolving, full motion
or any other similar message or transitional movement is
prohibited;
(a)
(2)
C.
107. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it would be effective retroactively to
2-23-2012, except to the extent that it would impair a vested right of a property owner.
108. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it would be effective retroactively to
2-23-2012, except to the extent that it would impair a vested right of a property owner.
§ 164-121 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-121
150:619
Only text messages shall be displayed, and the message shall
not change more than once every 30 seconds;
(b)
Advertisements for off-premises businesses or services are
prohibited;
(c)
The VEMS may only be used as part of a wall or monument
sign;
(d)
The VEMS must have automatic dimming capacity that adjusts
brightness to ambient light at all times, not to exceed 5,000
candelas per square meter during daylight hours and 500
candelas per square meter between dusk and dawn;
(e)
The VEMS shall present a maximum of three colors and shall
display a dark screen in the event of a sign malfunction;
(f)
The VEMS shall not exceed 32 square feet, which area will be
counted toward the maximum sign allowance; and
(g)
The VEMS shall be subordinate to the business name portion
of the sign (the VEMS may not be the predominant feature).
(h)
On properties including drive-through restaurants, service
stations, and other similar establishments serving motorists, one
illuminated electronic display will be permitted per establishment,
provided that: [Added 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 860109]
The illuminated electronic display does not exceed eight inches
in height or two feet in width or extend more than five feet
above the ground; and
(a)
Audio speakers shall not be audible beyond the property
boundary.
(b)
(3)
One flat wall sign shall be permitted at each major pedestrian
entrance into department stores over 30,000 square feet in
leasable area. Said wall signs shall not exceed 150 square feet and
shall not extend above the roofline.
(4)
One flat wall sign shall be permitted at each major pedestrian
entrance of the mall. Said wall sign shall not exceed 150 square
feet and shall not extend above the roofline.
(5)
One flat wall sign shall be permitted for each exterior wall of stores
over 60,000 square feet in leasable area. Said wall signs shall not
exceed 200 square feet and shall not extend above the roofline.
(6)
109. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection
C(2) through (6) as Subsection C(4) through (8), respectively, and further provided that it
would be effective retroactively to 2-23-2012, except to the extent that it would impair a
vested right of a property owner.
§ 164-121 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-121
150:620
Signs for separate standing buildings or stores not included in
the mall structure shall meet the provisions established for the
Business Zone in Subsection A.
(7)
Any sign or signs other than those provided herein shall be
permitted only after application and approval by the Planning
Commission.
(8)
Signs for special exception uses shall be in accordance with the
pertinent provisions of this article and approved by the Board of
Appeals upon the granting of a special exception. Such signs may be
freestanding or attached to a building but shall not exceed 32 square
feet in size, except as to signs provided by § 164-120C. Lighting for
such signs shall not cause glare onto neighboring residential properties
or uses and shall be approved upon consideration of the character of
the neighborhood in which the special exemption is located. Signs for
tourist homes, boardinghouses and home occupations shall not exceed
two square feet in size on any one side.
D.
Business signs pertaining to a use on the premises are permitted as
an accessory use in the P-I Planned Industrial Zone, provided that they
meet the following provisions: [Added 9-22-1997 by Ord. No. 622]
No sign shall project over or into any street right-of-way or project
more than 12 inches above the parapet wall or roofline.
(1)
Any sign erected shall be located in such a manner that traffic
visibility is not impaired.
(2)
Signs shall be integral with or attached to the building.
Additionally, one freestanding sign located at the street right-ofway
shall be permitted as provided in Subsection E(5) hereof.
(3)
Where the lot adjoins any residential zone, a sign within 50 feet
shall be attached flat against the front of the building, and no
freestanding sign shall face any residential zone.
(4)
Any freestanding sign shall be permitted as follows. Applications
for signs which do not exceed 64 square feet in total area and
which do not exceed 20 feet in height shall be approved by the
Zoning Administrator. Applications for signs up to and including
250 square feet and/or up to and including 40 feet in height shall
be approved by the Commission. In determining whether or not
to approve an application, the Zoning Administrator or the
Commission shall take into consideration the following factors:
traffic and pedestrian safety; the size, configuration elevation and
location of the property; existing signs on the property and
neighboring properties; aesthetics, and any other factors relating
to the location, size, design, composition and specific character of
the proposed sign deemed appropriate by the Zoning Administrator
or the Commission. No sign shall be approved if the Zoning
(5)
E.
§ 164-121 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-121
150:621
Administrator or the Commission find that it would not achieve a
maximum of compatibility, safety, efficiency and attractiveness.
Business signs pertaining to a use on the premises are permitted as
an accessory use in the N-C Neighborhood Commercial Zone, provided
that they have been approved as part of an integrated sign program
approved by the Commission and meet the following provisions:
[Added 9-25-2000 by Ord. No. 638]
No such sign shall project over or into any street right-of-way or
project more than 12 inches above the parapet wall or roofline.
(1)
Any sign erected shall be located in such a manner that traffic
visibility is not impaired.
(2)
Such signs shall be integral with or attached to the building. The
area of building-mounted signs shall not exceed one square foot for
each linear foot of the front building wall, with a maximum size of
64 square feet.
(3)
Additionally, one freestanding monument-style sign located at the
street right-of-way shall be permitted; provided, however, that on
sites greater than 14 acres in size, with at least 1,000 feet of
frontage on a dual highway, one such additional sign shall be
permitted. Said freestanding monument-style sign shall not exceed
12.5 feet in total height and a maximum area of 64 square feet per
face. [Amended 1-14-2013 by Ord. No. 838]
(4)
Said freestanding identification sign may include a VEMS, provided
that: [Added 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 860110]
Animated, flashing, blinking, reflecting, revolving, full motion
or any other similar message or transitional movement is
prohibited;
(a)
Only text messages shall be displayed, and the message shall
not change more than once every 30 seconds;
(b)
Advertisements for off-premises businesses or services are
prohibited;
(c)
The VEMS may only be used as part of a wall or monument
sign;
(d)
A VEMS must have automatic dimming capability that adjusts
brightness to ambient light at all times, not to exceed 5,000
candelas per square meter during daylight hours and 500
candelas per square meter between dusk and dawn;
(e)
(5)
F.
110. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it would be effective retroactively to
2-23-2012, except to the extent that it would impair a vested right of a property owner.
§ 164-121 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-121
150:622
§ 164-122. Outdoor advertising signs.
Outdoor advertising signs, commonly referred to as "billboards" or "poster
panels," shall be subject to the following regulations:
The VEMS shall present a maximum of three colors and shall
display a dark screen in the event of a sign malfunction;
(f)
The VEMS shall not exceed 32 square feet, which area will be
counted toward the maximum sign allowance;
(g)
The VEMS shall be subordinate to the business name portion
of the sign (the VEMS may not be the predominant feature);
and
(h)
The VEMS shall display one text message between 10:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m.
(i)
On properties used exclusively for, or including, drive-through
restaurants, service stations, and other similar establishments
serving motorists, one illuminated electronic display will be
permitted per establishment, provided that: [Added 9-28-2015 by
Ord. No. 860111]
The illuminated electronic display does not exceed eight inches
in height or two feet in width or extend more than five feet
above the ground; and
(a)
Audio speakers shall not be audible beyond the property
boundary.
(b)
(6)
Where the lot adjoins any residential zone, a sign within 50 feet
shall be attached flat against the front of the building, and no
freestanding sign shall face any residential zone.
(7)
Any sign or signs other than those provided herein shall be
permitted only after application to and approval by the
Commission. This provision shall authorize the Commission to
increase the square footage limitations of any sign not to exceed
125 square feet.
(8)
In determining whether or not to approve an application, the
Commission shall take into consideration the following factors:
traffic and pedestrian safety; the size, configuration elevation and
location of the property; existing signs on the property and
neighboring properties; aesthetics; and any other factors relating
to the locations, size, design, composition and specific character of
the proposed sign deemed appropriate by the Commission. No sign
shall be approved if the Commission finds that it would not achieve
a maximum of compatibility, safety, efficiency and attractiveness.
(9)
111. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it would be effective retroactively to
2-23-2012, except to the extent that it would impair a vested right of a property owner.
§ 164-121 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-122
150:623
§ 164-123. Sign permits.
Outdoor advertising signs shall be permitted in the P-I, I-R and I-G
Zones. No sign shall be located within 200 feet of any residential zone,
nor shall such sign be located within 300 feet of an intersection on a
two-lane or proposed two-lane highway or within 100 feet of any other
intersection.
A.
All outdoor advertising signs shall be spaced at least 300 feet apart.
In the case of existing two-lane highways, each side of the two-lane
highway shall be considered separately in determining spacing
requirements. In the case of non-dual-lane highways, spacing shall be
determined and measured between signs, regardless of the side of the
highway on which they are located and proposed.
B.
No outdoor advertising sign shall be closer than 100 feet to any
property line nor located closer than 660 feet to the right-of-way line of
any highway which is part of the interstate highway system nor closer
than 200 feet to the right-of-way line of any other street or road.
C.
D. Outdoor advertising signs shall be no higher than 30 feet.
E. No sign shall exceed more than 260 feet in area.
No outdoor advertising sign shall be permitted in the following scenic
areas in a residential zone within the City along the following Maryland
routes: Route Nos. 31, 97 and 140.
F.
Except as provided in § 164-120, no sign shall be erected, altered or
relocated without a sign permit issued by the Zoning Administrator.
A.
The application for a sign permit shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator. The permit application shall be signed by the applicant,
and when the applicant is any person other than the owner of the
property, the permit application shall also be signed by the owner of the
property and shall contain the location of the sign structure, the name
and address of the sign owner and of the sign erector and drawings
showing the design, dimensions and locations of the sign and such
other pertinent information as the Zoning Administrator may require to
ensure compliance with the laws of the City.
B.
A fee shall be charged for each sign permit issued as provided in the
General Fee Ordinance.112 [Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 792]
C.
A sign permit shall become null and void if the work for which the
permit was issued has not begun within a period of six months after
the date of the permit. A permit may be renewed, and no additional fee
shall be charged for such renewal.
D.
112. Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
§ 164-122 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-123
150:624
§ 164-124. Structural requirements; inspection and maintenance.
§ 164-125. Nonconforming signs.
§ 164-126. Removal.
The following operations shall not be considered as creating a sign and
shall not require a permit:
Replacing copy: the changing of the advertising copy or message
on an approved painted or printed sign or on a theater marquee
and similar approved signs which are specifically designed for the
use of replaceable copy.
(1)
Maintenance: painting, repainting, cleaning and other normal
maintenance and repair of a sign or a sign structure, unless a
structural change is made.
(2)
E.
All signs requiring permits shall display, in a place conspicuous to
inspectors, evidence of the permit containing such data as may be
supplied and designated by the Zoning Administrator.
F.
All signs shall comply with the pertinent requirements of the BOCA
Basic Building Code, as may be amended from time to time.
A.
Signs for which a permit is required shall be inspected periodically by
the Zoning Administrator for compliance with this article and the other
laws of the City.
B.
All signs and components thereof shall be kept in good repair and in a
safe, neat, clean and attractive condition.
C.
The Zoning Administrator is authorized to adopt rules and regulations
to ensure that signs are constructed, licensed and maintained in
accordance with this article.
D.
Signs which do not conform to the regulations and restrictions
prescribed for the zone in which they are situated but which were
erected in accordance with regulations in effect at the time may remain
as long as the use advertised remains.
A.
No nonconforming sign shall be enlarged, reconstructed or altered in
any manner nor shall it be worded to advertise any other use than was
advertised at the time it became nonconforming.
B.
No nonconforming sign shall be moved on the same lot or to any other
lot unless the moving will relocate the sign into a zone in which it would
conform.
C.
Any sign which is not in conformity with the provisions of this article
shall be subject to removal in accordance with § 164-126.
D.
§ 164-123 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-126
150:625
§ 164-127. Abandonment.
A sign shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the premises upon
which the sign is located when the business which it advertises is no longer
conducted on the premises. If the owner or lessee fails to remove the sign,
the Zoning Administrator may remove it in accordance with § 164-126.
These removal provisions shall not apply where a succeeding owner or
lessee conducts the same type of business and agrees to maintain the signs
as provided in this article or changes the copy on the signs to advertise the
type of business being conducted on the premises, provided that the signs
comply with the other provisions of this article.
§ 164-128. Appeals.
Upon denial of a sign permit or an order of removal by the Zoning
Administrator or where a variance is denied, the sign owner or owner of
the property on which a sign is located may file an appeal within 30 days of
the date of action of the Zoning Administrator to the Board of Appeals. The
appeal shall be in writing in such form as required by the Board.
§ 164-129. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction, shall be subject to the penalty contained in § 164-159.
The Zoning Administrator shall order the removal of any sign erected
or maintained in violation of this article. Ten days' notice in writing
shall be given to the owner of such sign or of the building, structure
or premises on which such sign is located to remove the sign or to
bring it into compliance with this article. Upon failure to remove the
sign or to comply with this notice or an appeal taken timely to the
Board of Appeals, the Zoning Administrator may cause the sign to be
removed. The Zoning Administrator may remove the sign immediately
and without notice if it reasonably appears that the condition of the sign
is such as to present an immediate threat to the safety of the public. Any
costs of removal incurred by the Zoning Administrator shall be assessed
to the owner of the property on which such sign is located and may be
collected in the manner of ordinary debt or in the manner of taxes, and
such charge shall be a lien on the property.
A.
The remedy contained in Subsection A is not exclusive and is in addition
to the right of the City to institute appropriate legal proceedings.
B.
§ 164-126 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-129
150:626
ARTICLE XVIII
Regulations Applicable in All Districts
§ 164-130. Interpretation.
The regulations contained in this chapter within each district shall be
minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of
structure or land, except as herein provided.
§ 164-131. Compliance required.
Except as hereinafter specified, no land, building, structure or premises
shall hereinafter be used and no building, part thereof or other structure
shall be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged,
converted or altered except in conformity with the regulations herein
specified for the zone in which it is located.
§ 164-131.1. Compliance with landscape manual. [Added 3-22-1993
by Ord. No. 553]
§ 164-131.2. Compliance with Development Design Preferences
Manual. [Added 5-9-2016 by Ord. No. 863]
The Mayor and Common Council is authorized to adopt, and from
time to time amend, by ordinance, a landscape manual for the City of
Westminster to enhance the City's environmental and visual character
for its citizens' use and enjoyment. In that regard, the Mayor and
Common Council find that a landscape manual will preserve and
stabilize the City's ecological balance, improve air and water quality,
reduce flooding and stormwater management and provide protection
from climatic conditions. The adoption of a landscape manual will
enable the City to protect and improve the health and general welfare
by promoting the environmental and public benefits of trees.
A.
It shall be the joint and several responsibility of each person owning
or using property to comply with the landscape manual of the City of
Westminster in accordance with approvals pursuant to §§ 164-188E(4),
164-193I, and 164-211A(1)(d).
B.
The requirements of the landscape manual adopted by the Mayor and
Common Council shall prevail over any conflict or inconsistency with
any other provisions required for landscaping under this chapter.
C.
The Mayor and Common Council is authorized to adopt, and from time
to time amend, by resolution, a manual that contains development
design preferences, to be included as part of the development design
review in any district in the City.
A.
The Planning and Zoning Commission may utilize said preferences
manual and make recommendations related to development design,
B.
§ 164-130 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-131.2
150:627
§ 164-131.3. Required screening of modern appurtenances. [Added
9-25-2017 by Ord. No. 869]
to be included in all projects via the Commission's review under
§§ 164-193L and 164-211K.
The Development Design Preferences Manual shall be utilized by the
Planning and Zoning Commission, in coordination with other provisions
and requirements of this code, to achieve an improved design.
C.
Any roof-mounted, wall-mounted, or ground-mounted appurtenance,
including, but not limited to, newly installed air-conditioning units,
telecommunications installations, and mechanical and electronic
equipment, located on any nonresidentially zoned property shall be
screened from view from yard areas of residentially zoned property
within 500 feet of said appurtenance.
A.
The screening material must be compatible with and integrated into the
architectural and site design of the project.
B.
In any National Historic District, the State Historic Preservation Office
shall be offered an opportunity to review and comment.
C.
For any appurtenance installed after the date of this revision which
is located on property adjacent to Main Street and between Longwell
Avenue and Bond Street/John Street, no appurtenance shall be visible
from the ground level of any portion of the Main Street public rights-ofway
between Longwell Avenue and John/Bond Street.
D.
For any modern appurtenance to be installed on a property described
in Subsection D above, if the appurtenance itself is not visible from
the ground level of any portion of the Main Street public rights-of-way
between Longwell Avenue and John/Bond Street from the yard areas of
any residential use located adjacent to the property upon which such
an appurtenance is located, said modern appurtenance need not be
screened.
E.
City-owned infrastructure of any kind shall not be subject to the
provisions of Subsection D above.
F.
The Planning and Zoning Commission, the director, or the director's
designee may in the case of extenuating circumstances or for
temporary relief, approve an appurtenance without screening, at the
discretion of the aforementioned, if the requirements in Subsection C
above are met.
G.
Screening for (micro) wireless communication antenna array.
Landscaping and privacy screening shall be employed to screen
outdoor equipment facilities from view. When located in an historic
district, it is recommended that the micro antenna and any necessary
support devices be painted and/or positioned to minimize their visual
H.
§ 164-131.2 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-131.3
150:628
§ 164-132. Nuisances.
Any use which is found by the Board to be a public nuisance by reason
of the emission of dust, fumes, gas, smoke, odor, noise, vibration or other
disturbance is expressly prohibited. No such finding shall be made by the
Board except after a hearing upon reasonable notice, and any person, the
Commission or the Common Council may file a petition with the Board for
such hearing.
§ 164-133. Effect of prior approval.
§ 164-134. Conflicts.
Any existing or proposed use which is determined to be in conflict with
any existing ordinance or laws of the City or law or regulation of the State
of Maryland or any federal governmental agency shall be prohibited, even
though such use may be allowed under the terms of this chapter.
impact and to protect the historic character of the affected building and
neighborhood buildings.
Where any approval has been granted by the Mayor and Common
Council and/or the Commission and is in compliance with the terms and
provisions of the prior Interim Zoning Ordinance, such approval, with
any conditions imposed thereon by the Mayor and Common Council
and/or Commission, shall apply to any use which has been established
thereunder. In those cases where a time limit had been imposed as a
condition of approval, the Board may approve, upon reapplication, one
extension of time of equal duration, but in no case to exceed five years.
A.
All preliminary plans, final plans, revised preliminary or final plans
and all development plans of any type which have been approved
by the Mayor and Common Council and/or the Commission prior to
November 5, 1979, shall continue to be approved and valid after said
date, regardless of the zonal classification of the real property as to
which such plans pertain, and said real property shall be developed
in accordance with the provisions of such plans. Such plans may be
amended in accordance with the procedures provided for the
amendment of development plans contained in § 164-188J of this
chapter. Additionally, the Common Council may amend any such plans
approved prior to November 5, 1979, to permit residential single-family
attached dwellings in lieu of any commercial or business use, provided
that it determines, after an opportunity for public comment, that there
will be no increase in the gross allowable residential density beyond
that originally approved and that such development will not have an
adverse impact upon the adjacent properties or the general character
of the approved development plan.
B.
§ 164-131.3 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-134
150:629

ARTICLE XIX
Nonconformities
§ 164-135. Continuation. [Amended 9-25-1995 by Ord. No. 602]
§ 164-136. Extension and alteration.
No existing building or premises devoted to a use not permitted by this
chapter in the zone in which such building or premises is located shall
be enlarged, extended, substituted or structurally altered, unless the use
thereof is changed to a use permitted in the district in which such building
or premises is located, except as follows:
Any building, structure or premises lawfully existing at the time of the
adoption of this chapter or lawfully existing at the time this chapter
is subsequently amended may continue to be used even though such
building, structure or premises does not conform to uses, dimensions
or other requirements of the zone in which it is located, subject to the
provisions of §§ 164-136 and 164-137.
A.
An existing use or building located in a zone in which such use or
building is classified herein as a special exception may continue as
though it were an authorized special exception but may not be changed
or enlarged without further authorization as for a new special exception
by the Board.
B.
In the C-B Central Business Zone, a special exception granted by the
Board of Appeals on or before May 15, 1995, but which has
subsequently been eliminated as a special exception use in that Zone,
shall not be regarded as a nonconforming special exception and may
be continued, repaired, reconstructed, structurally altered, extended or
enlarged in accordance with all City approvals.
C.
In the C-B Central Business Zone, any permitted use which was lawfully
existing prior to May 15, 1995, but which has subsequently been
eliminated as a permitted use in that Zone, shall not be regarded as
a nonconforming use and may be continued, repaired, reconstructed,
structurally altered, extended or enlarged in accordance with all City
approvals.
D.
A nonconforming use may be extended throughout those parts of a
building or structure which were specifically designed or constructed
for such use prior to the adoption of this chapter and which parts were
either completed or substantially completed, structurally, at the time of
adoption of this chapter.
A.
If no structural alterations are made, the Board may approve the
changing of a nonconforming use of a building, structure or premises
to another nonconforming use if the Board finds that such new
nonconforming use is of the same or more appropriate use or more
restrictive use. However, no building or premises in which a
B.
§ 164-135 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-136
150:631
§ 164-137. Termination.
nonconforming use has been changed, in whole or in part, to a more
restricted use shall again be devoted to a less restrictive use.
Except as provided in Subsection C below, no building, structure or
premises where a nonconforming use has ceased to operate for six
months or more shall thereafter be used except in conformance with
this Zoning Ordinance. [Amended 9-24-2007 by Ord. No. 771]
A.
Nothing in these regulations shall prevent the restoration of a
nonconforming building or structure destroyed by fire, windstorm,
flood, explosion or act of the public enemy or accident or prevent
the continuance of the use thereof as it existed at the time of such
destruction, provided that a zoning certificate is obtained and
restoration begun within one year of such destruction. The Zoning
Administrator may, upon application of a property owner and upon
a finding of good cause, extend the period of time for obtaining a
zoning certificate and beginning restoration under this subsection for
an additional one-year period.
B.
Any main building which was specifically designed and constructed
before November 6, 1979, for a use not permitted by this chapter in
the zone in which such building is located shall not be deemed to
have lost its nonconforming status unless the nonconforming use of the
building shall have ceased for 48 consecutive months or more. [Added
9-24-2007 by Ord. No. 771]
C.
§ 164-136 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-137
150:632
ARTICLE XX
Special Provisions
§ 164-138. Major road plans.
In an area where a major road plan has been duly adopted in accordance
with Article 66B of the Annotated Code of Maryland, showing a proposed
new highway or street or a proposed relocation or widening of an existing
highway or street, no building or part of a building shall be permitted to
be erected within the lines of such proposed highway or street except as
provided hereinafter:
§ 164-138.1. Access to state highways. [Added 4-28-2003 by Ord.
No. 700; amended 7-10-2006 by Ord. No. 746; 1-28-2008 by Ord. No.
774]
In certain limited instances, with the concurrence of the Maryland State
Highway Administration, the Planning Director is authorized to issue
temporary access to state roads to property which is not otherwise
authorized to directly access state roads. In order to be eligible for
temporary access, the property must having existing access to a state road.
Temporary access may not exceed a period of two years from plan approval.
Under extraordinary circumstances, with the concurrence of the Maryland
State Highway Administration, the Director may grant up to two additional
extensions of two years each.
The Zoning Administrator shall issue a zoning certificate for such
construction as applied for, provided that the Maryland State Highway
Administration, the County Department of Public Works or an
appropriate authority, upon and within 30 days of a written notice
thereof, does not reaffirm and substantiate its plans to provide such
construction in accordance with the major road plan.
A.
The owner of the property so affected shall, following the expiration
time of such written notice, have the right to appeal to the Board the
refusal of a zoning certificate, and the Board may give approval to
build if it should find, after public hearing and upon the evidence and
arguments presented to it upon such appeal that:
The entire property of the appellant of which the area affected by
the major road plan forms a part cannot yield a reasonable return
to the owner unless such appeal is granted; and
(1)
Balancing the interest of the general public in preserving the
integrity of the plan and the interest of the owner of the property
in the use and benefits of his property, the granting of such permit
is required by consideration of reasonable justice and equity.
(2)
B.
§ 164-138 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-139
150:633
§ 164-139. Essential utility equipment. [Amended 10-26-1998 by
Ord. No. 631]
Essential utility equipment shall be permitted in any zone, as authorized
and regulated by law and ordinance of the City, including § 164-157 and
Article XXV of this chapter. The term "essential utility equipment" means
underground or overhead electrical, gas, communications, water or
sewerage systems, inclusive of pumping stations and wastewater treatment
plants, and including poles, towers or pole structures, wires, lines owned
or maintained by a public utility company or public agencies and mains,
drains, sewers, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, public telephone stations,
police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, regulating and measuring
devices and the structures in which they are housed and other similar
equipment and accessories in connection therewith. Except as hereinbefore
provided, it does not include buildings, yards, stations or substations for
transforming, boosting, switching or pumping purposes where such
facilities are constructed on the ground. Additionally, it does not include
telecommunications facilities.
§ 164-139.1. Telecommunications facilities. [Added 10-26-1998 by
Ord. No. 631]
Requirements. Telecommunications facilities shall meet the following
requirements:
An antenna and a related unmanned equipment building or cabinet
may be installed on privately owned land on a rooftop of buildings
which are at least 30 feet in height. A telecommunications facility
antenna must not be mounted on the facade of any building
designed or used as a one-family residential dwelling. An
unmanned equipment building or cabinet may be located on the
roof of a building, provided that it and all other roof structures do
not occupy more than 25% of the roof area.
(1)
Telecommunications antennas may be attached to a freestanding
monopole on privately owned land. A freestanding monopole,
including antenna structure for a telecommunications facility, is
permitted up to 199 feet in height with a setback as provided in
Subsection A(10) hereof.
(2)
An unmanned equipment building or cabinet included as part of
a telecommunications facility on privately owned land must not
exceed 560 square feet and 12 feet in height. Any such equipment
building or cabinet must be so located as to conform to the
applicable setback standards of the zone in which the property is
classified.
(3)
All antennas shall be located and designed, including materials,
color and texture, so as to minimize visual impact on surrounding
properties and as seen from the public streets.
(4)
A.
§ 164-139 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-139.1
150:634
No signs are permitted in connection with any telecommunications
facility.
(5)
No lights or other illumination devices are permitted on any
monopole or antenna unless required by the Federal
Communications Commission, the Federal Aviation Administration
or the City. Any security lighting must be downshielded to prevent
light pollution on adjoining properties.
(6)
All monopoles erected as part of a telecommunications facility
must maintain or accommodate at least three telecommunications
carriers; provided, however, that a monopole or other support
structure designed or engineered to accommodate fewer than
three telecommunications carriers may be approved by the Board
as provided in § 164-139.1.B(8).
(7)
No more than one monopole is permitted on a lot or parcel of land,
and no two monopoles may be located within 1,000 feet of each
other.
(8)
Every freestanding monopole or support structure, and any
unmanned equipment building or cabinet associated with a
telecommunications facility must be removed at the cost of the
owner of the facility when the telecommunications facility is no
longer in use by any telecommunications carriers.
(9)
A monopole, tower or other support structure must be located
at a distance of 1/2 foot from the property line of adjacent
nonresidentially zoned property for every foot of height of the
monopole or other support structure. Such structures must be
located a distance of one foot from the property line of adjacent
residentially zoned property for every foot of height of such
structure.
(10)
Telecommunications facilities may be permitted upon a finding by the
Board, in addition to the findings required in Article XXII of this
chapter, that:
The application complies with all of the standards contained in
§ 164-139.1A.
(1)
The location selected is necessary for the public convenience and
service.
(2)
The location selected is not in an area in which there is an over
concentration of freestanding monopoles, towers or similar
structures.
(3)
The location selected for a monopole is more than 300 feet from
either the nearest boundary of an historic district or more than 300
feet from the nearest boundary of the environmental setting of an
historic resource that is not within an historic district.
(4)
B.
§ 164-139.1 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-139.1
150:635
The location selected for a monopole is suitable for the collocation
of at least three telecommunications antennas and related
unmanned cabinets or equipment buildings, and the facility is
designed to accommodate at least three antennas. The holder of a
special exception may not refuse to permit the collocation of two
additional antennas and related equipment buildings or cabinets
unless collocation is technically impractical because of engineering
and because it will interfere with existing service. The refusal to
allow such collocation without just cause may result in revocation
of the special exception.
(5)
The Board must further find that any monopole, tower, support
structure, equipment building or cabinet is located in conformity to
the applicable setback standards of the zone and those provided in
§ 164-139.1A(10).
(6)
The Board must find that the addition of an equipment building
or cabinet proposed to be located on the roof of a building, in
combination with all other roof structures, does not create the
appearance of an additional story and does not increase the roof
coverage by more than an additional 10%. The Board must also
find that the structure minimizes visual impact on surrounding
properties and as seen from the public street.
(7)
The Board must also find that a freestanding monopole or other
support structure is proposed to hold no fewer than three
telecommunications carriers. The Board may approve a monopole
or other support structure with fewer than three
telecommunications carriers if the applicant establishes that
existing telecommunications facilities serving the same service
area have no additional capacity to include the applicant's antenna
or the applicant establishes that collocation on an existing
monopole is technically impractical and that engineering criteria
establish the need for the requested facility; and the approval of
the application will not result in an over concentration of similar
facilities in the surrounding area.
(8)
The Board must find that the operation of the proposed
telecommunications facility will not interfere with public safety
telecommunicators. Any application for a special exception shall
be accompanied by an intermodulation study which provides a
technical evaluation of all proposed transmissions and indicates all
potential interference problems. Prior to the introduction of any
new service, the owner/operator shall provide the City at least 10
calendar days' notice in advance of such service and allow the City
to monitor interference levels during the testing process.
(9)
An applicant for a special exception for a telecommunications
facility shall provide with the application a report from a qualified
and licensed professional engineer which describes the tower,
monopole or support structure height and design, including cross
(10)
§ 164-139.1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-139.1
150:636
§ 164-140. Distance requirements.
Any uses of buildings subject to compliance with this section shall be
located at least 100 feet from any other lot in a residential zone or in
any other zone which contains a dwelling, school, church or institution for
human care.
§ 164-141. Ponds, lakes, stabilization and stormwater management
facilities.
All ponds, lakes, stabilization lagoons and stormwater management
facilities shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from the public right-ofway
line and shall be fenced and/or protected by a guardrail along the
right-of-way line in accordance with regulations established by the Director
of Public Works and approved by resolution of the Mayor and Common
Council.
§ 164-142. Use of mutual open space.
No part of a minimum required yard or other open space provided about
any building or structure for the purpose of complying with the provisions of
this chapter shall be included as part of a minimum required yard or other
open space required under this chapter for another building or structure.
§ 164-143. Front yard depth; projections into required front or rear
yards.
sections and elevations; documents the height above grade for
all potential mounting positions for collocated antennas and the
minimum separation distances between antennas; describes the
capacity of the tower or monopole, including the number and type
of antennas that can be accommodated; documents what steps the
applicant will take to avoid interference with established public
safety telecommunications; includes an engineer's stamp and
registration number; and includes other information necessary to
evaluate the request.
Prior to granting any requested special exception for a
telecommunications facility, the Board may require a visual
analysis demonstration for any proposed monopole, tower or
support structure.
(11)
After notice and hearing, the Board may revoke the special
exception for any telecommunications facility which has not been
in use for 12 consecutive months, and the owner of the facility shall
remove it at the owner's cost within 90 days after revocation of the
special exception by the Board.
(12)
Each front yard depth or setback specified shall be measured at right
angles or radially from the nearest street right-of-way line (front
property line), except that when the right-of-way of any existing street
A.
§ 164-139.1 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-143
150:637
§ 164-144. Bulk requirement modifications.
§ 164-145. Setback modifications.
is less than 50 feet wide in the case of a minor street or less than
60 feet wide in the case of a major street, the front yard or setback
shall be measured from a line 25 or 30 feet, as the case may be, from
the center line of such street. The foregoing rules shall apply also to
the measurement along the side street of a corner lot. Architectural
features such as bay windows, chimneys, unenclosed entrances, stoops,
balconies, eaves and leaders shall not project more than four feet into
any required yard.
If attached to a main building, a one-story open or enclosed and
unheated porch or deck, with or without a roof, may extend into any
required rear yard not more than 25% of the required depth of the
rear yard. An extension of not more than 40% of the required minimum
required depth of the rear yard is authorized for properties whose
development was approved prior to November 6, 1979. [Amended
11-25-1991 by Ord. No. 548]
B.
Minimum lot area and lot width regulations in any zone shall not apply
to repeater, booster, transformer or switching stations or dial offices.
A.
Existing lots of record. In any zone wherein a single-family dwelling
is permitted, such dwelling may be permitted on any lot or plot which
is of official record by deed or a subdivision duly recorded among the
land records of Carroll County as of the effective date of this chapter,
provided that:
The owner does not own sufficient land adjoining to enable
conformance with yard or area requirements.
(1)
(2) No side yard shall be less than 10% of the width of said lot.
No rear yard shall be less than 20% of the depth of said lot, but in
no case less than 15 feet.
(3)
B.
In any zone where dwellings are permitted, a lot not connected to a
public water and/or sewerage system shall be subject to the minimum
lot requirements provided by the Maryland State Department of Health
and Mental Hygiene, Regulation No. COMAR 10.17.2 and 10.17.3 and
the Carroll County Plumbing Code, Section 16.4.1 and 16.4.2, as
presently provided or as hereinafter may be amended.
C.
Except as provided in the B Zone, where the average setback line of
all buildings on lots which are on the same side of the street or road
and within 200 feet of the lot in question is less than the minimum
setback prescribed by this chapter, the minimum setback line shall be
the average setback line of all buildings within 200 feet of the proposed
building. However, in no case shall the setback line be less than 25 feet
from the center line of any abutting minor road to street or 30 feet in
A.
§ 164-143 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-145
150:638
§ 164-146. Height exceptions. [Amended 12-8-1997 by Ord. No.
624]
§ 164-147. Accessory buildings.
the case of a major street. These minimums shall also apply to the side
of a corner lot.
In computing the depth of a rear yard or the width of a side yard where
the rear or side yard opens on an alley, 1/2 of the alley width may be
included as a portion of the rear or side yard, provided that no buildings
shall be located within five feet of an alley line.
B.
The side yard width may be varied where the side wall of a building is
not parallel to the side lot line or is broken or otherwise irregular. In
such case the average width of the side yard shall not be less than the
otherwise required least width; provided, however, that such side yard
shall not be narrower at any point than 1/2 the otherwise required least
width.
C.
D. A corner lot shall have two front yard setback lines.
Building height limitations shall not apply to water tanks, barns,
windmills, silos or other accessory farm structures; or to belfries,
steeples, spires, electric or transforming or switching equipment, radio,
television or radar towers, chimneys or smokestacks, flagpoles, fire
or observation towers, cupolas, domes, monuments or roof structures
for housing stairways or elevators; or to tanks, ventilating fans, airconditioning
equipment required to operate and maintain the building.
No roof structure shall have a total area greater than 25% of the roof
area, nor shall such structure be used for any purpose other than a
use incidental to the main use of the building. The building height
limitations contained in § 164-139.1 shall apply to telecommunications
facilities. [Amended 10-26-1998 by Ord. No. 631]
A.
Any college or university building or administration, student center,
dormitory, classroom, church, lecture hall, laboratory, theater, or such
type of building related to the educational function of the college
or university, constructed on the campus may not exceed a height
equal to the height of the tallest building existing on campus as of
July 1, 1997; buildings for commercial purposes not principally related
to the educational function of the college or university, regardless
of ownership of the building or land, shall conform to the height
restrictions of the zoning district in which they are located.
B.
Accessory buildings shall be confined to rear yards, except as may
hereinafter be otherwise provided in this chapter.
A.
Accessory buildings shall be at least eight feet in distance from alley
lines and from lot lines which are adjoining lots in any residential zone.
B.
§ 164-145 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-147
150:639
§ 164-148. Off-street parking and loading.
In every zone, spaces for off-street parking and for loading and unloading
of vehicles shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Article
XVI.
§ 164-149. Automobile service stations.
In any residential zone where a corner lot adjoins in the rear a lot
fronting on the side street and located in a residential zone, no part of
any accessory building on such corner lot shall be nearer the side street
lot line than the minimum front yard requirement along such side street
for a dwelling on such adjoining lot. In no case shall any part of such
accessory building be nearer to the common lot line than the minimum
side yard requirement for the principal building to which it is accessory.
C.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection B above, storage sheds
not in excess of 150 square feet of floor space and not in excess of one
story in height may be located on rear and/or side lot lines of singlefamily
attached dwellings and multiple-family dwellings. Such storage
sheds may not be utilized for the storage of motor vehicles.
D.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection B above, a residential
garage which is a portion of a main building or is attached to a main
building may be located anywhere on a lot, provided that the garage
is within the rear, side and front yard requirements of the zone within
which the lot is classified.
E.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection B above, a residential
garage which is not a portion of a main building nor is attached to a
main building may be located anywhere to the side or rear of the main
building, provided that the garage is within the side yard requirements
of the zone within which the lot is classified and is at least five feet in
distance from the rear lot line of said lot, unless access to the garage is
from an existing alley or street which abuts the rear lot line, in which
case the setback shall be eight feet from the rear lot line.
F.
An automobile service station may be permitted upon a finding by
the Board, in addition to the findings required in Article XXII of this
chapter, that:
The use will not constitute a nuisance because of noise, fumes,
odors or physical activity in the location proposed.
(1)
The use at the proposed location will not create a traffic hazard or
traffic nuisance because of its location in relation to similar uses,
necessity of turning movements in relation to its access to public
roads or intersections or its location in relation to other buildings
or proposed buildings on or near the site and the traffic pattern
from such buildings or by reason of its location near a vehicular
or pedestrian entrance or crossing to a public or private school,
(2)
A.
§ 164-147 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-149
150:640
park, playground or hospital or other public use or place of public
assembly.
The use at the proposed location will not adversely affect nor retard
the logical development of the general neighborhood or of the
industrial or commercial zone in which the station is proposed,
considering the service required, the population, character, density
and number of similar uses.
(3)
The evidence of record establishes that for the public convenience
and service a need exists for the proposed use due to an insufficient
number of similar uses presently available to serve existing
population concentrations in the City and that the use at the
location proposed will not result in a multiplicity of proposed uses.
In the absence of convincing evidence to the contrary, the following
shall constitute lack of probability of a reasonable public need:
An automobile service station within one mile on the same side
of the road, except at intersections.
(a)
The presence of two service stations within the four quadrants
of an intersection, including 1/2 mile from the center of the
intersection in any direction.
(b)
(4)
The proposed use will be conducted upon a lot having a minimum
area of 20,000 square feet, provided that this size is adequate
to meet the necessary services and the setback and buffering
requirements, and a minimum lot frontage of 120 feet on a public
road shall be required for each automobile service station site.
(5)
The lot shall contain landscaping on a minimum of 10% of the site
area.
(6)
In addition, the following requirements shall be met:
When such abuts a residential zone or institutional premises not
recommended for reclassification to commercial or industrial zone
on an adopted Master Plan and is not effectively screened by a
natural terrain feature, the use shall be screened by a solid wall or
a substantial, sightly, solid fence not less than five feet in height,
together with a three-foot planting strip on the outside of such wall
or fence, planted in shrubs and evergreens. Screening shall not be
required on street frontage.
(1)
Signs, products displays, parked vehicles and other obstructions
which adversely affect visibility at intersections or to station
driveways shall be prohibited.
(2)
Lighting shall be designed and controlled so that any light source,
including the interior of a building, shall be so shaded, shielded or
directed that the light intensity or brightness shall not adversely
affect surrounding or facing premises nor adversely affect safe
(3)
B.
§ 164-149 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-149
150:641
§ 164-150. Conversion dwellings. [Amended 12-20-1999 by Ord. No.
649]
In the R-7,500, B, D-B and C-B Zones, a dwelling may be converted to
provide additional dwelling units upon a finding by the Board, in addition to
those required in Article XXII of this chapter, that:
vision of operators of vehicles moving on public or private roads,
highways or parking areas. Such lighting shall not shine on or
reflect on or into residential structures.
All gasoline service station developments shall meet City off-street
parking standards to ensure the safe movement of vehicles and
pedestrians. The arrangement of structures, islands, driveways,
parking and landscaping shall be designed so as to ensure
maneuvering ease, to serve the community and not to adversely
affect adjacent properties.
(4)
Driveways shall be designed and located to ensure a safe and
efficient movement of traffic on and off the site from the lane
of traffic nearest the curb. The design, location and construction
of all vehicular access driveways shall be in accordance with the
applicable specifications and standards of the Department of Public
Works.
(5)
Gasoline pumps or other service appliances shall be located on the
lot at least 10 feet behind the building line, and all service storage
or similar activities in connection with such use shall be conducted
entirely within the building. There shall normally be at least 20
feet between driveways on each street, and all driveways shall
be perpendicular to the curb- or street line unless the Planning
Director determines that those configurations would present an
unreasonable risk to vehicular and pedestrian traffic and grants
a modification of those requirements which would eliminate or
minimize such risks. [Amended 1-28-2008 by Ord. No. 774]
(6)
Vehicles shall not be parked so as to overhang in the public rightof-
way.
(7)
There will be off-street parking in accordance with the parking standard
for multiple-family units as provided in § 164-111C, and the location
of said spaces when occupied by motor vehicles will not obstruct or
impede the safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians or be parked so
as to overhang in the public right-of-way.
A.
The maximum number of dwelling units permitted in any conversion
dwelling in the B, D-B or C-B Zone shall be determined by dividing
the area in square feet of the lot upon which the proposed conversion
dwelling is located by 3,500. The maximum number of dwelling units
in the R-7,500 Zone shall be determined by dividing the area in square
B.
§ 164-149 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-150
150:642
§ 164-151. Junkyards.
feet of the lot upon which the proposed conversion dwelling is located
by 5,000.
The structure sought to be converted is not enlarged or expanded more
than 30% of the floor area of the dwelling existing prior to conversion.
C.
Each proposed dwelling unit shall meet the minimum square foot
requirements of the Minimum Livability Code as contained in Carroll
County Ordinance No. 70.
D.
Any person or persons, corporation, partnership, association or
organization shall be prohibited from establishing, maintaining or
operating a junkyard for the collection, storage or disposal of junked
motor vehicles, furniture, furnishings or equipment without a permit
from the Zoning Administrator, which shall be issued in the industrial
zones only upon the following conditions:
The yard shall be located at least 500 feet at its closest point
from any property used for a school or a hospital or for religious
purposes.
(1)
No junkyard shall be established within any block or area which
contains residences.
(2)
Payment of an application fee as provided in the General Fee
Ordinance113 shall be required. [Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord.
No. 792]
(3)
No junkyard permit shall be granted when the location and use
of the junkyard would hinder or obstruct traffic or cause a traffic
condition dangerous to the public, would be dangerous to the
health or safety of the public or would constitute a public nuisance.
(4)
No junkyard permit shall be issued for any junkyard which requires
a state license in any case in which the State Roads Commission
has denied such license.
(5)
A.
No receptacles or other structure or pieces of equipment in said yards
shall be permitted to be exposed in such a manner as would permit
accumulation of water.
B.
Grass or weeds shall not be permitted to grow higher than one foot
from the ground.
C.
Any junked or abandoned cars, trucks and other motor vehicles shall
be kept in an orderly manner and out of sight of a public road and
residential zones, except agricultural.
D.
E. No materials shall be burned.
113. Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
§ 164-150 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-151
150:643
§ 164-152. Mobile homes.
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, the parking of a mobile home in
any district shall be prohibited, except in the following locations:
No garbage, refuse or organic matter shall be permitted to accumulate
on such lots.
F.
Such lots shall be adequately fenced in with a fence of sufficient height
and quality to prevent trespassers from entering such premises and
shall be screened by a fence and hedge so as not to be visible. Said
fencing and hedging shall be approved by the Board.
G.
Owners and operators of junkyards and places of business for the
purchase, sale, baling, handling or storage of scrap paper, junked
automobiles, metals, bottles, rags, rubber or other junk are hereby
prohibited from transacting any such business with any minor other
than a relative or employee. However, this subsection shall not be
construed to prohibit collection of junk and the sale thereof to junk
dealers when such collection is made by organizations such as, for
example, the Boy Scouts or Girl Scouts of America when a permit for
such purpose has been issued, free of charge, by the City.
H.
Each owner or operator of a junkyard or place of business for the
purchase, sale, baling, handling or storage of scrap paper, junked
automobiles, metals, bottles, rags, rubber or other junk shall keep a
record of all purchases made by him, such record to include the name
and address of the vendor, the item purchased, the purchase price,
the date of purchase and any unusual circumstances connected with
the transaction. This record shall be open to inspection by the Police
Department during all regular business hours prevailing within the City.
I.
One mobile home may be parked or stored in an accessory building or
in the rear yard of a principal use, provided that no living quarters shall
be maintained or any business conducted in such mobile home while it
is parked or stored.
A.
A mobile home may be located as a temporary construction office in any
zone.
B.
A mobile home may be placed, upon approval of the Board, on a farm
to be used in support of agricultural enterprises conducted thereon in
either of the following cases:
For the purpose of providing a home for those members of the
immediate family of the owner of such farm whose principal
occupation is employment on the farm.
(1)
For the purpose of providing a home for tenant or migrant labor
employed full-time on the farm.
(2)
C.
§ 164-151 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-152
150:644
§ 164-153. Multiple-family dwellings.
The Board may authorize and issue a permit under Subsection C when
the mobile home shall be located in the immediate vicinity of and as
an integral part of other major farm buildings (located in the farm
building group) not more than 300 feet therefrom and abiding by
setback and yard requirements prescribed for the district, and provided
further that a minimum of 50 acres of land engaged in the active
production of agricultural products shall be required for eligibility
under this section. A farm or any other portion thereof, regardless
of size, that is not actively employed in agricultural production or a
farm or portion thereof enrolled in the United States Department of
Agricultural soil bank or similar program shall be considered inactive
and not eligible under this section.
D.
Multiple-family dwellings may be permitted as a special exception upon
a finding by the Board, in addition to the findings required in Article
XXII of this chapter, that the following standards and requirements will
be met.
A.
Standards for sites consisting of one acre or less. Sites consisting of one
acre or less shall meet the following standards:
Density. The maximum number of dwelling units permitted shall be
determined by dividing the area in square feet of the site by 2,150.
Where the quotient resulting from the foregoing division includes
a fraction and where the fraction exceeds 0.75, one additional
dwelling unit may be added to the quotient. For purposes of this
section only, an efficiency unit shall be counted as 0.75 of a
dwelling unit; a one-bedroom unit shall be counted as one dwelling
unit; and a unit with two or more bedrooms shall be counted as
1.25 dwelling units.
(1)
Open space. Ten percent of the site area shall be kept for open
space.
(2)
Building height limit. No structure shall exceed the height of three
stories or the height of an adjacent structure on the block,
whichever is higher.
(3)
Building or use setbacks. Notwithstanding the provisions of
§ 164-45, the following minimum requisites for building or use
setbacks shall be observed:
Front. The front line setback shall be six feet or equal to the
setbacks of immediately adjacent buildings, whichever is more,
from the public street.
(a)
Side. The side line setback shall be equal to 1/3 or more of the
height of the multifamily building.
(b)
(4)
B.
§ 164-152 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-153
150:645
§ 164-153.1. Multiple-family dwellings in R-7500 Residential Zone.
[Added 10-25-1999 by Ord. No. 639]
Rear. The rear line setback shall be 40 feet from the rear lot
line for multifamily buildings and eight feet from the rear lot
line for accessory buildings.
(c)
For parking uses, the setback shall be five feet from any public
walkway, 10 feet from any street or curb and five feet from
every residential lot line.
(d)
Parking. Spaces for off-street parking and for loading and
unloading shall be provided in accordance with the requisites
of Article XVI. Additionally, no front yard parking shall be
allowed.
(e)
(5) Site plan approval pursuant to Article XXV.
Standards for sites consisting of more than one acre. Sites consisting of
more than one acre shall meet the following standards:
Density. The maximum number of dwelling units shall not exceed
15 dwelling units per acre. Calculation of net acreage shall include
all land within the site, except floodplain areas and slopes in excess
of 25%.
(1)
Lot area, lot width and yard requirements. The minimum lot area,
lot width and yard requirements contained in § 164-91C shall be
met.
(2)
Building height limitations. The maximum building height
limitations contained in § 164-92 shall not be exceeded.
(3)
Open space. The open space provisions contained in § 164-93 shall
be met.
(4)
Dedication of land for public use. The dedication of land for public
use provisions contained in § 164-96 shall be met.
(5)
(6) Site plan approval shall be attained pursuant to Article XXV.
C.
Multiple-family dwellings permitted in the R-7500 Residential Zone
under § 164-135D shall comply with the following standards and
requirements:
Density. The maximum number of dwelling units shall not exceed
the number of dwelling units existing on the site as of July 1, 1999,
plus an increased density bonus of 20%.
(1)
Open space. Ten percent of the site area shall be kept for open
space.
(2)
A.
§ 164-153 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-153.1
150:646
§ 164-153.2. Multiple-family housing for older persons. [Added
9-24-2001 by Ord. No. 672114]
Building height limit. No multiple-family dwelling shall exceed 2
1/2 stories or 35 feet in height, and no accessory building shall
exceed two stories or 25 feet in height.
(3)
Building or use setbacks. The following minimum requisites for
building or use setbacks shall be observed:
Front. The front line setback shall be six feet or equal to the
setbacks of immediately adjacent buildings, whichever is more,
from the public street.
(a)
Side. The side line setback shall be equal to 1/3 or more of the
height of the multifamily building.
(b)
Rear. The rear line setback shall be 40 feet from the rear lot
line for multifamily buildings and eight feet from rear lot line
for accessory buildings.
(c)
For parking uses, the setback shall be five feet from any public
walkway, 10 feet from any street or curb and five feet from
every residential lot line.
(d)
(4)
Parking. Spaces for off-street parking and for loading and
unloading shall be provided in accordance with the requisites of
Article XVI. Additionally, no front yard parking shall be allowed.
(5)
(6) Site plan approval shall be obtained pursuant to Article XXV.
Housing for older persons may be permitted as a special exception upon
a finding by the Board, in addition to the findings required in Article
XXII of this chapter, that the following standards and requirements will
be met.
A.
Density. The maximum number of dwelling units shall not exceed 16
dwelling units per gross acre, prior to any dedications.
B.
C. Open space. At least 10% of the site shall be kept for open space.
Building height limit. No principal structure shall exceed three stories
or 40 feet in height, and no accessory building shall exceed two stories
or 20 feet in height.
D.
E. The following minimum requirements shall apply:
114. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that any density calculation made under
§ 164-153.2 shall round upward to the next highest dwelling unit.
§ 164-153.1 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-153.2
150:647
§ 164-154. Single-family detached and semidetached dwellings.
Single-family detached and semidetached dwellings may be permitted as a
special exception upon a finding by the Board, in addition to the findings
required in Article XXII of this chapter, that the following standards and
requirements will be met.
Dwelling Type
Lot Width at
Building
Line
(feet)
Front
Yard
(feet)
Side
Yard
(feet)
Rear
Yard
(feet)
All principal and
accessory structures
100 40 20 50
For the purpose of administering this section, any room other than a
living room, kitchen, dinette or dining room, bathroom and closet shall
be construed as a bedroom.
F.
The architectural design of all buildings shall be consistent with the
creation of an independent, self-reliant and pleasant living atmosphere
for a group of older persons requiring indoor and outdoor privacy,
participation in social and community activities and who may have
limited mobility.
G.
Dedication of land for public use. Such land as may be required for
public streets, parks, schools and other public uses shall be dedicated
in accordance with the requirements of the laws of the City and the
adopted general plan and Master Plans and other plans as may be
applicable. The lands to be dedicated shall be so identified upon
development plans and site plans required under the provisions of this
chapter and any other laws of the City.
H.
Parking. Spaces for off-street parking and for loading and unloading
shall be provided in accordance with the requisites of Article XVI,
except that each standard perpendicular or angled parking space shall
be a rectangle having minimum dimensions of 10 feet by 18 feet.
I.
The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed use is compatible
with the abutting dissimilar land uses, which may include provisions to
mitigate impacts upon adjacent properties. Any proposal submitted by
the applicant to the Board to address compatibility shall become part of
the Board's findings and requirements.
J.
K. Site plan approval shall be obtained pursuant to Article XXV.
A. Open space. Ten percent of the site area shall be kept for open space.
Building height limit. No structure shall exceed the height of three
stories or the height of an adjacent structure on the block, whichever is
higher.
B.
§ 164-153.2 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-154
150:648
§ 164-155. Self-service storage facilities.
In the I-R Restricted Industrial Zone, self-service storage facilities are
permitted, provided that the following standards and requirements are met:
Building or use setbacks. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 164-45,
the following minimum requisites for building or use setbacks shall be
observed:
Front. The front line setback shall be six feet or equal to the
setbacks of immediately adjacent buildings, whichever is more,
from the public street.
(1)
Side. The side line setback shall be equal to 1/3 or more of the
height of the principal structure.
(2)
Rear. The rear line setback shall be 25 feet from the rear lot line
for the principal structure and eight feet from rear lot line for
accessory structures.
(3)
For parking uses, the setback shall be five feet from any public
walkway, 10 feet from any street or curb and five feet from every
residential lot line.
(4)
Parking. Spaces for off-street parking and for loading and
unloading shall be provided in accordance with the requisites of
Article XVI. Additionally, no front yard parking shall be allowed.
(5)
C.
Site plan approval. Site plan approval shall be attained pursuant to
Article XXV.
D.
A. Building height limit. No structure shall exceed 20 feet in height.
Building or use setback. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 164-55,
the following minimum requisites for building or use setbacks shall be
observed:
(1) Front: 30 feet from the public street right-of-way.
Side and rear: 10 feet from any side or rear property or right-ofway
line.
(2)
B.
Building construction.
Materials. The exterior of all buildings visible from outside the
property shall be brick, architecturally attractive block (such as
scored colored block, fluted block or split-face block) or some other
similarly acceptable material. Standard block or metal exteriors
are allowed in interior areas not visible from outside the property.
(1)
Area. The maximum floor area of each individual storage unit shall
be 300 square feet, except that up to 20% of the total area may be
encompassed by units of up to 600 square feet. In no case will any
unit greater than 600 square feet be permitted.
(2)
C.
§ 164-154 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-155
150:649
Parking.
Parking shall be provided at a ratio of one space for each 6,500
square feet of gross building area, but not less than six parking
spaces shall be provided.
(1)
Parking near units shall be provided as a part of the driving lane.
Said lane shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide.
(2)
(3) Parking spaces may not be rented as or used for vehicular storage.
D.
Lighting. All outdoor lighting shall be shielded to direct light and glare
only onto the self-service storage premises and shall be of sufficient
intensity to discourage vandalism and theft. Said lighting and glare
shall be deflected, shaded and focused away from all adjoining
properties.
E.
Landscaping.
Size. A minimum landscaped strip 10 feet wide shall be provided
along the entire perimeter of the premises.
(1)
Placement. Landscaping shall be provided in areas between the
property line and the required fencing or barrier.
(2)
Planting. Landscaping shall be provided to establish a buffer
between the site barrier (fence or storage structure wall) and
the property line. The buffer shall consist of a variety of hardy
evergreen and deciduous plant material, located in such a way so
as to provide substantial screening of the site barrier. Emphasis of
the planting shall be directed toward key frontage and rear and
side yard conditions where the impact of the project may be the
most severe. The plant material selected shall consist of a mix of
shade trees, flowering trees, evergreen trees and evergreen and
deciduous shrubs and ground cover. Evergreen trees shall have
a minimum height of six feet. Shade trees shall have a minimum
caliper of 2 1/2 inches, and flowering trees shall have a minimum
caliper of two inches. Landscaping plans shall be prepared by a
registered landscape architect.
(3)
F.
Fencing. A barrier shall be located at least 10 feet from the property
line. Said barrier may consist of either the solid facades of the storage
structures or a fence. Any fence shall be a minimum of eight feet
in height and constructed of opaque materials that will prevent the
passage of light and debris, such as brick, stone, architectural tile,
masonry units, wood or similar materials.
G.
Signs. Signs shall be permitted subject to the provisions of Article XVII
of this chapter. However, outdoor advertising displays, media or signs
that do not identify the nature of the self-service storage facilities shall
not be permitted on the premises.
H.
I. Storage only. The following restrictions are imposed:
§ 164-155 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-155
150:650
§ 164-155.1. Indoor shooting ranges. [Added 2-27-1995 by Ord. No.
594]
Indoor shooting ranges may be permitted as a special exception upon
approval by the Board in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
provided that the following standards and requirements are met:
No business activity other than the storage and removal of personal
property shall be conducted on the premises.
(1)
Outside storage not to exceed 15% of the gross building area shall
be permitted for the storage of licensed motor vehicles, trailers,
campers and boats. The service, repair, construction or
reconstruction of any such property is prohibited, and this
provision shall not permit the storage of such property which is
partially dismantled, wrecked or inoperable. Any such outside
storage shall be located only in designated paved areas located in
a manner so as not to interfere with the use of enclosed storage,
and said designated area shall be located in a manner not to be
visible from outside the property. Such area shall not be considered
to substitute for the parking requirements set forth in Subsection
D.
(2)
No outside storage will be permitted other than that allowed in the
prior subsection.
(3)
Storage of flammable, toxic or explosive materials or hazardous
chemicals is prohibited, except for fuel in the standard fuel tanks
of boats and other vehicles.
(4)
All rental contracts for self-service storage facilities shall include
clauses prohibiting the storage of flammable liquids, highly
combustible or explosive materials or hazardous chemicals and the
use of the property for uses other than dead storage.
(5)
Resident manager facility. A self-service storage facility may utilize the
service of a resident manager to enhance security. A dwelling unit may
be provided for said resident manager, which is permitted only as an
accessory use pursuant to § 164-53N and it may not be otherwise used.
J.
That any such range shall be constructed and maintained in such a
manner as to eliminate all danger to persons or property outside said
range from flying projectiles.
A.
Any such range shall be housed in a separate freestanding building with
no other uses therein.
B.
Any such range shall employ the best available technology in the
handling, manipulation, control, management and disposal of metallic
bullet lead and lead shot.
C.
§ 164-155 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-155.1
150:651
§ 164-155.2. Private indoor recreational facilities. [Added
12-14-2015 by Ord. No. 861]
Private indoor recreational facilities may be permitted as a special
exception, upon approval by the Board in accordance with the provisions of
this code, provided that the following standards and requirements are met
below. An exception to § 164-140 is noted under Subsection C below.
§ 164-155.3. Firearms sales in D-B Downtown Business Zone.
[Added 1-14-2019 by Ord. No. 903]
Any such application under consideration by the Board shall include
the organizational and management structure of the indoor shooting
range, a detailed plan of operation and a security plan, all of which such
documents shall be adopted either as proposed or as amended by the
Board as conditions to approval of the special exception by the Board.
D.
The use of explosive-tip or Teflon-coated ammunition and black powder
shall not be allowed within any such facility.
E.
No persons shall be allowed within any such facility who appear to be
under the influence of drugs and/or alcohol.
F.
The sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the property shall be
prohibited.
G.
Entering or leaving the premises with loaded firearms shall be strictly
prohibited. All firearms must be cleared and open except while on the
firing line. This subsection shall not apply to law enforcement personnel
and those individuals who have a valid handgun permit issued by the
Maryland State Police.
H.
Private indoor recreational facilities may only be located on a lot no
greater than three acres.
A.
Such private facilities may only be designed for a capacity of no greater
than 320 persons.
B.
Such private facilities are not subject to the additional distance
requirement in § 164-140.
C.
Notwithstanding any other provision, such facilities shall comply with
or exceed required parking standards for recreation facilities and
centers under § 164-111, with no reductions.
D.
Firearm sales may be permitted as a special exception in the D-B Zone
upon approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals for businesses with
the primary purpose of firearms training and/or sales in accordance
with the provisions of this Code, provided that the following standards
and requirements are met below. The distance requirements from
dwellings, schools, churches and institutions for human care are waived
A.
§ 164-155.1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-155.3
150:652
for firearms sales via an exception to § 164-140 under Subsection H
below.
A loading and unloading station must be provided within the facility
where firearms are to be sold. Stations shall be comprised of heavy
steel enclosures to safely contain any errant round fired while
loading or unloading a firearm.
(1)
An industry-standard alarm system must be provided. Alarm
systems must be technically robust and encompass glass
protection, interior and exterior doors, access panels and ducts.
A panic button must be provided. The system must be externally
monitored.
(2)
An industry-standard video surveillance system must be provided.
Video surveillance systems must include coverage of all entrances
and exits, register areas, loading areas, and restricted firearms
storage areas. Cameras should also be visible to the public to serve
as a crime deterrent.
(3)
Firearms sales facilities shall provide break-resistant doors, gates,
glass, security grills and gates.
(4)
Exterior and interior lighting must be provided with automatic
timers to function from dusk to dawn each day.
(5)
All exterior doors must have commercial-quality locks and door
hardware, dead bolts, guard plates, emergency egress locks and
secondary locking mechanisms.
(6)
Firearms may only be displayed in high-security showcases,
firearm safes, cable locks and secure stockrooms. All firearms must
be removed from display and placed in secure storage during
the hours the establishment is closed. A security protocol for all
transfer times must be established.
(7)
Firearms sales uses shall not be subject to the additional distance
requirements in § 164-140 (i.e., 100 feet from any property that
contains a dwelling, school, church or institution for human care).
(8)
Any wall abutting another structure designed or intended for
human occupancy must be constructed of or faced with a bulletresistant
material.
(9)
No firearms sales may be conducted in any premises on any lot that is
contiguous with Main Street.
B.
Notwithstanding any other provision in the Code, firearms sales uses
approved under this section and located in an existing building shall be
exempt from all parking requirements in § 164-111.
C.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, a special exception
granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals under this section will lapse six
D.
§ 164-155.3 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-155.3
150:653
months after the cessation of the business with the primary purpose of
firearms training and/or the sale of firearms.
The Westminster Police Department shall inspect the premises
biennially for compliance with the requirements of this section.
E.
§ 164-155.3 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-155.3
150:654
ARTICLE XXI
Administration and Enforcement
§ 164-156. Department and Director of Community Planning and
Development. [Added 2-11-2013 by Ord. No. 840115]
§ 164-157. Zoning certificate.
There is hereby established the Department of Community Planning
and Development and the office of Director of said Department. For
purposes of this Code, any reference to the Zoning Administrator shall
be deemed to be a reference to the Director of Community Planning
and Development. Any person appointed to the office shall be qualified
by education, experience or training to administer and enforce the
provisions of this chapter. Any person so appointed shall maintain no
interest in any matter which may be construed by the Mayor and
Common Council of Westminster to be in conflict with the duties and
decisions of his office.
A.
The Director of Community Planning and Development shall be
responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter and
shall perform such other duties as the Mayor and Common Council shall
from time to time direct. He shall have the authority to adopt rules,
regulations and procedures for the performance of his responsibilities
and may delegate, in writing, such responsibilities as he deems
necessary.
B.
Appeals may be made by any person, board, association, corporation,
jurisdiction or official allegedly aggrieved by the grant or refusal of a
zoning certificate, as authorized by the Annotated Code of Maryland,
Land Use Article, Division I, as amended, or by any other administrative
decision of the Director of Community Planning and Development
based, in whole or in part, upon this chapter, including the Zoning
Map. Such appeals shall be made to the Board in accordance with the
provisions of Article XXII of this chapter.
C.
Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for an owner to use
or to permit the use of any building, structure or land or part thereof
hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or enlarged, wholly or
partly, until a zoning certificate shall have been issued by the Zoning
Administrator. A fee shall be charged for each zoning certificate issued
as provided in the General Fee Ordinance.116 A zoning certificate shall
be revocable for failure to comply with all requirements and conditions.
[Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 792]
A.
All applications for zoning certificates shall state the name and address
of the applicant and the name and address of the owner of the property
and shall be accompanied by plans drawn approximately to scale,
B.
115. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 164-156, Zoning Administrator.
116. Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
§ 164-156 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-157
150:655
§ 164-158. Planning Commission.
In addition to the responsibilities and duties assigned to the Planning
Commission under the provisions of Article 66B of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, 1978 Replacement Volume, and as hereinafter may be amended,
and Chapter 7, Boards and Commissions, Article II, Planning and Zoning
Commission, of the Code of Westminster, the Commission shall exercise the
responsibilities and functions provided in this chapter. In that connection,
showing the dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon, the
size and location of existing buildings, if any, and the location and
dimensions of the proposed building or alteration. Where no buildings
are involved, the location of the proposed use to be made of the lot
shall be shown. The application and/or plans shall authorize the Zoning
Administrator to inspect the property and shall include such other
information as may be reasonably required by the Zoning Administrator
to determine conformance with and provide for the enforcement of this
chapter. All applications and plans shall be retained in the office of the
Zoning Administrator, who shall furnish copies of them at a reasonable
cost to any person upon request.
The Zoning Administrator shall approve the issuance of a zoning
certificate only if the application complies with the requirements of this
chapter, and provided that such zoning certificate shall not be granted
until all agencies concerned have given their approval, including the
site plan approval required under Article XXV.
C.
No departments, officials or public employees which are vested with
the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall issue any permit
or license for any use, building or purpose if the same would be in
conflict with the provisions of this chapter. Any permit or license issued
in conflict with the provisions of this chapter shall be null and void.
D.
A zoning certificate shall become void 12 months after the date of
issuance if the construction or use for which the certificate was issued
has not been initiated.
E.
Construction or use under prior zoning certificate. Where a zoning
certificate has been validly issued prior to the adoption of this chapter,
the construction or use so authorized may be completed or continued
in accordance with the conditions then required, provided that such
construction or use shall have been started within 12 months of the
date of issuance of such zoning certificate and is completed within a
reasonable time under the particular circumstance. Where an appeal
is pending for a conditional use under the terms of the Interim Zoning
Ordinance No. 355 and which has been filed not more than 90 days
prior to the adoption of this chapter, the Board shall consider such
appeal under the terms of Interim Zoning Ordinance No. 355, provided
that all papers constituting the appeal have been filed with the Zoning
Administrator prior to the adoption of this chapter.
F.
§ 164-157 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-158
150:656
the Commission is authorized to adopt rules and regulations which it deems
appropriate relating thereto.
§ 164-158.1. Administrative adjustments. [Added 4-28-2003 by Ord.
No. 701]
Authorization to grant.
In accordance with § 4.05(d) of Article 66B of the Annotated Code
of Maryland, the Planning Director (Director) is authorized to grant
administrative adjustments from the following requirements
contained in this chapter: [Amended 1-28-2008 by Ord. No.
774]
(a) Local height requirements;
(b) Local setback requirements;
(c) Local bulk requirements;
(d) Local parking requirements;
(e) Local loading, dimensional, or area requirements; or
(f) Similar local requirements.
(1)
The Director may grant such adjustments in cases where the strict
compliance with the requirements of this chapter would result in
practical difficulty or unreasonable hardship which has not been
caused by the applicant. Nothing in this section is intended to
permit the Director to permit an adjustment to state or City
requirements that are intended to protect environmentally
sensitive areas, such as streams, slopes. wetlands, natural heritage
areas or critical areas. This section does not authorize the Director,
under the guise of an adjustment, to change the use of land.
(2)
A.
The criteria and procedures regarding the granting of administrative
adjustments shall be adopted by the Director and approved by
resolution of the Mayor and Common Council. Any decision by the
Director on an application for an administrative adjustment shall
include written findings of fact
B.
The Mayor and Common Council is authorized to establish fees for
the review of administrative adjustment requests as provided in the
General Fee Ordinance.117 [Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 792]
C.
The final action of the-Director on an application for approval of an
administrative adjustment may be appealed by any person aggrieved
by such action to the Circuit Court for Carroll County. Any such appeal
shall be taken in accordance with the Maryland Rules of Procedure as
set forth in Title 7, Chapter 200.
D.
117. Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
§ 164-158 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-159
150:657
§ 164-159. Violations and penalties.
In addition to any other remedies provided by law, any violation of this
chapter is declared to be a municipal infraction. The penalty for violation
shall be $400. Each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 164-159 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-159
150:658
ARTICLE XXII
Board of Zoning Appeals
§ 164-160. General provisions.
The Board of Zoning Appeals of Westminster is hereby created and
designated the "Board of Appeals."
§ 164-161. Powers and duties.
The Board of Appeals consists of three members who shall be residents
of the City. In addition, there shall be one alternate member empowered
to sit on the Board in the absence of any member of the Board. When
the alternate is absent, a temporary alternate shall be designated.
A.
The terms of office of the members of the Board are three years. They
shall be appointed by the Mayor, confirmed by the Common Council and
removable for cause, upon written charges and after public hearing.
B.
Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose
term becomes vacant.
C.
Members of the Board may receive such compensation as the Common
Council deems appropriate.
D.
Persons appointed to the Board shall be selected for their
understanding of and appreciation for principles of zoning, knowledge
of conditions in the community and its plans, policies, objectives,
general civic interest and fair judicial approach.
E.
Neither the Mayor nor any member of the Common Council shall serve
as either a member, alternate member or temporary alternate member
of the Board of Appeals.
F.
The Board shall have the following powers:
To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an
error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made
by an administrative official, including the Zoning Administrator,
in regard to the enforcement of this chapter or of any ordinance
adopted pursuant thereto.
(1)
To hear and decide special exceptions as such exceptions are
authorized by this chapter.
(2)
To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variances from the
terms of this chapter as are necessary to avoid arbitrariness and
so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed and substantial
justice done.
Such variances shall be authorized by the Board only upon a
finding by the Board that:
(a)
(3)
A.
§ 164-160 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-161
150:659
§ 164-162. Meetings.
§ 164-163. Appeals.
Appeals to the Board shall be taken within 30 days after the decision by
filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the Board a
notice of appeal, specifying the grounds therefor. The officer from whom the
There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or
conditions applying to the property in question or to the
intended use of the property that do not apply generally to
other properties or classes of uses in the same zone;
[1]
Such variance is necessary for the preservation and
enjoyment of substantial property rights possessed by
other properties in the same zone and in the same vicinity;
and
[2]
The authorizing of such variance will not be of substantial
detriment to adjacent properties and will not materially
impair the purpose of this chapter or the public interest.
[3]
This subsection shall not be construed to permit the Board,
under the guise of a variance, to change the use of land.
(b)
In exercising the above-mentioned power in appeals, the Board may,
in conformity with the provisions of law and this chapter, reverse or
affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement,
decision or determination as the Board deems necessary and to that
end shall have all the powers of the office from whom the appeal is
taken.
B.
The Board is also empowered to adopt and promulgate such rules and
regulations as it shall deem necessary to perform its responsibilities,
including the conduct of its hearings and the issuance of its decision.
C.
The Board shall be organized and its rules shall be adopted in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter and this chapter.
Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairman and
at such other times as the Board may determine. The Chairman or, in
his absence, the Acting Chairman may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses. For assistance in reaching decisions relative
to appeals, special exceptions or variances, the Board may request
testimony at its hearings for purposes of securing technical aid or
factual evidence from the Commission or any agency or person.
A.
All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall
keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member
upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such
fact, and shall keep records of its official actions, all of which shall be
immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public record.
B.
§ 164-161 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-163
150:660
appeal is taken, including the Zoning Administrator, shall forthwith transmit
to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from was taken.
§ 164-164. Stay of proceedings.
An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from unless the official from whom the appeal was taken certifies to the
Board, after the notice of appeal has been filed with him, that by reasons of
facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent
peril to life or property. In such case proceedings shall not be stayed
otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board
or by a court of record, on application, after notice to the officer from whom
the appeal was taken and on due cause shown.
§ 164-165. Special exception petitions.
§ 164-166. Actions prior to hearing.
Upon the filing of a notice of appeal or a petition for special exception, the
Board shall take the following action preparatory to holding a hearing:
Filing of petition. Petitions for the grant of special exceptions shall be
filed with the Board on forms provided therefor. The petitioner shall
submit site development plans, specifications or other data, including
architectural plans or explanatory material, stating the methods by
which he will comply with the conditions specified for each grant of
special exception. At the time of filing his request for a grant of special
exception, the petitioner shall pay to the Board the fee provided in
§ 164-174.
A.
Zoning Map to indicate special exception. Upon receipt of a notice of a
grant of special exception, the Zoning Administrator shall indicate the
same in the proper place on the Zoning Map by use of appropriate code
number or symbol.
B.
The Board shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing of the appeal or
petition.
A.
Notice of the hearing shall be advertised in two issues of a newspaper
having general circulation in the City, and the first insertion shall
appear in such newspaper at least 20 days prior to such hearing.
B.
The property with which the appeal or petition is concerned shall be
posted conspicuously by the Zoning Administrator stating the time,
date, place and purpose of the hearing at least 14 days before the date
of the hearing. Said sign shall be maintained continuously, and at the
hearing the appellant or petitioner shall have the duty of proving by
affidavit that this provision has been met up to the time of the hearing.
It shall be unlawful for anyone except the Zoning Administrator to
C.
§ 164-163 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-166
150:661
§ 164-167. Public hearings.
§ 164-168. Postponement or continuation of hearing.
remove or tamper with any sign during the period that it is required to
be maintained.
Notification by certified mail shall be made to the appellant or
petitioner and to the owners of those properties and the addresses
certified on the notice of appeals or petition for special exception,
respectively, by the appellant or petitioner as being contiguous to the
property with which the hearing is concerned. Properties facing the
property and across a street or public right-of-way shall also be
considered contiguous.
D.
Upon written request to the Board by any interested party at least 10
days prior to the date of the scheduled hearing, the Board shall be
required to visit the property in question before the hearing. The Board
may otherwise visit the specific property prior to the hearing.
E.
The Board shall refer all petitions for special exceptions to the
Commission for its report and recommendation. Thereafter, the
Commission may, in its discretion, issue a report and recommendation.
F.
Before making its decision on any appeal or petition, the Board shall
hold a public hearing, at which time any party may appear and be heard
in person or by agent or by attorney.
A.
The Board in its rules and regulations may prescribe regulations
pertaining to the submission of documentary evidence into the record
prior to the hearing.
B.
Subject to the provisions of Subsection B, any party has the right to
submit oral or written testimony or documentary evidence into the
record.
C.
The Board may consider the Zoning Map as a part of the record. It
may also exclude evidence which is immaterial, irrelevant or unduly
repetitious.
D.
The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, meetings and
hearings.
E.
Requests for postponement of a scheduled hearing shall be filed, in
writing, with the Board not less than 10 days prior to the date of
hearing and shall be accompanied by a sum of money sufficient to pay
the cost of advertising the postponement and the rescheduled hearing.
The granting of such requests shall be at the discretion of the Chairman
of the Board.
A.
Requests for postponement filed later than 10 days prior to the date
of a scheduled hearing shall, in addition to the other requirements set
B.
§ 164-166 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-168
150:662
§ 164-169. Criteria for determination.
In the exercise of its responsibilities under this chapter, the Board shall
study the specific property involved, as well as the neighborhood, shall
consider all testimony and data submitted and shall hear any person
desiring to speak for or against the appeal or petition.
forth in Subsection A, be supported by an affidavit of the party making
the request or of some other creditable person. The granting of such
request shall be at the discretion of the Board, in cases of extreme
hardship, or upon good cause shown.
The Board may, upon its own initiative, postpone a scheduled hearing
at any time, but shall readvertise the new hearing date in accordance
with § 164-166B.
C.
Once started, the Board may continue a hearing to a date, time and
place certain on public announcement given at the hearing specifying
such new date, time and place, and no additional notice of continued
hearings shall be required.
D.
In making its determination, the Board may consider whether the
appeal or petition would adversely affect the public health, safety,
security, morals or general welfare, would result in dangerous traffic
conditions or would jeopardize the lives or property of people living in
the neighborhood.
A.
In deciding such matters, the Board may consider the following factors,
together with other relevant factors:
The number of people residing or working in the immediate area
concerned.
(1)
(2) The orderly growth of a community.
(3) Traffic conditions and facilities.
The effect of such use upon the peaceful enjoyment of people in
their homes.
(4)
(5) The conservation of property values.
The effect of odors, dust, gas, smoke, fumes, vibrations, glare and
noise upon the use of surrounding property values.
(6)
(7) The most appropriate use of land and structure.
(8) Prior decisions of the courts regarding such matters.
(9) The purpose of the regulations as set forth in this chapter.
The type and kind of structures in the vicinity where public
gatherings may be held, such as schools, churches and the like.
(10)
B.
§ 164-168 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-169
150:663
§ 164-170. Conditions for grant of special exceptions.
§ 164-171. Other restrictions; remedies.
Facilities for sewers, water, schools, transportation and other
services and the ability of the City to supply such services.
(11)
Limitations of fire-fighting equipment and the means of access for
fire, police and health services.
(12)
(13)The preservation of cultural and historical landmarks.
Traffic conditions, including facilities for pedestrians, such as
sidewalks, safety zones, parking facilities available and the safe
access of cars to highways or roads.
(14)
The contribution, if any, that such proposed use, building or
addition would make toward the deterioration of areas and
neighborhoods.
(15)
The Board may grant a special exception when it finds from a
preponderance of the evidence of record that:
The proposed use does not adversely affect the general plan for the
physical development of the district, as may be embodied in this
chapter and in any Master Plan or portion thereof adopted by the
Commission;
(1)
The proposed use at the location selected will not:
Adversely affect the health and safety of residents or workers
in the area;
(a)
Overburden existing public services, including water, sanitary
sewer, public roads, storm drainage and other public
improvements; or
(b)
Be detrimental to the use or development of adjacent
properties or the general neighborhood or change the
character of the general neighborhood in which the use is
proposed, considering the service required, at the time of the
application, the population, density, character and number of
similar uses; and
(c)
(2)
The standards set forth for each particular use for which a special
exception may be granted have been met.
(3)
A.
The applicant for a special exception shall have the burden of proof,
which shall include the burden of going forward with the evidence
and the burden of persuasion on all questions of fact which are to be
determined by the Board.
B.
§ 164-169 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-171
150:664
§ 164-172. Decisions.
The Board is hereby empowered to add the specific provisions that
it may deem necessary to protect adjacent properties, the general
neighborhood and the residents and workers therein, including
provisions such as special setbacks, landscaping, parking, lighting
restrictions, limited business hours and other restrictions. The Board
may also specify a time limit for the implementation of a special
exception.
A.
Special exceptions shall be subject to the parking requirements
contained in Article XVI.
B.
Whenever the Board shall find, in the case of any exception heretofore
or hereafter granted pursuant to the provisions of this article, that any
of the terms, conditions or restrictions upon which such exception was
granted are not being complied with, the Board is authorized, after due
notice to all parties concerned and granting full opportunity for a public
hearing, to suspend or revoke such exception or take other action as
it deems necessary to ensure compliance. The Board is authorized to
request and obtain investigations and reports as to compliance from
such City, county or state agencies or administrative officers as may be
appropriate.
C.
Ex parte or private communications. A member shall not consider any
ex parte or private communication from any person, whether oral or
written, which he knows is or reasonably may be intended to influence
unlawfully the decision on the merits of any matter pending before
the Board of Appeals or an appeal therefrom to a court of competent
jurisdiction. Any such ex parte or private communication received and
considered shall be made of public record by the recipient and, if
made orally, shall be written down in substance for this purpose by
the recipient. A communication to the Board of Appeals concerning the
status or procedures of a pending matter shall not be considered an
ex parte or private communication. This subsection shall not apply to
legal advice rendered by the City Attorney or his staff and shall not
apply to technical advice or explanation by governmental agencies at
the request of a member or members of the Board.
A.
The Board shall render its decisions, in writing, within a reasonable
time. Said decisions shall contain a statement of the grounds and
findings upon which they are based. A copy of such decisions shall be
promptly mailed by the Board to the appellant or petitioner and to all
parties to the proceeding or their representatives before the Board as
shown by a list to be maintained by the Board in each case, and a copy
shall be furnished to the Zoning Administrator.
B.
The concurring vote of two members of the Board shall be necessary
to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any
administrative official or to decide in favor of the applicant on any
C.
§ 164-171 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-172
150:665
§ 164-173. Effect of disapproval.
If disapproved, no appeal or petition requesting substantially the same
relief in regard to the same property shall be received or heard by the Board
for a period of two years following the Board's disapproval or, in the event
that the Board's decision is appealed, for a period of two years following the
date of final disposition of such appeal, except that this limitation shall not
affect the Board's right to grant a rehearing in the original proceeding if
such rehearing is provided in the Board's rules of procedure. In the event of
an appeal or application which is withdrawn before the Board hearing, the
above time period shall be reduced to one year.
§ 164-174. Filing fees. [Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 792]
A filing fee shall accompany each appeal or petition to the Board, as may
be determined by the Mayor and Common Council of Westminster in the
General Fee Ordinance.118
§ 164-175. Appeals from Board.
matters upon which it is required to pass under this chapter or to effect
any variance from this chapter.
Who may appeal; procedure. Any person or persons, jointly or severally,
aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Appeals or any taxpayer or
any officer, department, board or bureau of the City may appeal the
same to the Circuit Court for Carroll County. Such appeal shall be taken
according to the Maryland Rules as set forth in Chapter 1100, Subtitle
B of the Annotated Code of Maryland.
A.
Hearing; additional testimony. If upon the hearing it shall appear to
the Court that testimony is necessary for the proper disposition of the
matter, it may take evidence or appoint a referee to take such evidence
as it may direct and report the same to the Court with his findings
of fact and conclusions of law, which shall constitute a part of the
proceedings upon which the determination of the Court shall be made.
B.
Costs not allowed against Board; exception. Costs shall not be allowed
against the Board unless it shall appear to the Circuit Court that it
acted with gross negligence or in bad faith or with malice in making the
decision appealed from.
C.
Issues under section have preference. All issues in any proceeding
under this section shall have preference over all other civil actions and
proceedings.
D.
Decision of Circuit Court; appeal to Court of Special Appeals; costs.
Upon its determination of a case, the Circuit Court shall file a formal
order embodying its final decision. An appeal may be taken to the Court
E.
118. Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
§ 164-172 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-175
150:666
of Special Appeals, during the period and in the manner prescribed by
the Maryland Rules, from any decision of the Circuit Court. In such
cases the award of costs shall be subject to the discretion of the Court
of Special Appeals.
§ 164-175 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-175
150:667

ARTICLE XXIII
Amendments
§ 164-176. Types of amendments.
An application for amendment of this chapter may be either a proposal for
the amendment of the text or a proposal for amendment of the Zoning Map.
An application for an amendment to the Zoning Map shall be one of the
following types:
§ 164-177. Filing application.
§ 164-178. Acceptance of application.
A local amendment covering a single tract, all portions of which are
proposed to be classified in one zone or two alternative zones.
A.
A sectional amendment covering two or more tracts or parcels of land
in the City, portions of which may be proposed to be classified in
different zones.
B.
A comprehensive amendment covering the entire City, portions of
which may be proposed to be classified in different zones.
C.
Who may file.
Text amendments. An application for an amendment of the text
of this chapter may be filed by an interested party or any officer,
department, board, commission or bureau of the City.
(1)
Local amendments. An application for a local amendment to the
Zoning Map may be made by any governmental agency as outlined
in Subsection A or by any person with a financial, contractual or
proprietary interest in the property to be affected by the proposed
amendment.
(2)
Sectional and comprehensive amendments. An application for a
sectional or comprehensive map amendment may be made only by
the Commission or the Mayor and Council.
(3)
A.
Signature of applicant. All applications shall be signed by the applicant
and shall state his name and address.
B.
An application for a local map amendment shall not be accepted for
filing by the Zoning Administrator if the application is for the
reclassification of the whole or any part of land, the reclassification of
which has been denied by the Common Council on the merits within
12 months from the date of the decision of the Common Council or the
date of the last judicial decision upholding the decision of the Common
Council.
A.
§ 164-176 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-178
150:669
§ 164-179. Filing fees.
§ 164-180. Contents of application.
An application for a local map amendment shall not be accepted for
filing by the Zoning Administrator if the application fails to conform to
any of the applicable requirements of this chapter.
B.
An application for a text amendment or for a local map amendment
shall not be accepted for filing unless it is in the form provided herein
and is accompanied by a receipt from the City Treasurer showing
payment to the City of the applicable filing fee.
A.
The Mayor and Common Council shall adopt filing fees as provided in
the General Fee Ordinance.119 [Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No.
792]
B.
The filing fee requirements of this section do not apply to the
governmental agencies described in § 164-177A(1).
C.
Once paid, no filing fee shall be refunded unless the application is
withdrawn prior to its advertising for hearing has been ordered, in
which event 3/4 of the fee shall be refunded.
D.
Local map amendments. An application for a local map amendment
shall be in such form as the Zoning Administrator may prescribe and
shall include the following:
A written statement specifying:
The street number, if any, of the land proposed to be
reclassified or, if none, the location with respect to nearby
public roads.
(a)
A description by metes and bounds, courses and distances of
the land or, if the boundaries conform to lot boundaries within
a subdivision for which a plat is recorded in the land records
of the county, then the lot, block and subdivision designations
with appropriate plat reference.
(b)
The present zoning classification of the land, the proposed
classification and the alternative classification, if any.
(c)
(d) The name and address of the owner of the land.
The area of the land proposed to be reclassified, stated in
square feet if less than one acre and in acres if one or more.
(e)
The application number and the date of the application of and
the action taken on all prior applications filed within three
(f)
(1)
A.
119. Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
§ 164-178 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-180
150:670
§ 164-181. Changes to application.
After acceptance for filing, an application for a local map amendment shall
not be modified or amended as to the area proposed to be reclassified or as
to the class of zone requested.
§ 164-182. Map amendment sign.
years previously for the reclassification of the whole or any
part of the land proposed to be reclassified.
An identification plat prepared by a civil engineer, surveyor or
other competent person and certified thereon by him to be correct
and in conformity with this subsection, showing by metes and
bounds, courses and distances the land proposed to be reclassified
or, if the boundaries conform to lot boundaries within a subdivision
for which a plat is recorded among the land records of the county,
then a copy of such plat, with the land proposed to be reclassified
appearing in a color distinctive from that of other land shown on
the plat.
(2)
Sectional and comprehensive amendments. An application for a
sectional or comprehensive amendment shall be in such form as the
Zoning Administrator may prescribe.
B.
Text amendments. An application for an amendment to the text of
this chapter shall be in such form as the Zoning Administrator may
prescribe but shall include the new text which is proposed to be added
and the existing text which is proposed to be deleted.
C.
Erection of sign. Not less than 20 days before the hearing date on an
application for a local map amendment, the Zoning Administrator shall
erect a sign on the land proposed to be reclassified. The sign shall be
erected within 10 feet of whatever boundary line of such land abuts the
most traveled public road and, if no public road abuts thereon, then
facing in such manner as may be most readily seen by the public. The
sign shall contain such information as the Zoning Administrator may
require, including the time, place and purpose of the hearing.
A.
Removal of or tampering with sign. It shall be unlawful for anyone
except the Zoning Administrator to remove or tamper with the sign
erected under this section during the period it is required to be
maintained.
B.
Affidavit. At the hearing on any application for a local amendment to
the Zoning Map or within 10 days thereafter, the applicant shall file an
affidavit stating that the sign required by this section was continuously
maintained in accordance with the requirements thereof through the
date of the last hearing on such application. If such sign was not
continuously maintained, such affidavit shall be sufficient if it states
that following erection of such sign the property was inspected at least
C.
§ 164-180 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-182
150:671
§ 164-183. Referral of application to Planning Commission or
Historic District Commission. [Amended 1-25-1993 by Ord. No. 568]
§ 164-184. Hearing examiners.
once per week and that on each and every occasion through the date
of the affidavit such sign was found to be in place or, in the event
that such sign was damaged, destroyed or removed, that such sign was
repaired or replaced within five days of the inspection which resulted
in discovery of the damage to or destruction or removal of such sign.
Within a reasonable time after accepting for filing any application for
the amendments provided in § 164-176, except those regarding the
Historic District Zone, the Zoning Administrator shall refer a copy
thereof to the Commission for its study and recommendations and
notify the Commission of the hearing date of the application. The
Commission shall thereupon promptly submit a report and
recommendation prior to the hearing date to the Zoning Administrator,
which shall be incorporated in the application file and thereafter be
considered as a part of the record on the application.
A.
Within a reasonable time after accepting for filing any application
for the Historic District Zone, the Zoning Administrator shall refer
a copy thereof to the Historic District Commission for its study and
recommendations and notify the Historic District Commission of the
hearing date of the application. The Historic District Commission shall
thereupon promptly submit a report and recommendation prior to the
hearing date to the Zoning Administrator, which shall be incorporated
in the application file and thereafter be considered as a part of the
record on the application.
B.
The Mayor and Common Council may appoint such full- or part-time
hearing examiners as in its discretion may be deemed necessary and
appropriate and may delegate to such hearing examiner or examiners
the power to hold and conduct public hearings in the manner and
subject to such rules and regulations as may be provided by the Mayor
and Common Council.
A.
The hearing examiner or examiners shall be appointed for such terms of
office, shall be possessed of such qualifications and shall receive such
compensation as may be provided by the Mayor and Common Council.
B.
Any such hearing examiner is hereby authorized to issue subpoenas to
compel attendance of witnesses and production of documents at any
public hearing and to administer oaths to witnesses appearing before
the examiner.
C.
The hearing examiner shall promptly render a written report and
recommendation on each application heard after the record of the
hearing is closed.
D.
§ 164-182 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-184
150:672
§ 164-185. Hearing procedures.
The hearing examiner may recommend rules and regulations regarding
the conduct of public hearings and other functions of the hearing
examiner.
E.
The hearing examiner may perform such other tasks and duties as the
Mayor and Common Council from time to time may assign.
F.
Concurrently with the transmittal to the Mayor and Common Council,
copies of the hearing examiner's report shall be mailed to the applicant,
the Commission and to all persons and associations entering an
appearance at the hearing as evidenced by the hearing transcript.
G.
Notice of hearing.
Within 120 days of accepting any application for the amendments
provided in § 164-177 for filing, the Zoning Administrator shall set
the application for hearing at a specified date, time and place and
shall cause to be published in at least one newspaper of general
circulation in the county, once each week for two successive weeks,
notice of the public hearing on such application, stating the
application number, date, time and place of hearing and containing
the following:
(a) A summary of the amendment, if a text amendment.
The location of the property, its area, name of owner, change of
classification or two alternative classifications applied for and
the application number, if a local map amendment.
(b)
The designation of the area covered, if a sectional or district
zoning plan map amendment, and the place where copies of
the map or maps and the application may be examined. The
first publication of notice shall appear at least 15 days prior to
the hearing.
(c)
(1)
Additionally, at least 15 days prior to the hearing on any application
for a local amendment to the Zoning Map, the Zoning
Administrator shall send a written notice of such hearing by
regular mail, postage prepaid, to the owners of all real property
immediately adjacent to the property which is the subject of such
application.
(2)
The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant and the
Commission by mail of the date, time and place of hearing. The date
of hearing shall not be less than 20 days following the newspaper
publication of the notice.
(3)
All application files in the custody of the Zoning Administrator shall
be open to public inspection during regular office hours. Such files
shall not be removed from the Zoning Administrator's office or
(4)
A.
§ 164-184 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-185
150:673
§ 164-186. Action on application. [Amended 7-8-2002 by Ord. No.
679]
inspected therein at other times by any person, except that such
files may be removed from such office or inspected therein at other
times by any person pursuant to court order or by the Mayor and
Common Council, by the City Attorney or by the hearing examiner.
Availability of evidence prior to hearing. The Mayor and Common
Council may prescribe regulations pertaining to the submission of
documentary evidence into the record of any application prior to the
advertised hearing date for such application.
B.
Conduct of hearing. Any interested person shall have the right to
submit oral or written testimony or documentary evidence into the
record at the hearing of any application subject to the regulations
adopted under Subsection B of this section. There shall be a complete
record of the testimony at the hearing with all exhibits admitted at
the hearing, including the application, which shall promptly be
incorporated by the Zoning Administrator in the application file and
shall be considered a part of the record on the application. The Zoning
Map and any sectional or district zoning highway plan map adopted
by the Commission for the area within which lies the land proposed to
be reclassified shall be considered a part of record on the application.
Evidence which is immaterial, irrelevant or unduly repetitious may
be excluded. The hearing may be adjourned from time to time to a
date certain on public announcement at the hearing of the earliest
practicable date, time and place for resumption of the hearing.
C.
Receipt of recommendations. No hearing shall be conducted prior to
receipt by the Zoning Administrator of the report and recommendations
of the Commission.
D.
Requests for postponement. Requests for postponement of a scheduled
hearing shall be filed, in writing, with the Zoning Administrator not less
than 10 days prior to the date of hearing and shall be accompanied by a
sum of money sufficient to pay the cost of advertising the postponement
and the rescheduled hearing. The granting of such requests shall be at
the discretion of the President of the Common Council.
E.
Late filing of request. Requests for postponement filed later than 10
days prior to the date of a scheduled hearing shall, in addition to
the other requirements set forth in Subsection E, be supported by an
affidavit of the party making the request or of some other creditable
person. The granting of such request shall be at the discretion of the
Common Council, in cases of extreme hardship, or upon good cause
shown.
F.
Readvertisement. The Common Council may, upon its own initiative,
postpone a scheduled hearing at any time, but shall readvertise the new
hearing date in accordance with § 164-185.
G.
§ 164-185 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-186
150:674
An application for a map amendment shall be decided on the basis
of the evidence of record, provided that any application heard by a
hearing examiner may be decided solely on the basis of the hearing
examiner's report.
A.
In the event that an application is heard by an examiner, within 10
days after transmittal of the examiner's report, any person who or
association which appeared and participated in person, in writing or by
counsel at the hearing before the examiner or any person who would
be aggrieved by any decision of the Common Council may request, in
writing, an opportunity to present oral argument before the Common
Council prior to its rendering a decision. The Common Council may,
in its discretion, grant or deny such request. Thereafter, it shall either
decide the application or remand it to the examiner for clarification or
the taking of additional evidence, if deemed appropriate.
B.
An application for text or map amendment shall be either approved
or denied on the merits or denied for want of the necessary total of
affirmative votes as provided in § 164-187 or dismissed or allowed to be
withdrawn. The Common Council may dismiss any such application if
it finds that the application does not conform to any stated procedural
requirements of this article or that the application is not acceptable for
filing because of being filed within the time limitations of § 164-178 or
that the application is frivolous or filed for purposes of harassment. The
Common Council may allow an applicant to withdraw his application
for a local map amendment at any time, provided that if the request
for withdrawal is made after publication of the notice of hearing, no
application for the reclassification of all or any part of the land which
is the subject of the application shall be allowed within the time
limitations set forth in § 164-178 following the date of the action of
the Common Council approving such withdrawal, unless such action
allowing withdrawal or subsequent resolution specifies that the time
limitation shall not apply. An application for a sectional or district
plan map amendment shall be approved, with such modification as the
Common Council deems appropriate, as a map amendment with the
force and effect of law or shall be denied.
C.
Action shall be taken upon an application heard by the Common Council
within 90 days after the record has been closed. Action shall be taken
upon an application heard by a hearing examiner within 90 days after
the Council receives the examiner's report.
D.
No application for a local map amendment shall be approved for a zone
other than applied for, or, if application is made for two alternative
zones, the application shall not be approved for a zone other than one
of the two applied for.
E.
No application for a local map amendment shall be approved for a
greater area than that applied for, but an application may be approved
for a smaller area than that applied for if the reclassification of such
F.
§ 164-186 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-186
150:675
§ 164-186.1. Action on application with additional restrictions,
conditions or limitations. [Added 7-8-2002 by Ord. No. 679]
small area is supported by the evidence of record and if such smaller
area is accurately delineated in the record.
Any area reclassified by a local or a sectional or district plan map
amendment shall exclude and be held to exclude any portion of the area
which lies in the bed of a road, street, alley or transit route or facility,
whether existing or proposed on a plan adopted by the Commission or
Common Council.
G.
Upon the zoning or rezoning of any land or lands pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, the Common Council may impose any
additional restrictions, conditions, or limitations that the Common
Council considers appropriate to preserve, improve, or protect the
general character and design of:
(1) The lands and improvements being zoned or rezoned; or
(2) The surrounding for adjacent lands and improvements.
A.
Upon the zoning or rezoning of any land or lands pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, the Common Council may retain or reserve
the power to approve or disapprove the design of buildings,
construction, landscaping, or other improvements, alterations, and
changes made or to be made on the land being zoned or rezoned to
assure conformity with the intent and purpose of Article 66B of the
Annotated Code of Maryland and of this Zoning Ordinance.
B.
Additional restrictions, conditions, or limitations may be originated by
the applicant, by the Commission, or by the Common Council. However,
the published notice of hearing and, where appropriate, posted notice
of hearing must include not only the nature of the requested zoning or
rezoning and the time, place and date of hearing, but also the general
nature and the extent of restrictions, conditions, or limitations imposed
upon the zoning or rezoning requested.
C.
In no case shall any restrictions, conditions, or limitations waive or
lessen the requirements of or prohibit uses allowed in the approved
zone.
D.
In the event that any restrictions, conditions, or limitations beyond
those contained in the public notice of hearing are sought to be
imposed, a new notice containing such proposed additional restrictions,
conditions, or limitations shall be published in the same manner as
otherwise provided for public hearings and another public hearing shall
be conducted by the Common Council thereon. In considering said
restrictions, conditions, or limitations, the Common Council may obtain
an additional recommendation from the Commission.
E.
§ 164-186 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-186.1
150:676
§ 164-187. Decision by Common Council.
In addition to any other remedies provided by law, any violation of
any restrictions, conditions, or limitations placed upon a zoning or
rezoning under this section shall be deemed a violation of this chapter
and shall be punishable under the provisions of § 164-159. Further, the
Common Council may in its discretion impose a further condition that
a violation of all or any such restrictions, conditions, or limitations may
automatically void the zoning or rezoning granted, causing the property
involved to revert to its former zoning classification.
F.
On any application for a local map or sectional map, the Common
Council shall adopt written decisions which shall contain findings of
fact in each specific case, including but not limited to the following
matters: the purpose of this chapter, population change, availability
of public facilities, present and future transportation patterns,
compatibility with existing and proposed development for the area,
the recommendation of the Commission and the relationship of such
proposed amendment to the City's plan; and may grant the amendment
based upon a finding that there was a substantial change in the
character of the neighborhood where the property is located or that
there was a mistake in the existing zoning classification. A complete
record of the votes of the Common Council shall be kept.
A.
Each member of the Common Council shall have one vote on all zoning
decisions. A majority of affirmative votes shall be necessary to adopt a
decision granting an application for a map or text amendment, except
as provided in the Charter of the City of Westminster as it exists on
the date of the enactment of this chapter or as it may thereafter be
amended. If the necessary total of affirmative votes as herein provided
shall fail to be achieved for any reason, the application shall be held
to be denied; no decision need be adopted for such denial, and the
minutes shall so reflect the denial for want of the necessary affirmative
vote total. Any such denial for want of the necessary total of affirmative
votes shall not be subject to the time limitation set forth in § 164-178. A
copy of the decision shall be filed in the application record, and a copy
shall be promptly mailed by the Zoning Administrator to the applicant,
the Commission and to all parties to the proceeding before the Common
Council as shown by the hearing transcript.
B.
The decision of the Common Council on any application for a local map
or sectional map text amendment shall be final. The time for appeal
from a final decision of the Common Council, including a denial for
want of the necessary total of affirmative votes as set forth in § 164-186,
shall begin to run from the date of the decision or from the date the
application was denied for want of the necessary total of affirmative
votes.
C.
Any decision by the Common Council on an application for a local map,
sectional map or text amendment shall not become effective until 10
days after the conduct of the public hearing held on said application.
D.
§ 164-186.1 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-187
150:677
§ 164-188. Planned development.
A member of the Common Council shall not consider any ex parte or
private communication from any person, whether oral or written, which
he knows is or reasonably may be intended to influence unlawfully the
decision on the merits of any application pending before the Common
Council. Any such ex parte or private communication received and
considered shall be made part of the public record by the recipient and,
if made orally, shall be written down in substance for this purpose by
the recipient. A communication to the Common Council concerning the
status or procedures of a pending matter shall not be considered an
ex parte or private communication. Alternately, upon receipt of such
ex parte or private communication, a member of the Common Council
may abstain from participating in the decision. This subsection shall not
apply to legal advice rendered by the City Attorney or his staff and shall
not apply to technical advice or explanation by governmental agencies
at the request of a member or members of Common Council.
E.
The Commission shall determine whether any development of land is or
is not in substantial accordance with an approved development plan or
an approved amended development plan, and the party implementing
an approved development plan or an approved amended development
plan must obtain a determination by the Commission as to whether
or not a proposed undertaking is in substantial accordance with an
approved development plan or an approved amended development
plan.
A.
In order to assist in achieving the flexibility of design needed for the
implementation of the purposes of certain planned development zones,
a development plan must be submitted as a part of the application
for reclassification of land to the planned development zones set forth
in Articles XIA, XII, XIII and XIV of this chapter. Approval of the
application for rezoning must include explicit approval of a
development plan. Development of land must be in substantial
accordance with an approved development plan or an approved
amended development plan. Modification of road alignments, unit types
or site planning designs which do not increase the approved density of
the project shall not constitute a substantial change in the development
plan unless the Commission considers such a change to have an adverse
impact on the adjacent properties or general character of the approved
development plan. [Amended 9-25-2000 by Ord. No. 638]
B.
The application process for all planned developments shall follow the
same process, whether they are divided into multiple phases or not.
The process will consist of three stages: rezoning (development plan
approval), subdivision (culminating with the final plat) and building
permit (site plan approval). In the event that the development includes
multiple phases, separate applications for subdivision and building
permit will be required for each separate development phase.
C.
§ 164-187 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-188
150:678
All development plans and amendments thereto shall be prepared by
and certified by a licensed architect, landscape architect or registered
civil engineer.
D.
A development plan shall be prepared, taking into consideration the
following standards and design criteria, and shall reflect compliance
with the standards and criteria:
In residential areas of planned developments, units shall be
arranged and distributed so that higher densities are not
unreasonably and disproportionately concentrated in areas of open
space, single-family and semidetached dwellings or so located as to
concentrate traffic on minor residential streets.
(1)
Interior and exterior roads shall provide safe and adequate links
among areas in the development and to areas outside of the
development. Sufficient ingress and egress shall be provided to
accommodate the projected traffic flow.
(2)
All planned developments shall be provided with water and sewage
facilities sufficient to meet project needs for the development.
(3)
All planned developments shall comply with the landscape manual
of the City of Westminster adopted pursuant to § 164-131.1.
[Added 3-22-1993 by Ord. No. 553]
(4)
E.
The development plan shall clearly indicate how the proposed
development would meet the standards and purposes of the zone
applied for. The development plan shall include the following:
(1) The location, acreage and density calculations for each zone.
The location, acreage and gross leasable area of all other
nonresidential uses, including open space.
(2)
The location and dimensions, to include right-of-way and pavement
widths, for all proposed roads.
(3)
Conceptual site plans for all buildings and parking areas, including
schematic single-family and multifamily layouts.
(4)
A preliminary utility master plan showing the layout of water and
sanitary storm sewer mains.
(5)
(6) The phasing plan, in the event of more than one phase.
Evidence of approval of other agencies to assure the adequacy of
those aspects of the plan pertinent to the respective department,
commission or office. These agencies may include, among others,
the Health Department, State Highway Administration, Carroll
County Department of Public Works, Carroll County Planning
Commission and Carroll County Board of Education.
(7)
F.
§ 164-188 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-188
150:679
Proof that the owners and/or applicants for any planned
development are financially able to complete the proposed
development and that they intend to start construction within 18
months of the Commission's approval.
(8)
Submission requirements for supplements to the development plan
shall include the following information:
A property map describing the boundary and total acreage of the
proposed project.
(1)
Topography of the project area at five-foot-contour intervals with
identification of all slopes in excess of 25%.
(2)
One-hundred-year floodplain area, bodies of water and
watercourses.
(3)
(4) Easements and public rights-of-way.
(5) Existing utilities.
(6) Vegetation, including existing trees.
(7) Adjacent land use and zoning.
(8) Existing public and private roads.
(9) Existing structures.
(10)The names of all abutting property owners.
(11)A soil map.
(12)A map showing the relationship of the site to the surrounding area.
The relationship, if any, of the development program to the City's
capital improvements program.
(13)
Other information, drawings or models required by the
Commission, the hearing examiner or the Common Council as
being necessary for evaluation of such plan of development or
additional information which the applicant may deem necessary to
support the application.
(14)
G.
All development plans and proposed amendments to development plans
shall be subjected to review and recommendation comments by the
Commission of the City in accordance with the following process:
The Commission shall consider whether a rezoning application
and an accompanying development plan fulfill the purposes and
requirements of the applicable zone and shall recommend
approval, approval with recommended modifications or disapproval
thereof to the Common Council, particularly considering, in regard
to the development plan, those matters which the Common Council
must consider in acting upon the rezoning application.
(1)
H.
§ 164-188 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-188
150:680
In reviewing a development plan, the Commission shall give
consideration to:
The purpose and objectives of the requested zonal district and
the planned development.
(a)
Compliance with the standards and design criteria for a
planned development.
(b)
Any other considerations relating to the location, size and
specific character of the site deemed appropriate by the
Commission having a substantial bearing on achieving
maximum safety, convenience and environmental and amenity
qualities for the development and its residents or users.
(c)
(d) The Comprehensive Development Plan.
(2)
The material required to be filed as or with a development plan
may be presented to the Commission and its staff in an informal
presentation for informal comment and recommendations by the
Commission and its staff.
(3)
Upon the receipt of informal comment and recommendations by the
Commission and its staff, the development plan, with any changes
or alterations, will be formally presented in a public hearing before
the Commission.
(4)
Following the public hearing on a development plan, the
Commission shall submit its written decision on the plan to the
applicant to approve, approve with modifications or disapprove the
plan within 45 days of the date of the hearing.
(5)
The Planning Commission shall also submit its written decision
on the development plan to the hearing examiner, if any, and the
Common Council for inclusion in the record of the rezoning
application of which the plan is a part.
(6)
The decision of the Commission on a development plan shall be
considered by the hearing examiner, if any, and the Common
Council in considering all rezoning applications which require
development plans.
(7)
The hearing examiner or Council shall consider the development plan
as a part of the application for rezoning for the purposes of conducting
the required public hearing on rezoning applications and preparing the
examiner's report and recommendation on a rezoning application to the
Council. The hearing examiner or Council shall not conduct a public
hearing on a rezoning application which includes a development plan
until after receipt of the decision of the Commission on said plan.
I.
In considering a rezoning application which includes a development
plan, the Common Council shall consider whether the application and
the development plan fulfill the purposes and requirements set forth in
J.
§ 164-188 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-188
150:681
this chapter. In so doing, the Common Council shall make the following
specific findings, in addition to any other findings which may be found
to be necessary and appropriate to the evaluation of the proposed
reclassification:
That the zone applied for is in substantial compliance with the
use and density indicated by the Master Plan or sector plan and
that it does not conflict with the general plan, the City's capital
improvements program or other applicable City plans and policies.
(1)
That the proposed development would comply with the purposes,
standards and regulations of the zone as set forth in Articles II
through XV, would provide for the maximum safety, convenience
and amenity of the residents of the development and would be
compatible with adjacent development.
(2)
That the proposed vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems are
adequate and efficient.
(3)
That by its design, by minimizing grading and by other means, the
proposed development would tend to prevent erosion of the soil
and to preserve natural vegetation and other natural features of
the site.
(4)
That any proposals, including restrictions, agreements or other
documents, which show the ownership and method of assuring
perpetual maintenance of those areas, if any, that are intended to
be used for recreational or other common or quasi-public purposes,
are adequate and sufficient.
(5)
That the submitted development plan is in accord with all pertinent
statutory requirements and is or is not approved. Disapproval of a
development plan by the Common Council shall result in a denial of
the rezoning application of which the development plan is a part.
(6)
An approved development plan may be amended, upon the application
by the developer of a planned development, by the Council. Any
application for an amendment to an approved development plan shall
be filed with the Commission and shall be subject to all the procedures,
hearings and requirements contained in this chapter which pertain to
development plans. An amendment to an approved development plan
shall not involve a change in zoning or the area zoned. The Common
Council shall approve or disapprove the application for amendment of
an approved development plan.
K.
Development and construction of all planned developments must be in
accordance with the provisions of an approved development plan or
approved amended development plan.
L.
Following approval of the development plan, the applicant shall then
submit plans for subdivision (final plat) and building permits for each
separate phase of the planned development. The procedure for such
M.
§ 164-188 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-188
150:682
§ 164-189. Other conditions.
submissions shall follow the requirements for subdivision of land as
defined in Article XXIV.
The subsequent approval of such subdivision plans and building permits
shall require Common Council approval only in the event that such
submissions deviate materially from the approved development plan.
N.
An approved development plan or amendment thereto shall remain
valid for a period of 24 months following the expiration of all applicable
appeal periods. In the event of an appeal to a court affecting the
development plan, the time limitation under this subsection shall run
from the decision date of the court making final determination of the
appeal. If at the end of that twenty-four-month period site plan
approval, including any required subdivision plan approval, has not
been obtained and construction has not begun, the development plan
shall be considered void unless the Council approves a petition for an
extension of time submitted by the applicant, his successor or assigns
for an extension not to exceed 12 months. This subsection shall not
apply to a development plan approved on or before the effective date of
this section.
O.
The Common Council may impose additional restrictions, conditions or
limitations upon the grant of any application for a local amendment
to the Zoning Map amendment pursuant to the provisions of
§ 164-186E.120
A.
If the decision of the Common Council is to grant a local amendment
application with conditions, it shall adopt a decision proposing the
restrictions, conditions or limitations upon which such application is to
be granted.
B.
The Common Council shall thereafter hold a public hearing on such
proposed conditions, notice of which shall be given as in the case of an
original local amendment application, and in writing by first class mail,
to any person who has registered an appearance, in writing, prior to the
adoption of such resolution.
C.
Following such public hearing on the proposed conditions, the Common
Council may adopt a decision granting the application with the
additional restrictions, conditions or limitations contained in or such
modifications thereof as are not substantially different therefrom. Upon
the adoption of such ordinance, the letter and number of the
classification of such property on the Zoning Map shall be followed by
the letter "C" to designate the zoning classification as conditional. Such
decision shall be subject to judicial review under § 164-190.
D.
120. Editor's Note: Former § 164-186E, regarding the rezoning of land, referred to herein was
deleted by Ord. No. 679, which amended § 164-186 in its entirety. For similar provisions,
see now § 164-186.1, Action on application with additional restrictions, conditions or
limitations.
§ 164-188 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-190
150:683
§ 164-190. Appeals from Common Council.
Who may appeal; procedure. Any persons, jointly or severally,
aggrieved by any decision of the Common Council or any taxpayer or
any officer, department, Board or bureau of the City may appeal the
same to the Circuit Court for Carroll County. Such appeal shall be taken
in accordance with the Maryland Rules as set forth in Chapter 1100,
Subtitle B.
A.
Hearing; additional testimony. If, upon the hearing, it shall appear to
the Court that testimony is necessary for the proper disposition of
the matter, it may take evidence or appoint a referee to take such
evidence as it may direct and report the same to the Court with his
findings of fact and conclusions of law, which shall constitute part of the
proceedings upon which the determination of the Court shall be made.
B.
Costs not allowed against Common Council; exception. Costs shall not
be allowed against the Common Council unless it shall appear to the
Circuit Court that it acted with gross negligence or in bad faith or with
malice in making the decision appealed from.
C.
Issues under section have preference. All issues in any proceeding
under this section shall have preference over all other civil actions and
proceedings.
D.
Decision of Circuit Court; appeal to Court of Special Appeals; costs.
Upon its determination of the case, the Circuit Court shall file a formal
order embodying its final decision. An appeal may be taken to the Court
of Special Appeals, during the period and in the manner prescribed by
the Maryland Rules, from any decision of the Circuit Court. In such
cases, the award of costs shall be subject to the discretion of the Court
of Special Appeals.
E.
§ 164-190 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-190
150:684
ARTICLE XXIV
Subdivision Regulations
§ 164-191. Approval required.
After the effective date of this chapter, no person shall subdivide or
resubdivide land within the City without the approval of the Commission
and the recording of a final plat in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court
of Carroll County in accordance with the provisions of this article. Further,
no lot in a subdivision or any section thereof created after the effective date
of this chapter shall be transferred nor shall a building permit be issued for
a structure thereon until such approval and recording shall be completed as
specified herein.
§ 164-192. Application for approval. [Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord.
No. 792]
Each application for approval of a preliminary plan or final plat shall be
submitted on forms provided therefor by the Planning Commission and shall
be accompanied by such fee as is determined by the Mayor and Common
Council as provided in the General Fee Ordinance.121
§ 164-193. General requirements. [Amended 3-22-1993 by Ord. No.
553; 7-9-2001 by Ord. No. 664]
The subdivision shall comply with all requirements of the appropriate
state agencies, including but not limited to the Department of
Environment.
A.
Easements shall be shown on the final plat where a natural watercourse
(stream) exists or where natural or street drainage is located or may be
provided, such easement to be a minimum of 20 feet, except in the case
of a natural watercourse, which shall contain adequate easement area
to provide for a twenty-year storm.
B.
Lots, including lot sizes, shall be subject to the requirements of the
appropriate Maryland state agency, and in no case shall lot sizes be less
than the minimum prescribed by the provisions contained in Articles II
through XV of this chapter. No lot shall front on an alley.
C.
Residential cluster subdivisions are permitted in accordance with the
provisions of § 164-197.1.
D.
No more than 40 residential lots may be contained on a single plat,
provided that upon receipt of the Director’s recommendation, the
Commission may adjust said number upward up to 20% for good cause.
Any further upward adjustment shall require an administrative
adjustment pursuant to § 164-158.1. [Added 10-27-2008 by Ord. No.
788122]
E.
121. Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
§ 164-191 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-193
150:685
Nonresidential subdivisions, including industrial and commercial
tracts, shall conform to the Master Plan and standards established in
this chapter. The subdivider shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Commission that the street, parcel and block pattern is specifically
adapted to the uses anticipated and takes into account other uses in the
vicinity.
F.
Where there is a discrepancy between minimum standards or
dimensions in this article and other official regulations, the highest
standards shall apply.
G.
Reservation, dedication and/or acquisition of land for sites for schools
and other public facilities. In order to provide for the adequate and
convenient placement of sites for public schools and other public uses
as authorized by § 5.03 of Article 66B of the Annotated Code of
Maryland, all subdivisions shall conform to the designated location of
sites for public schools and other public facilities as shown on the
Master Plan. Where the City Master Plan indicates a location for a
school or other public facility, the location of such sites shall also be
shown, if applicable, on any subdivision plan involving land affected by
a public facility designation of the Master Plan. If no City Master Plan
has been adopted at the time of application, a school site or other public
facility site may be required if a need is determined by the Commission.
It shall be the duty of the Commission to coordinate the planning of the
development of the subdivision with the plans of the appropriate county
or City agency for acquisition of the site.
H.
Compatibility. The Commission shall not approve a preliminary plan or
final plat if it finds that the subdivision would not achieve a maximum
of compatibility, safety, efficiency and attractiveness; and the fact that
either a preliminary plan or final plat complies with all of the stated
general regulations, development standards or other specific
requirements of the zone shall not, by itself, be deemed to create a
presumption that the proposed preliminary plan or final plat is, in
fact, compatible with surrounding land uses and, in itself, shall not be
sufficient to require its approval.
I.
The Commission shall not approve a preliminary plan or final plat if it
finds that the subdivision does not comply with the landscape manual
of the City of Westminster, adopted pursuant to § 164-131.1.
J.
To ensure that projects are not approved for which water and sewer
capacity does not exist, the following subdivision plat approval
procedures are adopted: [Added 4-13-2015 by Ord. No. 853;
amended 4-9-2018 by Ord. No. 891]
Upon receipt of a completed application for a subdivision plat that
includes a concept plan meeting the guidelines established by the
Planning Director and a request for a water and sewer allocation,
(1)
K.
122. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections E through I as
Subsections F through J, respectively.
§ 164-193 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-193
150:686
§ 164-194. Streets.
the Planning Director shall make a written determination as to the
availability of water and sewer capacity.
Upon a finding that the application is complete, that adequate
capacity exists for an allocation, and that the use otherwise
complies with requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, subject to
any approvals required from the Planning Commission, the
Director shall assign the plat a tentative allocation approval, which
may stipulate the phasing of water allocation over time.
(2)
Upon approval of a final subdivision plat by the Planning
Commission, the Planning Director shall issue a final water and
wastewater allocation consistent with the Planning Commission's
approval.
(3)
Notwithstanding anything in this section, when a plat expires or
becomes null and void through lapse or revocation, the allocations
shall also be forfeited.
(4)
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall not approve a preliminary
plan or final plat if it finds that the subdivision does not adequately
address the preferences and guidelines set forth in the most recently
adopted Development Design Preferences Manual in compliance with
the requirements of § 164-131.2. [Added 5-9-2016 by Ord. No. 863]
L.
Proposed streets shall be shown by providing a minimum right-of-way
width of 50 feet with a minimum paving width of 30 feet. Where it is
determined by the Commission that a street should be designed in a
subdivision to carry traffic from other areas or adjacent subdivisions,
whether existing or potential, a right-of-way 60 feet or greater shall
be dedicated. Where a subdivision is created fronting on an existing
City-maintained road, lot lines of a subdivision shall be established
30 feet from the center of the existing county- or City-maintained
road unless an additional right-of-way is specifically required by the
Commission. The developer may be required to make improvements to
the streets if additional traffic will be generated. Nothing contained
in this section shall be construed as prohibiting a subdivider from
voluntarily establishing, upon consent of the Commission, lot lines of
a subdivision more than 30 feet from the center of the existing county
road. A cul-de-sac (short dead-end street) shall terminate in a circular
area with a minimum paving diameter of 100 feet and a minimum rightof-
way diameter of 120 feet. If, however, such street will eventually
be extended, a temporary turnaround shall be provided in accordance
with the requirements of the Department of Public Works. Depending
upon the number of units and traffic generation of a subdivision, more
than one access into a subdivision may be required to be bonded or
developed before building permits are issued.
A.
§ 164-193 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-194
150:687
§ 164-195. Soil removal and grading.
Any soil removed in any zone shall be done in accordance with the
provisions of Carroll County Ordinance No. 5, subject to the following:
§ 164-196. Stormwater management.
Stormwater management shall be accomplished pursuant to Chapter 136,
Stormwater Management, of the Code of the City of Westminster.
§ 164-197. Floodplains.
No structure shall be placed in any floodplain except as provided in
accordance with Chapter 83, Floodplain Management, of the Code of
Westminster.
§ 164-197.1. Residential cluster subdivision. [Added 7-9-2001 by
Ord. No. 664]
Neither the approval of a preliminary or final subdivision plan nor the
approval of any site plan or development plan nor the filing of any land
record plat shall constitute the acceptance by the City of any street
dedication. No street shall be accepted for dedication unless and until
the Mayor and Council, through appropriate action, accept such street
dedication, and a deed conveying the street to the City, pursuant to the
acceptance of a street dedication by the Mayor and Council, has been
duly recorded among the land records of Carroll County, Maryland.
B.
To ensure no duplication, street names shall be cleared through the
Department of Public Works prior to submitting a final plat.
C.
Streets shall be constructed in accordance with those standards and
regulations as set forth, in writing, by the Department of Public Roads.
A financial guaranty shall be provided to the City by the subdivider
prior to commencing construction in order to ensure completion by the
subdivider of those facilities that will serve the subdivision.
D.
Sod and soil may be removed in any residential zone, except
agricultural, to a depth not to exceed 18 inches in a surface area not
exceeding 5,000 square feet.
A.
Removal and excavation necessary for construction shall be permitted
in accordance with site plan or subdivision profiles approved by the
Department of Public Works.
B.
Grading of land shall be permitted in accordance with plans approved
by the Department of Public Works, provided that the new grades do
not substantially alter natural drainage patterns and that the plans
include siltation and erosion control measures described in Carroll
County Ordinance No. 5.
C.
§ 164-194 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-197.1
150:688
Purpose. The purpose of the cluster method of development is to
protect sensitive environmental features, to provide larger open areas
with greater utility for rest, recreation and preservation of natural
features, to provide site design flexibility and to encourage the
development of more attractive functional and economic building forms
with higher standards of open space.
A.
Objectives. The following objectives are sought by the cluster method
of development:
To provide a more attractive and varied living environment than
would be possible through the strict application of the
requirements of the R-10,000 and R-20,000 Residential Zones.
(1)
To encourage developers to use a more creative approach in the
development of land.
(2)
To encourage more efficient allocation and maintenance of common
open space in residential areas through private initiative.
(3)
To encourage variety in the physical development patterns of
residential areas without changing the character of the
neighborhood.
(4)
(5) To protect sensitive environmental features.
To encourage the preservation of existing topography and to
provide forest conservation while providing useful community open
space.
(6)
B.
Eligibility. The cluster method of development is permitted for singlefamily
detached unit developments only in the R-10,000 Residential and
R-20,000 Residential Zones.
C.
Dimensional requirements.
Density.
Residential density shall be approved generally on the
capabilities of the existing and/or planned utilities and such
other standards and requirements as enumerated in this
chapter, but in no case shall the density exceed four dwelling
units per net acre in the R-10,000 Zone and two dwelling units
per net acre in the R-20,000 Zone.
(a)
Calculation of the net acreage shall include all land within the
cluster subdivision, except common open space. Common open
space includes environmental open space and recreational
open space. Environmental open space consists of onehundred-
year floodplain areas, wetlands, streams and slopes of
25% or greater. Recreational open space includes 15% of the
gross project area, which shall be dedicated for recreational
open space. The fifteen-percent recreational open space shall
(b)
(1)
D.
§ 164-197.1 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-197.1
150:689
not consist of the one-hundred-year floodplain area, wetlands,
streams and slopes of 25% or greater; however, the onehundred-
foot stream buffer area that is not part of the abovementioned
environmentally sensitive features may account for
a maximum of 33% of the recreational open space
requirement. Portions of the environmental open space
features may overlap. The area of any such overlap will only be
counted once towards the calculations of the net acreage.
Lot area, lot width and yard requirements in the R-10,000 and
R-20,000 Residential Zones.
The following minimum per unit requirements shall apply:
Dwelling Type
Lot
Width at
Building
Line
(feet)
Front
Yard
(feet)
Side Yard
(feet)
Rear
Yard
(feet)
Single-family
detached
70 25 8 30
(a)
Single-family detached dwellings, in all events, shall be on lots
with a minimum lot area of 7,000 square feet.
(b)
A corner lot shall have a minimum width of 100 feet, measured
at the building line along at least one street front, which shall
be the front yard for the subject lot.
(c)
(2)
The lot area, lot width and yard requirements set forth herein shall
supersede those requirements set forth in §§ 164-26 and 164-31.
(3)
Open space.
The common open space and one-hundred-foot stream buffer shall
be dedicated and deeded without charge to the City. The City may
waive the right to such dedication to it and instead may require the
open space be deeded to, improved, operated and maintained by
a property owners' association consisting of residents of a cluster
subdivision. Land designated for this purpose shall be deeded to
the property owners' association or to the City, and recording
references to the articles of incorporation with respect to such
property owners' association or to the City shall be noted in the
final plat prior to recording. The City Attorney may review, at the
applicant's cost, and approve any covenants relating to ownership
and maintenance of such lands prior to recording of the final plat.
(1)
In determining the type and location of common open space, the
Commission, in consultation with the City Parks Board, shall review
the area's needs for parks and recreational sites in the area. Open
space required in a cluster subdivision project shall have access to
(2)
E.
§ 164-197.1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-197.1
150:690
a street by a fee simple right-of-way or easement and be located
so as to be reasonably accessible from all dwellings within the
cluster subdivision project. In all instances, a minimum of 50% of
the recreational open space shall be suitable for dry-ground active
recreational uses, as determined by the Commission.
In addition to the minimum required open space, the applicant/
developer may offer additional contiguous open space such as
floodplains, steep slopes and wooded areas to the City for parkland.
At its discretion, the City may accept or reject this additional land
which may otherwise be included with open space deeded to the
property owners' association.
(3)
The approval by the Commission of a final subdivision plat shall
not be deemed to constitute or imply acceptance of the City of
any park, recreation or other public land shown on the plat until
such land is improved as contained in the construction plans of the
cluster subdivision project and deeded.
(4)
Panhandle lots. Panhandle lots may be permitted only in accordance
with the following standards:
Panhandle lots shall be designed to take advantage of the natural
land features and shall be located so as to abut areas of common or
dedicated open space to the maximum extent possible. At least 50%
of the total number of panhandle lots shall abut areas of common
open space or existing or planned public right-of-way along the
entire length of at least one side of the lot.
(1)
No more than four panhandle lots shall be served by one usein-
common driveway. No more than one use-in-common driveway
connection shall be permitted on the cul-de-sac portion of any
public street.
(2)
Panhandle lots shall be shown on the final plat and arranged such
that the specific layout and house locations of the houses on the
lots in the front on the public street are located so as not to block
the view of the houses at the rear of the use-in-common driveway.
(3)
F.
Compatibility.
All single-family detached dwellings constructed within 100 feet of
the nearest existing dwelling in the R-20,000, R-10,000 or R-7,500
Zones shall comply with the minimum development standards of
the zonal classifications of the adjoining land.
(1)
The Commission shall have the discretion to increase or decrease
the strict application of the requirements contained in
§ 164-197.1F(1) and G(1) hereof in instances in which the adjoining
property or properties will not be adversely affected by such
increase.
(2)
G.
§ 164-197.1 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-197.1
150:691
§ 164-198. Preliminary plat approval.
Procedures.
The subdivider shall comply with the provisions of Article XXIV,
including §§ 164-198 and 164-199.
(1)
The preliminary plan and final plat of a cluster subdivision shall be
filed with the Department and shall be accompanied by a detailed
statement or proposal, including covenants, agreements or other
specific documents addressing ownership, method of maintenance
and the use of those areas in the subdivision reserved as open
space for common use by property owners in the development.
(2)
The covenants and agreements creating the reservation specified
in this section shall be recorded before the plat is recorded.
(3)
H.
Prior to preparing a preliminary plan, the subdivider may present a
concept plan or sketch of the proposed subdivision to the staff of the
Commission for any assistance the staff may deem appropriate. Such
concept plan shall generally denote the type of densities, dwellings,
streets and proposed land uses.
A.
Thereafter, the subdivider shall prepare and file with the Commission
a preliminary plan. Information shown on the preliminary plan shall
include the subdivision's name and owner, the subdivider's name and
address, the surveyor or engineer, election district, county, state,
adjacent property owners, vicinity sketch, scale, North point, date,
contours, lots, their densities, building setback lines, existing and/
or proposed easements, street names and widths, water, sewer and
storm drainage, lot numbers, soils information, zoning district
classification(s), floodplain(s), bearings and dimensions and plat or
technical notes, as well as those covenants, restrictions and/or
statements proposed to be shown on the final plat.
B.
Additionally, the preliminary plan shall include a proposed recording
and construction schedule which must indicate those portions of the
property covered by the preliminary plan for which building permits
will be sought and obtained from the City. If the project is proposed to
be built in phases, the schedule shall specifically identify the timing for
the construction and conveyance of the lots, as well as any dedication
for utilities, roads, open areas and recreational facilities. The schedule
must be approved by the Planning Commission as a part of its
preliminary plan approval, and the approved schedule shall establish
the validity period for the entire project, including any phasing. [Added
10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 788123]
C.
Fifteen copies of the preliminary plan shall be provided to the
Commission with written application for conditional approval at least
D.
123. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections C through J as
Subsections D through K, respectively.
§ 164-197.1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-198
150:692
60 days prior to the Commission's meeting at which it is to be
considered. The Commission shall refer the application and plan to its
staff for review.
Referral shall be made for a certification of the adequacy of public
facilities to the appropriate agencies having jurisdiction over public
facilities in the City, including but not limited to the following: schools,
public water and sewerage facilities, police protection, roads and traffic
control devices, storm drain facilities, emergency service facilities,
health care facilities and solid waste disposal facilities.
E.
No preliminary plan shall be approved by the Commission unless the
adequacy of public facilities is reviewed by the appropriate state,
county or City agency which has jurisdiction in the particular area of
each such public facility affected by the proposed subdivision. Each
agency to which a plan is referred shall return one copy of the plan
to the Commission within 20 days of referral with its recommendation
noted thereon, such as "Approved," "Approved subject to modification"
or "Disapproved" for specific reasons. If such recommendation is not
made within the twenty-day period by any agency to which referred, the
preliminary plan shall be deemed to have been approved by it, unless
said period has been extended by the Commission.
F.
Following a review of the preliminary plan and other material submitted
for conformity with this chapter by the staff and the appropriate
agencies and, if deemed necessary by the staff, a review with the
subdivider of any changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent
of improvements to be made by him, a written staff recommendation
shall be made available to the applicant, together with any comments
or recommendations of other agencies concerned with the subdivision
of land. Thereafter, the Commission shall, within 120 days after the
preliminary plan has been filed, act thereon as submitted or modified;
and, if approved, the Commission shall express its approval and state
the conditions of such approval, if any, or, if disapproved, shall express
its disapproval and its reasons therefor. Failure to act within 120 days
will constitute approval of the preliminary plan. However, the applicant
may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of such period.
The grounds for disapproval of any plat shall be stated in the records of
the Commission and a copy furnished to the applicant. The Commission
may consider and use the refusal of any agency to certify the adequacy
of any public facility or facilities to serve a proposed subdivision as a
basis for the disapproval of a preliminary plan.
G.
A copy of any action taken by the Commission pursuant to this
preliminary plan shall be sent to the subdivider and to any agencies to
which the plan had been referred.
H.
Upon a finding by the Commission that the preliminary plan does not
comply with this chapter, any other applicable laws or regulations or
with the development plan or any portion thereof, approval of the
I.
§ 164-198 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-198
150:693
§ 164-199. Final plat approval.
preliminary plan may be revoked by resolution of the Commission at
any time prior to the approval of the final plat.
Approval of a preliminary plan shall not constitute approval of the final
plat, but shall be a guide to the preparation of the final plat.
J.
The Commission reserves the right to return to the subdivider any
preliminary plan which does not comply with the requisites of this
section.
K.
The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plan as
approved. If desired by the subdivider subject to the provision of
Subsection G, it may constitute only that portion of the approved
preliminary layout which he proposed to record and develop at the time
and shall contain the schedule required under § 164-199. In connection
with granting its final plat approval, the Commission may modify the
schedule consistent with the adequacy of public facilities, including, but
not limited to, the provision of adequate sewer and water. [Amended
10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 788]
A.
Copies of the final plan and other exhibits required for approval shall
be prepared in accordance with § 164-193 and shall be submitted to
the Commission within 12 months after approval of the preliminary
plan; otherwise, the approval of the plan shall be deemed to have
been withdrawn. For good cause shown, not more than four extensions
not exceeding six months each may be granted by the Planning
Commission.
B.
Application for approval of the final plat shall be submitted in writing
to the Commission at least 30 days prior to the meeting at which it is to
be considered.
C.
No final plat shall be approved by the Commission without prior review
of the City, county or state agencies which shall review the final plan for
adequacy of public facilities in the same manner set forth in § 164-198.
Such agencies shall approve, with or without modification, or
disapprove the plat to the extent that each has jurisdiction. Such
agencies shall be requested to submit their approval or disapproval to
the Commission within 15 days of the receipt of the final plat from the
Commission.
D.
Any subdivision designed not to connect to public water or sanitary
sewer, or both, shall require a certificate from the Carroll County
Health Officer as to its compliance with water and sanitary sewer
requirements.
E.
No final plat for residential development shall be approved by the
Commission without a written notation on it that no more than 40
building permits for dwelling units will be issued during any calendar
year, provided that upon receipt of the Director’s recommendation,
F.
§ 164-198 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-199
150:694
§ 164-200. Final plat requirements.
the Commission may adjust said number upward or downward up to
20% for good cause. Any additional upward adjustment shall require
an administrative adjustment pursuant to § 164-158.1. [Amended
10-28-2002 by Ord. No. 688; 10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 788]
The final plat may represent only a portion of the preliminary plan,
provided that the public improvements to be constructed in the area
covered by the plat are sufficient by and of themselves to accomplish
a proper development and to provide adequately for the health, safety
and welfare of the City, including adequate access to contiguous areas.
The Commission shall have the power to agree with the applicant
upon use, height, area or bulk requirements or restrictions which are
designed to promote the purposes of this chapter. Such requirements or
restrictions shall have the same force of law and be enforceable in the
same manner and with the same sanctions and penalties and subject to
the same power of amendment or repeal as though set out as a part of
the Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Map of the City.
G.
The Commission shall approve or disapprove a final plat within 30 days
after the filing thereof with it; otherwise, such plat shall be deemed to
have been approved, and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by
the Commission on demand; provided, however, that the applicant may
waive this requirement and consent to an extension of such period. The
grounds for disapproval of any plat shall be stated in the records of
the Commission and a copy furnished to the applicant. The Commission
may consider and use the refusal of any agency to certify the adequacy
of any public facility or facilities to serve a proposed subdivision as a
basis for the disapproval of a final plan.
H.
Title and graphic information to be shown on the final plat shall be as
required on the approved preliminary plan, except contour lines, and
shall clearly show all items required by § 3-108 of the Real Property
Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland (1974), as amended,
pertaining to the preparation of record plats.
A.
Space shall be provided on the final plat for the following signatures
and dates:
(1) Certificate of the land surveyor and the owner's certificate.
(2) Approval of the Carroll County Health Officer.
(3) Approval of Westminster Planning and Zoning Commission.
Acknowledgment by the Mayor, the Zoning Administrator and the
Planning Director evidencing compliance with all pertinent
administrative procedures.
(4)
B.
The final plat shall be legibly and accurately prepared or printed on
sheets of material to a size of 18 inches by 24 inches, including a
C.
§ 164-199 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-200
150:695
§ 164-201. Resubdivision or minor subdivision.
The procedure for the filing of a final plat for the resubdivision of a lot or
parcel or for a minor subdivision shall be as indicated in this article for an
original subdivision, except that the submission of a preliminary plan shall
be at the option of the applicant.
two-inch margin on the left side of the eighteen-inch width. The plat
shall be to a scale acceptable to the Commission, generally, one inch
equals 50 feet or one inch equals 100 feet, depending upon the size
of the subdivision. The subdivider shall file with the Commission the
necessary copies for recording and distribution as required by the
Commission, at least one copy of which shall be returned, properly
signed, to the subdivider.
The final plat shall show the following owner's certificate and
surveyor's certificate unless otherwise required by the Commission:
OWNER'S CERTIFICATE
I(we), owner(s) of the property shown hereon and described in the
surveyor's certificate, hereby adopt this plan of subdivision, establish
the building lines as shown and certify that the requirements of § 3-108
of the Real Property Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland (1974),
as amended, pertaining to the preparation of record plats, and
subsequent acts, if any, amendatory thereto as far as they relate to the
preparation of this plat and the setting of markers, have been complied
with. New streets, roads, open spaces and the mention thereof in
deeds are for the purpose of description only, and the land so shown
is expressly reserved in the present owner(s) shown on this plat, their
successors, heirs and assigns. No more than one principal building
shall be permitted on any residential lot, and no such lot may ever
be resubdivided so as to produce a building site of less area or width
than the minimum required by applicable health, zoning or other
regulations.
Owner's Signature
Witness
Date
SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE
I, ____________________, a registered land surveyor of the State of
Maryland, do hereby certify that the land shown hereon has been
laid out and the plat prepared in compliance with § 3-108 of the
Real Property Article of the Annotated Code of Maryland (1974), as
amended, pertaining to the preparation of record plats.
(Signature)
(Date)
D.
§ 164-200 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-202
150:696
§ 164-202. Additional procedures.
The Commission is hereby authorized to establish whatever additional
written procedures it deems desirable for processing or referring the
approval of subdivisions under this article. A copy of any such procedure
shall be available at the Commission's office for review and reproduction.
§ 164-203. Fees. [Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 792]
After recommendation by the Commission, the Mayor and Common Council
shall adopt, and from time to time amend, such differential filing and
processing fees as provided in the General Fee Ordinance,124 based upon
the costs of processing a subdivision application. Said costs include
payment for reasonable expert services deemed necessary and reasonable
by the Director of Planning, which may include but not be limited to
engineering, architectural, planning, transportation, landscaping and legal
services. Payment of such fees is required prior to final plat approval.
§ 164-204. Appeals.
The final action of the Commission on an application for approval of a final
plat may be appealed by any person aggrieved by such action to the Circuit
Court for Carroll County. Any such appeal shall be taken in accordance with
the Maryland Rules of Procedure as set forth in Chapter 1100, Subtitle B.
124. Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
§ 164-202 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-204
150:697

ARTICLE XXV
Site Plans
§ 164-205. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to ensure the City that proposed development
is in conformity with the intent and provisions of the land use controls and
the Comprehensive Plan for Westminster and to avoid inequities and to
guide the City in the issuance of building permits.
§ 164-206. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply to any new, expanded or remodeled
use within all zones, and no zoning certificate or building permit shall be
issued therefor except in accordance with an approved site plan.
§ 164-207. Approval required.
A site plan containing the information set forth in § 164-208 or 164-209
shall be filed with and approved by the Planning Director as provided in
§ 164-211 prior to the issuance of a zoning certificate.
§ 164-208. Contents of site plan. [Amended 1-28-2008 by Ord. No.
774]
Fifteen copies of the site plan shall be filed with the Planning Director,
may cover all or any part of a lot or tract and shall contain the following
information, drawn at a consistent scale:
The location of the tract by an insert map at a scale of not less than
one inch equals 2,000 feet and such information as the names and
numbers of adjoining roads, streams and bodies of water, railroads,
subdivisions, election districts or other landmarks, sufficient to
clearly identify the location of the property.
(1)
(2) A boundary survey of the tract.
A certificate setting forth the source of title of the owner of the
tract and the place of record or the last instrument in the chain of
title, if such certificate has not been provided with a development
plan.
(3)
All existing and proposed streets and easements, their names,
numbers and widths; existing and proposed utilities; watercourses
and their names; the owners, zoning and present use of adjoining
tracts if not previously submitted with a development plan; and
the Tax Map/parcel number, current zoning, parking required/
provided, structure use and plan preparer.
(4)
All existing and proposed buildings and their location, size, height
and proposed use.
(5)
A.
§ 164-205 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-208
150:699
(6) Setback requirements and spaces between buildings.
(7) Signs, their location, size and height.
The location, type and complete dimensioning of vehicular
entrances to the site.
(8)
The location, type, size and height of fencing, retaining walls,
lighting and screen planting where required under the provisions
of this chapter.
(9)
All off-street parking, loading spaces and walkways, indicating type
of surfacing, size, angle of stalls and width of aisles, and a specific
schedule showing the number of parking spaces provided and the
number required in accordance with Article XVI, including
connection with adjacent developments and dimensions of
landscaped areas and type of curbing.
(10)
All locations and sizes of proposed water and sewer installations
or proposed additions to existing water and sewer installations, as
well as any design features which are unusual or which deviate
from normal design practices. The proximity to the nearest hydrant
and its area of coverage shall also be shown.
(11)
Provisions for the adequate disposition of natural and storm water
in accordance with the duly adopted design criteria and standards
of the City, indicating locations, sizes, types and grades of ditches,
catch basins and pipes and connections to the existing drainage
system. Copies of all pertinent calculations and assumptions
relative to the storm drainage design, to include the delineation
and consideration of the off-site contributing watershed and
affected areas, and provisions for sediment control and/or
stormwater retention, which are to be incorporated in all phases of
construction, shall accompany the site plan submissions for review
by the City and the Soil Conservation District.
(12)
Existing topography with a maximum of two-foot contour intervals;
where the existing ground is on a slope of less than 2%, either
one-foot contours or spot elevations where necessary, but not more
than 50 feet apart in all directions.
(13)
(14)A drainage area map, to a usable scale.
The proposed finished grading by contours supplemented where
necessary by spot elevations. All horizontal dimensions shown on
the site plan shall be in feet and decimals of a foot to be closest to
1/100 of a foot; and all bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds
shall be to the nearest 10 seconds. Closure shall be within
acceptable survey tolerances, a minimum of 1:10,000.
(15)
A proposed construction schedule. If the project is proposed to be
built in phases, the schedule shall specifically identify the timing
(16)
§ 164-208 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-208
150:700
§ 164-209. Simplified site plan.
§ 164-210. Preparation.
for each phase. The schedule shall also show the timing for any
dedication for utilities, roads, open areas and recreational
facilities. The schedule must be approved by the Director and by
the Planning Commission as a part of their site plan approval
and the approved schedule shall establish the validity period for
the entire project, including any phasing. [Added 10-27-2008 by
Ord. No. 788]
The Planning Director may also require such other information as the
Director deems necessary to comply with the purposes of this section
and this chapter. [Amended 10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 788]
B.
Upon the determination by the Zoning Administrator and the Planning
Director, with the concurrence of all appropriate agencies, a simplified
site plan may be filed by the owner/occupant of a proposed singlefamily
detached dwelling, an accessory building, a temporary use, an
addition to or change of use for a commercial or industrial structure
or for a special exception use which does not require a building permit
in those cases where a field inspection indicates that the scope of
the proposed accessory building, addition or special exception use is
of such nature that the provisions for the handling of natural and
storm water, sediment control, off-street parking, setbacks, water and
sewerage and other requirements can be adequately addressed with
a simplified site plan. Said site plan may be approved by the Zoning
Administrator and the Planning Director upon concurrence of all
appropriate agencies, except that approval of industrial use site plans
shall be in accordance with other sections of this chapter.
A.
The simplified site plan shall contain the following information:
(1) An accurate sketch of the lot drawn to scale.
(2) The present record owner of the property.
(3) A vicinity map.
(4) The location and size of the vehicular entrance to the site.
(5) Water and sewer (septic) facilities, if required.
(6) The location of the parking area and number of stalls as required.
The location, dimensions, height and setbacks of all existing and
proposed buildings.
(7)
(8) The proposed use of the structural addition.
B.
All site plans and amendments thereto, except those provided in
§ 164-209, shall be prepared and certified by a licensed architect,
A.
§ 164-208 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-210
150:701
§ 164-211. Action on site plan.
landscape architect or registered civil engineer. A site plan may be
prepared in one or more sheets to show clearly the information
required by this section and to facilitate the review and approval of
the plan. If prepared in more than one sheet, match lines shall clearly
indicate where the several sheets join. Every site plan shall show the
name and address of the owner or developer, election district, North
point, date and scale of drawing, number of sheets, existing zoning
and the Tax Map and parcel number. In addition, it shall reserve a
blank space three inches wide and five inches high for the use of the
approving authority.
Site plans shall be prepared to a scale of one inch equals 30 feet or
larger; the sheet or sheets shall not exceed the dimensions of 36 inches
by 48 inches.
B.
Clearly legible, blue- or black-line copies of a site plan shall be
submitted to the Planning Director, accompanied by a receipt
evidencing the payment of any site plan fees for processing and
approval. Fees for filing and reviewing site plans shall be those as
adopted by the Common Council. In addition, the Planning Director may
require the assistance of a consultant, and, in connection therewith, the
applicant shall pay the consultant's fee as a prerequisite to approval.
Copies shall be submitted in sufficient number to satisfy agency review
requirements.
C.
Compliance with standards.
The Planning Director and Commission shall approve, approve
subject to conditions or disapprove the site plan and shall notify the
applicant, in writing, not later than 120 days after receipt of the
site plan. However, the applicant may consent to an extension of
such period. In reaching their decision, the Planning Director and
Commission shall determine whether the site plan complies with
the following standards:
All applicable requirements, including all of the requirements
of the zone in which it is located, shall be met as verified by the
Zoning Administrator.
(a)
All streets and sidewalks shall conform to the design standards
of the City with respect to right-of-way, width, paving
specifications and drainage provisions.
(b)
The pedestrian circulation system shall be separated whenever
possible from vehicular circulation in order to permit safe and
convenient pedestrian movement.
(c)
Landscaping shall be incorporated into the design of every
planned development to enhance the appearance of structures,
to provide protection from climatic conditions and to screen
(d)
(1)
A.
§ 164-210 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-211
150:702
roads, parking areas and nearby property from view. Grass
or other ground cover, shrubs and trees shall be planted in
the development. Existing trees shall be preserved wherever
possible. All landscaping shall comply with the landscape
manual of the City of Westminster adopted pursuant to
§ 164-131.1. [Amended 3-22-1993 by Ord. No. 553]
(e) Land regulations as specified in Article XXIV shall be observed.
A supplementary drainage system shall be required when
adequate surface drainage is not possible.
(f)
All structures in any planned development shall be located in
regard to topography and natural features. Consideration shall
be given to prevailing winds and seasonal temperatures.
(g)
In residential areas of planned developments, variations of
setback distances shall be encouraged to create architectural
interest in arrangement and character of housing fronts.
(h)
All parking areas and areas of high pedestrian use shall be
adequately lighted.
(i)
Adequate lighting shall be provided in outdoor areas often
used by occupants after dark, including areas around
walkways, steps, ramps and signs.
(j)
In residential planned developments, lighting shall be located
so as to avoid shining directly into the windows of residences
or into private outdoor open space associated with the
development of surrounding units.
(k)
Parking areas shall be designed so as to discourage through
traffic.
(l)
Parking areas shall be screened from adjacent structures,
roads and traffic arteries with hedges, dense planting, earth
berms or changes in grade or walls.
(m)
In residential planned developments, no more than 15 parking
spaces shall be permitted in a continuous row without being
interrupted by landscaping.
(n)
All parking areas and off-street loading areas shall be graded
and drained so as to dispose of all surface water without
erosion, flooding and other off-site inconveniences. All areas
shall be marked to provide orderly and safe loading, parking
and storage.
(o)
The locations of the buildings and structures, the open space,
the landscaping and the pedestrian and vehicular circulation
shall be adequate, safe and efficient.
(p)
§ 164-211 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-211
150:703
The following shall be so arranged that traffic congestion is
avoided and pedestrian and vehicular safety and welfare are
protected with no adverse effect on surrounding properties:
[1] Facilities, improvements and utilities.
[2] Vehicular ingress and egress and internal circulation.
[3] Setbacks.
[4] Locations of service use areas.
[5] Walls and landscaping.
(q)
The proposed signs will not, by size, location or lighting,
interfere with traffic or limit visibility.
(r)
Each structure and use shall be compatible with other uses
and other site plans and with existing and proposed adjacent
development.
(s)
In reviewing these standards, the Planning Director shall consult
with appropriate agencies to ensure that all approvals will be
consistent with established policies and regulations.
(2)
Compatibility. The Planning Director and Commission shall not approve
the site plan if they find that the development would not achieve a
maximum of compatibility, safety, efficiency and attractiveness; and the
fact that a site plan complies with all of the stated general regulations,
development standards or other specific requirements of the zone shall
not, by itself, be deemed to create a presumption that the proposed site
plan is, in fact, compatible with surrounding land uses and, in itself,
shall not be sufficient to require approval of the site plan.
B.
The site plan approval shall contain the schedule required under
§ 164-208A(16) or 164-209B(9). In connection with granting their site
plan approval, the Director and the Commission may modify the
schedule consistent with the adequacy of public facilities, including,
but not limited to, the provision of adequate sewer and water. [Added
10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 788]
C.
No site plan shall be approved by the Planning Director and
Commission without a written notation on it that no more than 40
building permits for dwelling units will be issued during any calendar
year, provided that upon receipt of the Director’s recommendation,
the Commission may adjust said number upward or downward up to
20% for good cause. Any additional upward adjustment shall require
an administrative adjustment pursuant to § 164-158.1. [Added
10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 788125]
D.
125. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections C through G as
Subsections E through I, respectively.
§ 164-211 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-211
150:704
The final action of the Commission on an application for approval of a
site plan may be appealed by any person aggrieved by such action to
the Circuit Court for Carroll County. Any such appeal shall be taken
in accordance with the Maryland Rules of Procedure as set forth in
Chapter 1100, Subtitle B.
E.
Formal approval. The approved site plan, with any conditions shown
thereon or attached thereto, shall be dated and signed by the
designated member of the Commission and the Planning Director.
Copies of the site plan shall be forwarded to the appropriate agencies
and shall be attached to the building permit.
F.
Revisions. Any proposed changes by the applicant to an approved site
plan shall be resubmitted for approval in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
G.
Lapse of approval. A site plan shall become null and void after one year
from the date of approval, unless a building permit has been issued and
substantial work has begun on the project.
H.
I. Approval to run with land. Site plan approval shall run with the land.
To ensure that projects are not approved for which water and
wastewater capacity does not exist, the following additional site plan
approval procedures are adopted: [Added 4-13-2015 by Ord. No.
853; amended 4-9-2018 by Ord. No. 891]
Upon receipt of a completed application for a site plan approval for
a project that has not received water and wastewater allocations at
the time of approval of a subdivision plat that includes a request
for a water and sewer allocation, the Planning Director shall make
a determination as to the availability of water and sewer capacity.
(1)
Upon a finding that the application is complete, that adequate
capacity exists for an allocation, and that the use otherwise
complies with requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, subject to
any approvals required from the Planning Commission, the
Director shall assign the plan a tentative allocation approval, which
may stipulate the phasing of water allocation over time.
(2)
Upon approval of a site plan application by the Planning
Commission, the Planning Director shall issue a final water and
wastewater allocation consistent with the Planning Commission's
approval.
(3)
Notwithstanding anything in this section, when a site plan expires
or becomes null and void through lapse or revocation, the
allocations shall also be forfeited.
(4)
J.
No site plan shall be approved by the Planning Director and the
Planning and Zoning Commission that does not adequately address
the preferences and guidelines set forth in the most recently adopted
K.
§ 164-211 URBAN RENEWAL § 164-211
150:705
§ 164-212. Effect of noncompliance.
§ 164-213. Fees. [Amended 1-28-2008 by Ord. No. 774; 11-24-2008
by Ord. No. 792]
After recommendation from the Commission, the Mayor and Common
Council shall adopt and from time to time amend such differential filing and
processing fees as provided in the General Fee Ordinance126 based upon
the costs of processing a site plan application. Said costs include payment
for reasonable expert services deemed necessary and reasonable by the
Planning Director, which may include but not be limited to engineering,
architectural, planning, transportation, landscaping and legal services.
Payment of such fees is required prior to site plan approval.
Development Design Preferences Manual in compliance with the
requirements of § 164-131.2. [Added 5-9-2016 by Ord. No. 863]
Whenever the Planning Director shall find, in the case of any plan
approved in accordance with the provisions of this section, upon his
own or pursuant to a complaint filed with him that any of the terms,
conditions or restrictions upon which the site plan was approved are
not being complied with, the Planning Director is authorized, after
due notice to all parties concerned and granting full opportunity for
public discussion, to suspend or revoke the site plan and any permits
which have been issued pursuant to such site plan or to take such
other action as it finds necessary to ensure compliance. The Planning
Director is authorized to request and obtain investigations and reports
as to compliance from such county or state agencies or administrative
offices as may be appropriate.
A.
Upon certified notice from the Planning Director of revocation of a site
plan, the appropriate authority shall revoke such building permits and
use permits as the order of the Planning Director may direct.
B.
126. Editor's Note: See Ch. A175, Fees, Art. I, General Fees.
§ 164-211 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § 164-213
150:706
Appendix
Chapter A174
DISTRIBUTION TABLE
§ A174-1. Distribution Table.
The following table provides for the distribution of chapters, articles and
sections of the 1972 Code, as amended through 1990, into Parts I and II of
the 1991 Code.
Source Chapter, Article
or Section from 1972
Code
New Chapter,
Article or Section
in 1991 Code
Ordinances Adopted
after Code Adopted
(Ord. No. 381) and
Included in Code
Ch. 1, General Provisions Ch. 1, Art. II
§ 1-1 § 1-11
§ 1-2 § 1-12
§ 1-3 § 1-13
§ 1-4 § 1-14
§ 1-5 § 1-15
§ 1-6 § 1-16
§ 1-7 § 1-18A 484
§ 1-8 § 1-17
§ 1-8.1 § 1-18B 484
§ 1-8.2 § 1-18C 484
Ch. 2, Administration of
Government
—
Art. I, In General Ch. 4, Art. I
§ 2-1 § 4-1
§ 2-2 § 4-2
§ 2-3 § 4-3
§ 2-4 § 4-4
§ 2-5 § 4-5
Art. II, Legislative Body Ch. 4. Art. II
§ 2-6 § 4-6
§ 2-7 § 4-7 386; 452
§ 2-8 § 4-8
§ 2-9 § 4-9A and B 392; 479
§ 2-10 § 4-9C
§ 164-213 URBAN RENEWAL § A174-1
150:707
Source Chapter, Article
or Section from 1972
Code
New Chapter,
Article or Section
in 1991 Code
Ordinances Adopted
after Code Adopted
(Ord. No. 381) and
Included in Code
§ 2-11 § 4-9D
§ 2-12 § 4-9E
§ 2-13 § 4-10
§ 2-14 § 4-11
Art III, City Officers —
Div. 1, Generally Ch. 29, Art. I
§ 2-15 § 29-1 510
§ 2-16 § 29-2 533
§ 2-17 § 29-3 533
§ 2-18 § 29-4 451; 533
§ 2-19 § 29-5 533
§ 2-20 § 29-6
Div. 2, Mayor Ch. 4, Art. III
§ 2-21 § 4-12 533
§ 2-21A Ch. 29, Art. II, 533
§§ 29-7 - 29-11
Div. 3, City Clerk and City
Treasurer
Ch. 29, Art. III
§ 2-22 § 29-12 406; 533
§ 2-23 § 29-13 406; 533
§ 2-24 § 29-14 406
§ 2-25 § 29-15 406; 533
§ 2-26 § 29-16 406
§ 2-27 § 29-17 406; 533
Div. 4, City Attorney Ch. 29, Art. IV
§ 2-28 § 29-18 510
§ 2-29 § 29-19
§ 2-30 § 29-20
Div. 5, Planning Director Ch. 29, Art. V
§ 2-31 § 29-21 496
§ 2-32 § 29-22 496; 533
§ 2-33 § 29-23 496
§ 2-34 § 29-24 496; 533
§ 2-35 § 29-25 496; 533
§ A174-1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § A174-1
150:708
Source Chapter, Article
or Section from 1972
Code
New Chapter,
Article or Section
in 1991 Code
Ordinances Adopted
after Code Adopted
(Ord. No. 381) and
Included in Code
§ 2-36 § 29-26 496
Div. 6, Parks Board Ch. 7, Art. I
§ 2-37 § 7-1 397; 510
§ 2-37.1 § 7-2 397; 510
§ 2-37.2 § 7-3 397; 510
§ 2-37.3 § 7-4 397; 510
§ 2-37.4 § 7-5 397; 510
§ 2-37.5 § 7-6 397; 510
§ 2-37.6 § 7-7 397; 510
§ 2-37.7 —
§ 2-37.8 § 7-8 397; 510
§ 2-37.9 § 7-9 397; 510
§ 2-37.10 § 7-10 397; 510
§ 2-37.11 § 7-11 397; 510
§ 2-38 (Reserved) —
§§ 2-38.1 through 2-38.2
(Reserved)
—
§ 2-39 (Reserved) —
Div. 6.1, Public Works
Director
Ch. 29, Art. VI
§ 2-39.1 § 29-27 496
§ 2-39.2 § 29-28 496; 533
§ 2-39.3 § 29-29 496
§ 2-39.4 § 29-30 496; 533
§ 2-39.5 § 29-31 496; 533
§ 2-39.6 § 29-32 496
Div. 6.2
§§ 2-39.7 through 2-39.12
(Reserved)
—
Art. IV, Planning and
Zoning Commission
Ch. 7, Art. II
§ 2-40 § 7-12
§ 2-41 §§ 7-13 and 7-14
§ 2-42 § 7-15
§ A174-1 URBAN RENEWAL § A174-1
150:709
Source Chapter, Article
or Section from 1972
Code
New Chapter,
Article or Section
in 1991 Code
Ordinances Adopted
after Code Adopted
(Ord. No. 381) and
Included in Code
§ 2-43 § 7-16
§ 2-44 § 7-17
Art. V, Municipal-County
Relations
Ch. 24
§ 2-45 § 24-1A and B 507; 515
§ 2-46 § 24-1C 507
§ 2-47 § 24-2 507
Ch. 3, Animals and Fowl Ch. 48
§ 3-1 § 48-1
§ 3-2 § 48-2
§ 3-3 § 48-3
§ 3-4 § 48-4
§ 3-5 § 48-5
§ 3-6 § 48-6
§ 3-7 § 48-7
§ 3-8 § 48-8
§ 3-9 § 48-9
§ 3-10 § 48-10
§ 3-11 § 48-11
§ 3-12 § 48-12
§ 3-13 § 48-13 445
Ch. 4, Buildings Ch. 56
§ 4-1 § 56-1
§ 4-2 § 56-2
§ 4-3 § 56-3
§ 4-4 § 56-4
§ 4-5 § 56-5 514
Ch. 4A, Cable Television
Franchise
Ch. 61
§ 4A-1 § 61-1 446; 458
§ 4A-2 § 61-2 446
§ 4A-3 § 61-3 446; 458
§ 4A-4 § 61-4 446; 458
§ 4A-5 § 61-5 446
§ A174-1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § A174-1
150:710
Source Chapter, Article
or Section from 1972
Code
New Chapter,
Article or Section
in 1991 Code
Ordinances Adopted
after Code Adopted
(Ord. No. 381) and
Included in Code
§ 4A-6 § 61-6 446
§ 4A-7 § 61-7 446
§ 4A-8 § 61-8 446
§ 4A-9 § 61-9 446
§ 4A-10 § 61-10 446; 458
§ 4A-11 § 61-11 446
§ 4A-12 § 61-12 446
§ 4A-13 § 61-13 446
§ 4A-14 § 61-14 446
§ 4A-15 § 61-15 446
Ch. 5, Civil Emergencies Ch. 10
§ 5-1 § 10-1
§ 5-2 § 10-2
§ 5-3 § 10-3
§ 5-4 § 10-4
§ 5-5 § 10-5
§ 5-6 § 10-6
§ 5-7 § 10-7
Ch. 6, Elections Ch. 14
§ 6-1 § 14-1
§ 6-2 § 14-2
§ 6-3 § 14-3, lead-in
§ 6-4 § 14-3A through D
§ 6-5 § 14-4
§ 6-6 § 14-5
§ 6-7 § 14-6
§ 6-8 §§ 14-7 and 14-8
§ 6-9 § 14-9
§ 6-10 § 14-10
§ 6-11 § 14-11
§ 6-12 § 14-12
§ 6-13 § 14-13
§ 6-14 § 14-14
§ A174-1 URBAN RENEWAL § A174-1
150:711
Source Chapter, Article
or Section from 1972
Code
New Chapter,
Article or Section
in 1991 Code
Ordinances Adopted
after Code Adopted
(Ord. No. 381) and
Included in Code
§ 6-15 § 14-15
§ 6-16 § 14-16A
§ 6-17 § 14-16B
§ 6-18 § 14-17
§ 6-19 § 14-18
Ch. 6A, Ethics Ch. 16
§ 6A-1 § 16-1 440; 456
§ 6A-2 § 16-2 440; 456; 533
§ 6A-3 § 16-3 440; 456
§ 6A-4 § 16-4 440; 456
§ 6A-5 § 16-5 440; 456
§ 6A-6 § 16-6 440; 456
§ 6A-7 § 16-7 440; 456
Ch. 7, Fire Protection —
Art. I, In General Ch. 78, Art. I
§ 7-1 § 78-1
Art. II, Fire Prevention
Code
Ch. 78, Art. II
§ 7-2 § 78-2
§ 7-3 § 78-3
§ 7-4 § 78-4
§ 7-5 § 78-5
§ 7-6 § 78-6
§ 7-7 § 78-7
§ 7-8 § 78-8
§ 7-9 § 78-9
Art. III, Fire Department Ch.21
§ 7-10 §§ 21-1 and 21-2
§ 7-11 § 21-3
§ 7-12 § 21-4
Ch. 7A, Floodplain
Regulations
Ch. 83
Art I, Regulatory
Provisions
Art. I
§ A174-1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § A174-1
150:712
Source Chapter, Article
or Section from 1972
Code
New Chapter,
Article or Section
in 1991 Code
Ordinances Adopted
after Code Adopted
(Ord. No. 381) and
Included in Code
§ 7A-1 § 83-1 508
§ 7A-2 § 83-2 508
§ 7A-3 § 83-3 508
§ 7A-4 § 83-4 508
§ 7A-5 § 83-5 508
Art. II, Administrative
Provisions
Art. II
§ 7A-6 § 83-6 508
§ 7A-7 § 83-7 508
§ 7A-8 § 83-8 508
§ 7A-9 § 83-9 508
Ch. 8, Reserved —
Ch. 9, Junkyards Ch. 90
§ 9-1 § 90-1
§ 9-2 § 90-2
§ 9-3 § 90-3
§ 9-4 § 90-4
§ 9-5 § 90-5
§ 9-6 § 90-6
§ 9-7 § 90-7
§ 9-8 § 90-8
§ 9-9 § 90-9
Ch. 10, Licenses —
Art. I, In General Ch. 94, Art. I
§ 10-1 § 94-1
§ 10-2 § 94-2
§ 10-3 § 94-3
§ 10-4 § 94-4
§ 10-5 § 94-5
§ 10-6 § 94-6
§ 10-7 § 94-7
§ 10-8 § 94-8
§ 10-9 § 94-9
§ 10-10 § 94-10
§ A174-1 URBAN RENEWAL § A174-1
150:713
Source Chapter, Article
or Section from 1972
Code
New Chapter,
Article or Section
in 1991 Code
Ordinances Adopted
after Code Adopted
(Ord. No. 381) and
Included in Code
§ 10-11 § 94-11
Ch. 11, Nuisances Ch. 100
Art. I, In General Art. I
§ 11-1 § 100-1
§ 11-2 § 100-2
§ 11-3 § 100-3
§ 11-4 § 100-4
Art. II, Abatement Art. II
§ 11-5 § 100-5
§ 11-6 § 100-6
§ 11-7 § 100-7
§ 11-8 § 100-8A
§ 11-9 § 100-8B
§ 11-10 § 100-9
Art. III, Penalties Art. III
§ 11-11 § 100-10 484
Ch. 12, Offenses-
Miscellaneous
Ch. 106
§ 12-1 § 106-1
§ 12-2 § 106-2
§ 12-3 § 106-3
§ 12-4 § 106-4
§ 12-5 § 106-5
§ 12-6 § 106-6
§ 12-7 § 106-7
§ 12-8 § 106-8
§ 12-9 § 106-9
§ 12-10 § 106-10
§ 12-11 § 106-11
§ 12-12 § 106-12
§ 12-13 § 106-16
§ 12-14 § 106-17A
§ 12-15 § 106-17B
§ 12-16 § 106-17C
§ A174-1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § A174-1
150:714
Source Chapter, Article
or Section from 1972
Code
New Chapter,
Article or Section
in 1991 Code
Ordinances Adopted
after Code Adopted
(Ord. No. 381) and
Included in Code
§ 12-17 § 106-17D
§ 12-18 § 106-18
§ 12-19 § 106-19
§ 12-20 § 106-20
§ 12-21 § 106-21A
§ 12-21.1 § 106-21B
§ 12-21.2 § 106-21C
§ 12-22 § 106-22
§ 12-23 § 106-23A
§ 12-24 § 106-23B
§ 12-25 § 106-24
§ 12-26 § 106-25
§ 12-27 § 106-13 484
§ 12-28 § 106-14 484
§ 12-29 § 106-15A 470
§ 12-30 § 106-15B, C and D 470
Ch. 13, Picketing, Parades
and Demonstrations
Ch. 109
Art. I, Picketing Art. I
§ 13-1 § 109-1
§ 13-2 § 109-2 484
§ 13-3 § 109-3
§ 13-4 § 109-4
§ 13-5 § 109-5A
§ 13-6 § 109-5B
§ 13-7 § 109-6
§ 13-8 § 109-7
Art. II, Parades and
Demonstrations
Art. II
§ 13-9 § 109-8
§ 13-10 § 109-9
§ 13-11 § 109-10A 484
§ 13-12 § 109-10B
§ 13-13 § 109-10C
§ A174-1 URBAN RENEWAL § A174-1
150:715
Source Chapter, Article
or Section from 1972
Code
New Chapter,
Article or Section
in 1991 Code
Ordinances Adopted
after Code Adopted
(Ord. No. 381) and
Included in Code
§ 13-14 § 109-11
§ 13-15 § 109-12
§ 13-16 § 109-13A and B
§ 13-17 § 109-13C
§ 13-18 § 109-13D
§ 13-19 § 109-14
§ 13-20 § 109-15
Art. III, Penalties Art. III
§ 13-21 § 109-16 484
Ch. 14, Plumbing Ch. 112
Ch. 15, Police Department Ch. 33
§ 15-1 § 33-1
§ 15-2 § 33-2
§ 15-3 § 33-3
§ 15-4 § 33-4
§ 15-5 § 33-5A and B 511; 533
§ 15-6 § 33-5C 451
§ 15-7 § 33-5D 511
§ 15-8 § 33-6
§ 15-9 § 33-7 511
§ 15-10 § 33-8
§ 15-11 § 33-9
§ 15-12 § 33-10
§§ 15-13 through 15-15
(Reserved)
—
§ 15-16 §33-11
Ch. 15A, Raw Water
Reservoir
Ch. 80
§ 15A-1 § 80-1 457
§ 15A-2 § 80-2 457
§ 15A-3 § 80-3 457
§ 15A-4 § 80-4 457
Ch. 16, Sewers and
Sewage
Ch. 124
§ A174-1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § A174-1
150:716
Source Chapter, Article
or Section from 1972
Code
New Chapter,
Article or Section
in 1991 Code
Ordinances Adopted
after Code Adopted
(Ord. No. 381) and
Included in Code
§ 16-1 § 124-1 464
§ 16-2 § 124-2 464
§ 16-3 § 124-3 464
§ 16-4 § 124-4 464
§ 16-4.1 § 124-11 519
§ 16-5 § 124-5 464
§ 16-6 § 124-6 464
§ 16-6.1 § 124-7 464
§ 16-6.2 § 124-8 464
§ 16-6.3 § 124-9 464
§ 16-6.4 § 124-10 464
§ 16-7 § 124-19 464
§ 16-8 § 124-20 464
§ 16-9 § 124-17 464; 523
§ 16-9.1 § 124-12 464; 477
§ 16-10 § 124-13 464; 523
§ 16-10.01 § 124-14 464
§ 16-10.1 § 124-15A 464
§ 16-10.2 § 124-15B 464
§ 16-10.3 § 124-15C 464
§ 16-10.4 § 124-16A 495
§ 16-10.5 § 124-16B 495
§ 16-10.6 § 124-16C 495
§ 16-10.7 § 124-16D 495
§ 16-11 § 124-18 and
Schedule
464; 495; 502; 513; 530
§ 16-12 § 124-21 464
§ 16-13 § 124-22 464
§ 16-14 § 124-23 464
§ 16-15 Omitted 464
§ 16-16 Omitted 464
Ch. 16A, Stormwater
Management
Ch. 136
§ 16A-1 § 136-1 475
§ A174-1 URBAN RENEWAL § A174-1
150:717
Source Chapter, Article
or Section from 1972
Code
New Chapter,
Article or Section
in 1991 Code
Ordinances Adopted
after Code Adopted
(Ord. No. 381) and
Included in Code
§ 16A-2 § 136-2 475
§ 16A-3 § 136-3 475
§ 16A-4 § 136-4 475
§ 16A-5 § 136-5 475
§ 16A-6 § 136-6 475
§ 16A-7 § 136-7 475
§ 16A-8 § 136-8 475
§ 16A-9 § 136-9 475
§ 16A-10 Omitted 475
§ 16A-11 § 136-10 475
Ch. 16B, Special Capital
Benefit Assessment
Ch. 133
§ 16B-1 § 133-1 505
§ 16B-2 § 133-2 505
§ 16B-3 § 133-3 505
§ 16B-4 § 133-4 505
§ 16B-5 § 133-5 505
§ 16B-6 § 133-6 505
§ 16B-7 § 133-7 505
§ 16B-8 § 133-8 505
Ch. 16C, Solid Waste Ch. 130
§ 16C-1 § 130-1 528
§ 16C-2 § 130-2 528
§ 16C-3 § 130-3 528
§ 16C-4 § 130-4 528
§ 16C-5 § 130-5 528
§ 16C-6 § 130-6 528
§ 16C-7 § 130-7 528
§ 16C-8 § 130-8 528
§ 16C-9 § 130-9 528
§ 16C-10 § 130-10 528
§ 16C-11 § 130-11 528
§ 16C-12 § 130-12 528
§ 16C-13 § 130-13 528
§ A174-1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § A174-1
150:718
Source Chapter, Article
or Section from 1972
Code
New Chapter,
Article or Section
in 1991 Code
Ordinances Adopted
after Code Adopted
(Ord. No. 381) and
Included in Code
§ 16C-14 § 130-14 528
§ 16C-15 § 130-15 528
§ 16C-16 § 130-16 528
§ 16C-17 § 130-17 528
§ 16C-18 § 130-18 528
§ 16C-19 § 130-19 528
§ 16C-20 § 130-20 528
§ 16C-21 § 130-21 528
§ 16C-22 § 130-22 528
Ch. 17, Streets and
Sidewalks
Ch. 139
Art. I, In General
§ 17-1 § 139-1
§ 17-2 § 139-2
§ 17-3 § 139-3 447
§ 17-4 § 139-4 447
§ 17-5 § 139-5 447
§ 17-6 § 139-6
§ 17-7 § 139-7
§ 17-8 § 139-8A
§ 17-9 § 139-8B
§ 17-10 § 139-8C
§ 17-11 § 139-8D
Art. II, Laying Out,
Opening, Widening and
Extension of Streets
§ 17-12 § 139-9
§ 17-13 § 139-10
Art. III, Grading and
Paving of Sidewalks and
Curbs
§ 17-14 § 139-11A
§ 17-15 § 139-11B
§ 17-16 § 139-12
§ 17-17 § 139-13
§ A174-1 URBAN RENEWAL § A174-1
150:719
Source Chapter, Article
or Section from 1972
Code
New Chapter,
Article or Section
in 1991 Code
Ordinances Adopted
after Code Adopted
(Ord. No. 381) and
Included in Code
Art. IV, Procedure for
Closing Streets
§ 17-18 § 139-14
§ 17-19 § 139-15
§ 17-20 § 139-16A
§ 17-21 § 139-16B
§ 17-22 § 139-17
§ 17-23 § 139-18
§ 17-24 § 139-19
§ 17-25 § 139-20
Art. V, Structures
Overhanging Sidewalks
§ 17-26 § 139-21
§ 17-26.1 § 139-22
§ 17-27 § 139-23
§ 17-28 § 139-24
Art. VI, Excavations
§ 17-29 § 139-25
§ 17-30 § 139-26
§ 17-31 § 139-27
§ 17-32 § 139-28
§ 17-33 § 139-29
§ 17-34 § 139-30 447; 484
Ch. 18, Taxation and
Finance
Art. 1, In General —
§ 18-1 § 143-1
§ 18-2 § 143-2
§ 18-3 § 143-3 509
§ 18-4 § 143-4
§ 18-5 § 19-12
Art. II, Department of
Finance
—
§ 18-6 § 19-1
§ A174-1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § A174-1
150:720
Source Chapter, Article
or Section from 1972
Code
New Chapter,
Article or Section
in 1991 Code
Ordinances Adopted
after Code Adopted
(Ord. No. 381) and
Included in Code
§ 18-7 § 19-2 406
§ 18-8 § 19-3
§ 18-9 § 19-4
§ 18-10 § 19-5
§ 18-11 § 19-6 533
§ 18-12 § 19-7 406, 533
§ 18-13 § 19-8A 533
§ 18-14 § 19-8B
§ 18-15 § 19-9
§ 18-16 § 19-10, lead-in 406
§ 18-17 § 19-10A
§ 18-18 § 19-10B
§ 18-19 § 19-10C
§ 18-20 § 19-11
Ch. 18A, Trees Ch. 148
§ 18A-1 § 148-1 524
§ 18A-2 § 148-2 524
§ 18A-3 § 148-3 524
§ 18A-4 § 148-4 524
§ 18A-5 § 148-5 524
§ 18A-6 § 148-6 524
§ 18A-7 § 148-7 524
§ 18A-8 § 148-8 524
§ 18A-9 § 148-9 524
§ 18A-10 § 148-10 524
§ 18A-11 § 148-11 524
§ 18A-12 § 148-12 524
§ 18A-13 § 148-13 524
§ 18A-14 § 148-14 524
§ 18A-15 § 148-15 524
§ 18A-16 § 148-16 524
§ 18A-17 § 148-17 524
Ch. 19, Taxicabs Ch. 145
§ A174-1 URBAN RENEWAL § A174-1
150:721
Source Chapter, Article
or Section from 1972
Code
New Chapter,
Article or Section
in 1991 Code
Ordinances Adopted
after Code Adopted
(Ord. No. 381) and
Included in Code
§ 19-1 § 145-1 535
§ 19-2 § 145-2
§ 19-3 § 145-4C
§ 19-4 § 145-3 535
§ 19-5 § 145-4A and B
§ 19-6 § 145-5
§ 19-7 § 145-6
§ 19-8 § 145-7
§ 19-9 § 145-8
§ 19-10 § 145-9
§ 19-11 § 145-10
§ 19-12 § 145-11
§ 19-13 § 145-12
§ 19-14 § 145-13
§ 19-15 § 145-14
§ 19-16 § 145-15
§ 19-17 § 145-16
§ 19-18 § 145-17
§ 19-19 § 145-18A
§ 19-20 § 145-18B
§ 19-21 § 145-18C
§ 19-22 § 145-19A and B
§ 19-23 § 145-19C
§ 19-24 § 145-20
§ 19-25 § 145-21
§ 19-26 § 145-22
§ 19-27 § 145-23A and B 491
§ 19-28 § 145-23C 491
§ 19-29 § 145-24
§ 19-30 § 145-25
§ 19-31 § 145-26
§ 19-32 § 145-27
Ch. 19A, Urban Renewal Ch. 150
§ A174-1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § A174-1
150:722
Source Chapter, Article
or Section from 1972
Code
New Chapter,
Article or Section
in 1991 Code
Ordinances Adopted
after Code Adopted
(Ord. No. 381) and
Included in Code
§ 19A-1 § 150-1 418
§ 19A-2 § 150-2 418
Ch. 20, Vehicles and
Traffic
Ch. 155
Art. I, General Provisions Art. I
§ 20-1 § 155-1 526
§ 20-2 § 155-2 526
§ 20-3 § 155-3 526
§ 20-4 § 155-4 526
§ 20-5 § 155-5 526
§ 20-6 § 155-6 526
§ 20-7 § 155-7 526
§ 20-8 § 155-8 526
§ 20-9 § 155-9 526
§ 20-10 § 155-10 526
§ 20-11 § 155-11 526
§ 20-12 § 155-12 526
§ 20-13 § 155-13 526
§ 20-14 § 155-14 526
Art. II, Stopping, Standing
and Parking
—
Div. 2, General
Regulations
Art. II
§ 20-15 § 155-15 526
§ 20-16 § 155-16 526
§ 20-17 § 155-17 526
§ 20-18 § 155-18 526
§ 20-19 § 155-19 526
§ 20-20 § 155-20 526
§ 20-21 § 155-21 526
§ 20-22 § 155-22 526
§ 20-23 § 155-23 526
§ 20-24 § 155-24 526
§ 20-25 § 155-25 526
§ A174-1 URBAN RENEWAL § A174-1
150:723
Source Chapter, Article
or Section from 1972
Code
New Chapter,
Article or Section
in 1991 Code
Ordinances Adopted
after Code Adopted
(Ord. No. 381) and
Included in Code
§ 20-26 § 155-26 526
§ 20-27 § 155-27 526
§ 20-28 § 155-28 526
§ 20-29 § 155-29 526
§ 20-30 § 155-30 526
Div. 2, Metered Parking Art. III
§ 20-31 § 155-31 526
§ 20-32 § 155-32 526
§ 20-33 § 155-33 526
§ 20-34 § 155-34 526
§ 20-35 § 155-35 526
§ 20-36 § 155-36 526
§ 20-37 § 155-37 526
§ 20-38 § 155-38 526
§ 20-39 § 155-39 526
§ 20-40 § 155-40 526
§ 20-41 § 155-41 526
§ 20-42 § 155-42 526
§ 20-43 § 155-43 526
Art. III, Snow Emergencies Art. IV
§ 20-44 § 155-44 526
§ 20-45 § 155-45 526
§ 20-46 § 155-46 526
§ 20-47 § 155-47 526
Art. IV, Payment of Fines
and Election to Stand Trial
Art. V
§ 20-48 § 155-48 526
§ 20-49 § 155-49 526
§ 20-50 § 155-50 526
§ 20-51 § 155-51 526
Ch. 20A, Water Ch. 160
§ 20A-1 § 160-1 382; 393; 432; 436; 494;
501; 512; 529
§ A174-1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § A174-1
150:724
Source Chapter, Article
or Section from 1972
Code
New Chapter,
Article or Section
in 1991 Code
Ordinances Adopted
after Code Adopted
(Ord. No. 381) and
Included in Code
§ 20A-2 § 160-2 and
Schedule
382; 388; 393; 410; 432;
436; 494; 501; 512; 529
§ 20A-3 § 160-3 382; 388; 432
§ 20A-4 § 160-4 382; 410
§ 20A-5 § 160-5 382; 393
§ 20A-6 § 160-6 382
§ 20A-7 § 160-7 382; 388; 432; 522
§ 20A-7.1 § 160-8 383; 404; 432; 454; 522
§ 20A-7.2 § 160-9 399
§ 20A-8 § 160-10 382; 476
§ 20A-9 § 160-11 382
§ 20A-10 § 160-12 382
§ 20A-10.1 § 160-13 484
§ 20A-10.2 § 160-14 520
§ 20A-11 § 160-15 through
160-21
382; 448; 484
Ch. 21, Zoning and
Subdivision of Land
Ch. 164
Art I, In General Art. I
§ 21-1 § 164-1 425
§ 21-2 § 164-2 425
§ 21-3 § 164-3 425; 434; 439; 465; 471;
482; 493; 527
§ 21-4 Omitted 425
§ 21-5 § 164-4 425
§ 21-6 § 164-5 425
§ 21-6.1 § 164-6 450
§ 21-7 § 164-7 425
Art. II, Zoning Districts Arts. II through XV
§ 21-8 § 164-8 425; 450; 527
§ 21-9 § 164-9 425; 467
§ 21-10 § 164-10 425
§ 21-11 §§ 164-11 through
164-17
425; 471; 493
§ A174-1 URBAN RENEWAL § A174-1
150:725
Source Chapter, Article
or Section from 1972
Code
New Chapter,
Article or Section
in 1991 Code
Ordinances Adopted
after Code Adopted
(Ord. No. 381) and
Included in Code
§ 21-12 §§ 164-18 through
164-22
425; 471; 527
§ 21-13 §§ 164-23 through
164-27
425; 471; 527
§ 21-14 §§ 164-28 through
164-33
425; 441; 471; 527
§ 21-15 §§ 164-34 through
164-39
425; 441; 527
§ 21-16 §§ 164-40 through
164-45
425; 430; 438; 439; 441;
482; 527
§ 21-17 §§ 164-46 through
164-51
425; 439
§ 21-18 §§ 164-52 through
164-59
425; 493; 527
§ 21-19 §§ 164-60 through
164-64
425
§ 21-20 § 164-65 through
164-76
425; 527
§ 21-21 §§ 164-77 through
164-87
425; 437; 465; 482; 527
§ 21-22 (Reserved) — Repealed by 527
§ 21-23 §§ 164-88 through
164-98
425; 437; 465; 482; 527
§ 21-23.1 164-99 through
164-110
450; 482
Art. III, Off-Street Parking
and Loading Requirements
Art. XVI
§ 21-24 § 164-111 425; 482; 487; 497; 527
§ 21-25 § 164-112 425; 482; 527
§ 21-26 § 164-113 425; 482; 527
§ 21-27 § 164-114 425
§ 21-28 § 165-115 425; 482
§ 21-29 § 164-116 425
Art. IV, Signs Art. XVII
§ 21-30 § 164-117 425
§ 21-31 § 164-118 425
§ 21-32 § 164-119 425
§ A174-1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § A174-1
150:726
Source Chapter, Article
or Section from 1972
Code
New Chapter,
Article or Section
in 1991 Code
Ordinances Adopted
after Code Adopted
(Ord. No. 381) and
Included in Code
§ 21-33 § 164-120 425
§ 21-34 § 164-121 425; 450; 471; 493; 527
§ 21-35 § 164-122 425
§ 21-36 § 164-123 425
§ 21-37 § 164-124 425
§ 21-38 § 164-125 425
§ 21-39 § 164-126 425
§ 21-40 § 164-127 425
§ 21-41 § 164-128 425
§ 21-42 § 164-129 425
Art. V, General Regulations Arts. XVIII and XIX
§ 21-43 § 164-130 425
§ 21-44 § 164-131 425
§ 21-45 § 164-132 425
§ 21-46 § 164-133 425; 497
§ 21-47 § 164-134 425
§ 21-48 § 164-135 425
§ 21-49 § 164-136 425
§ 21-50 § 164-137 425
Art. VI, Special Provisions Art. XX
§ 21-51 § 164-138 425
§ 21-52 § 164-139 425
§ 21-53 § 164-140 425
§ 21-54 § 164-141 425; 527
§ 21-55 § 164-142 425
§ 21-56 § 164-143 425; 527
§ 21-57 § 164-144 425
§ 21-58 § 164-145 425
§ 21-59 § 164-146 425
§ 21-60 § 164-147 425
§ 21-61 § 164-148 425
§ 21-62 § 164-149 425; 527
§ 21-63 § 164-150 425; 482; 527
§ A174-1 URBAN RENEWAL § A174-1
150:727
Source Chapter, Article
or Section from 1972
Code
New Chapter,
Article or Section
in 1991 Code
Ordinances Adopted
after Code Adopted
(Ord. No. 381) and
Included in Code
§ 21-64 § 164-151 425
§ 21-65 § 164-152 425
§ 21-65.1 § 164-153 482
§ 21-65.2 § 164-154 482
§ 21-65.3 § 164-155 493
Art. VII, Administration
and Enforcement
Art. XXI
§ 21-66 § 164-156 425
§ 21-67 § 164-157 425
§ 21-68 § 164-158 425
§ 21-69 § 164-159 425; 484; 527
Art. VIII, Board of Zoning
Appeals
Art. XXII
§ 21-70 § 164-160 425; 527
§ 21-71 § 164-161 425
§ 21-72 § 164-162 425
§ 21-73 § 164-163 425
§ 21-74 § 164-164 425
§ 21-75 § 164-165 425
§ 21-76 § 164-166 425; 527
§ 21-77 § 164-167 425
§ 21-78 § 164-168 425
§ 21-79 § 164-169 425
§ 21-80 § 164-170 425
§ 21-81 § 164-171 425
§ 21-82 § 164-172 425
§ 21-83 § 164-173 425
§ 21-84 § 164-174 425
§ 21-85 § 164-175 425
Art. IX, Applications for
Amendments
Art. XXIII
§ 21-86 § 164-176 425
§ 21-87 § 164-177 425
§ 21-88 § 164-178 425
§ A174-1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § A174-1
150:728
Source Chapter, Article
or Section from 1972
Code
New Chapter,
Article or Section
in 1991 Code
Ordinances Adopted
after Code Adopted
(Ord. No. 381) and
Included in Code
§ 21-89 § 164-179 425
§ 21-90 § 164-180 425
§ 21-91 § 164-181 425
§ 21-92 § 164-182 425; 527
§ 21-93 § 164-183 425
§ 21-94 § 164-184 425
§ 21-95 § 164-185 425; 527
§ 21-96 § 164-186 425
§ 21-97 § 164-187 425; 527
§ 21-98 § 164-188 425; 450; 482
§ 21-99 § 164-189 425
§ 21-100 § 164-190 425; 527
Art. X, Subdivision
Regulations
Art. XXIV
§ 21-101 § 164-191 425
§ 21-102 § 164-192 425
§ 21-103 § 164-193 425; 527
§ 21-104 § 164-194 425; 527
§ 21-105 §§ 164-195 through
164-197
425; 527
§ 21-106 § 164-198 425; 527
§ 21-107 § 164-199 425; 527
§ 21-108 § 164-200 425
§ 21-109 § 164-201 425
§ 21-110 §§ 164-202 through
164-204
425; 527
Art. XI, Site Plans Art. XXV
§ 21-111 §§ 164-205 through
164-207
425
§ 21-112 § 164-208 425; 527
§ 21-113 § 164-209 425
§ 21-114 § 164-210 425
§ 21-115 § 164-211 425; 471; 527
§ 21-116 § 164-212 425
§ A174-1 URBAN RENEWAL § A174-1
150:729
Source Chapter, Article
or Section from 1972
Code
New Chapter,
Article or Section
in 1991 Code
Ordinances Adopted
after Code Adopted
(Ord. No. 381) and
Included in Code
§ 21-117 § 164-213 425; 527
Appendix: Fee Schedule Ch. A175 Res. No. R86-2
Chapter A175
FEES
§ A174-1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § A174-1
150:730
ARTICLE I
General Fees
[Adopted 12-8-2008 by Ord. No. 798127]
§ A175-1. General fees, charges and costs adopted; General Fee
Schedule established.
The City of Westminster hereby enacts and adopts the following fees,
charges and costs relating to the provision of its municipal services
pursuant to the Westminster Charter, the Westminster City Code, and
related authorities.
Chapter 14, Elections.
Code
Section Subject Fee
§ 14-2 Filing fees $25
(1)
Chapter 83, Floodplain Management.
Code
Section Subject Fee
§ 83-26 Administrative fees Actual costs
determined by
Director of Public
Works
(2)
Chapter 94, Licenses.
Code
Section Subject Fee
§ 94-8 Circus parades $100
§ 94-9 Circuses and other
entertainments
First performance of circus $100
Additional performance $100
First performance of
sideshow
$100
Additional performance $100
Other exhibitions $100
§ 94-10 Distribution of handbills, per
distribution
$25
§ 94-11 Peddling and soliciting $100
(3)
(4) Chapter 109, Picketing and Parades.
A.
127. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art I, General Fees, adopted
11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 794.
§ A175-1 URBAN RENEWAL § A175-1
150:731
Code
Section Subject Fee
§ 109-10 Procedure for requesting
parades and demonstrations
permits
Actual cost as
determined by City
Clerk
Chapter 119, Property Maintenance. [Amended 2-11-2013 by
Ord. No. 839]
Code
Section Subject Fee
Annual licensing fees
If application is timely filed.
This fee shall not be increased
prior to June 1, 2016. The
timely filing period will be
extended to July 31, 2013, for
the first year of the program
$20
If application is filed up to 30
days late
$30
If application is filed between
31 and 60 days late
$50
If application is filed between
61 and 90 days late
$100
If application is filed between
91 and 120 days late
$150
If application is filed between
121 and 365 days late
$250
If application is filed over 1
year late
$350
If application is filed over 2
years late
$450
For habitual offender $500
(5)
Chapter 130, Solid Waste.
Code
Section Subject Fee
§ 130-4C Permit to collect or dispose of
solid waste, annual charge
$200
§ 130-7 Bulk pickup
Fewer than 3 residential
units
No charge
(6)
§ A175-1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § A175-1
150:732
Code
Section Subject Fee
More than 4 residential
units, mixed businessresidential
units, business
institutions, and related uses
No service provided
by the City
Eviction and other bulk
collection service:
Entitled:
Normal pickup day for
location
$150
Other than normal pickup
day for location
$300
Overtime ($300 x 1.5) $450
Nonentitled:
Normal pickup day for
location
$300
Other than normal pickup
day for location
$500
Overtime ($500 x 1.5) $750
Chapter 133, Special Capital Benefit Assessment.
Code
Section Type of Use
Amount of
Assessment
§ 133-3A Dwelling and Dwelling Units
(including mobile homes)
Each single-family dwelling
unit or the first unit in a
multifamily dwelling unit as
defined in Chapter 164 of
this Code
$3,840
Each dwelling unit in a
multifamily dwelling unit
over and above the first unit:
1-bedroom or efficiency $3,072
2-bedroom $3,264
3-bedroom $3,456
4-bedroom $3,648
Industrial Manufacturing
(7)
§ A175-1 URBAN RENEWAL § A175-1
150:733
Code
Section Type of Use
Amount of
Assessment
Minimum (includes
buildings containing up to
5,000 square feet total floor
space)
$3,840
Next 10,000 square feet $0.77 per square
foot
Next 15,000 square feet $0.73 per square
foot
All over 30,000 square feet $0.70 per square
foot
Industrial Warehousing
Minimum (includes
buildings containing up to
2,000 square feet total floor
space)
$3,840
Next 3,000 square feet $0.77 per square
foot
Next 5,000 square feet $0.70 per square
foot
Next 20,000 square feet $0.59 per square
foot
All over 30,000 square feet $0.46 per square
foot
Schools and Colleges,
including Dormitories
(students and staff)
1 to 100 persons $6,528
101 to 250 persons $11,520
251 to 400 persons $16,896
401 to 1,000 persons $22,080
Each additional 400
persons or fraction thereof
over 1,000
$26,880
Hospitals, Care Homes and
Nursing Homes
1 to 20 beds $6,528
21 to 60 beds $11,520
Each additional bed over
60
$269
Hotels and Motels
§ A175-1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § A175-1
150:734
Code
Section Type of Use
Amount of
Assessment
1 to 10 rooms $3,840
11 to 50 rooms $6,528
Each additional bed over
50
$307
Commercial (retail, wholesale
and business offices)
Minimum (includes
buildings containing up to
5,000 square feet total floor
space)
$3,840
Next 5,000 square feet $0.77 per square
foot
Next 10,000 square feet $0.70 per square
foot
All over 20,000 square feet $0.59 per square
foot
§ 133-3B Existing structure converted
to additional dwelling units,
commercial units or business
offices
$576, plus $0.77 per
square foot
Chapter 136, Stormwater Management.
Code
Section Subject Fee
§ 136-17 Fees Review and
inspections
completed for City
by county
(8)
Chapter 139, streets and sidewalks.
Code
Section Subject Fee
§ 139-5 Use of sidewalks by
merchants and contractors
$50
§ 139-14 Petition to close streets, etc. $250
§ 139-21 Permit for outdoor display
signs or display structure
$50
§ 139-23 Permit fee for awnings $50
§ 139-25 Permit to dig streets, etc. $500
§ 139-29 Underground facilities
(9)
§ A175-1 URBAN RENEWAL § A175-1
150:735
Code
Section Subject Fee
First marking $35
Additional markings $15
Chapter 145, Taxicabs.
Code
Section Subject Fee
§ 145-5 Taxicab owner's license, for
each vehicle
$50
§ 145-7 Transferability of taxi license,
for each vehicle
$50
§ 145-9 Taxi stands, per space $250
§ 145-15 Taxi driver's license, per
license
$50
§ 145-23 Fares and rates
Flat fare for trips from 7:00
a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
$5
Surcharge for trips prior to
7:00 a.m. and after 10:00
p.m. to be added to base
fare
$10
Charge for intracity portion
of trip outside the City
$5
§ 145-25 Impoundment Service charge of
$100 plus actual
storage cost
(10)
Chapter 148, Trees.
Code
Section Subject Fee
§ 148-12 Tree topping, per tree $25
(11)
Chapter 155, Vehicles and Traffic.
Code
Section Subject Fee
§ 155-30 Parking permits:
Permit parking lots (per
month)
Longwell Annex Lot $0
Lower Conaway Lot $25
Upper Conaway Lot $20
(12)
§ A175-1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § A175-1
150:736
Code
Section Subject Fee
Chapel Lot $20
North Longwell Lot $25
Bauerlein Lot $20
Parking structures (per
month)
Longwell $30
Westminster Square $30
§ 155-31B Parking meter zones and
charges, per hour
$0.50
Chapter 164, Zoning and Subdivision of Land.
Code
Section Subject Fee
§ 164-45.21DCriteria for approval, per
space
$2,500
§ 164-82B Open space, per acre $2,500
§ 164-93B Open space, per acre $2,500
§ 164-111C General provisions and
requirements
One-time charge of
$2,500 per space
plus an annual
maintenance fee of
$56.79 adjusted
annually on CPI
§ 164-111D General provisions and
requirements
One-time charge of
$2,500 per space
plus an annual
maintenance fee of
$56.79 adjusted
annually on CPI
§ 164-123C Sign permits
Less than 64 square feet/
less than 20 feet high
$50
More than 64 square feet/
more than 20 feet high
$150
§ 164-151A Junkyard permit $250
§ 164-157A Zoning certificate, per
certificate
$200
§ 164-158.1CAdministrative adjustments $400
§ 164-174 Filing fees
Special exceptions:
(13)
§ A175-1 URBAN RENEWAL § A175-1
150:737
Code
Section Subject Fee
Day-care $300
Owner-occupied $300
All others $1,500, plus City
legal fees and court
reporter costs
Variances:
Owner-occupied $200
All others $1,000 plus City
legal fees and court
reporter costs
Appeals $600
§ 164-179 Zoning filing fees
Text amendment $1,500
Local map amendment
Less than 25 acres $1,600
More than 25 acres $1,600, plus $100
per acre over 25
Historic $0
§ 164-192 Subdivision application for
approval
$200
§ 164-203 Fees
Subdivision
Application fee $200
Concept plan $500
Preliminary plan $1,250 plus $50 per
lot
Development plan $1,250 lot plus $50
per lot
Final plat $1,000 plus $50 per
lot
§ 164-213 Fees
Site plan
Minor site plan $1,000, plus $200
per each acre less
than 5
Major site plan $1,500, plus $250
per each acre less
than 5
§ A175-1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § A175-1
150:738
Code
Section Subject Fee
Development plan $1,250, plus $50 per
lot
Miscellaneous fees.
Finance.
[1] Bad check fee: $50.
[2] Release of lien: $50.
(a)
Planning zoning and development.
Annexation fees.
Less than five acres: $2,500, plus reimbursement of
legal costs.
[a]
More than five acres: $5,000, plus reimbursement of
legal costs.
[b]
[1]
[2] Zoning verification letter: $50.
Electronic data.
Stored drawings and historic maps:
[i] Blueline copies: $5.
[ii] Burn to CD/e-mail: $5.
[a]
[3]
Plotted maps.
[a] Eight and one-half inches by 11 inches: $5.
[b] Eleven inches by 17 inches: $10.
[c] Twenty-four inches by 36 inches: $20.
[d] Thirty-six inches by 48 inches: $30.
[e] Custom sizes: $5 per square foot.
[f] Zoning Map (24 inches by 36 inches): $20.
[4]
Custom Products: $65 per hour. Add $5 per square foot for
custom-sized plotted maps.
[5]
Special loan programs:
[a] Application fee: $2,000.
[b] Work plan and inspection fee: $1,000.
[6]
(b)
(14)
§ A175-1 URBAN RENEWAL § A175-1
150:739
Public Works.
Construction inspection: 4.5% of public bond amount
would be paid to City to cover work of construction
inspectors. Fee shall be paid prior to initiation of
construction.
[1]
[2] Standard spec book: $40, if mailed; $35.
[3] Standard Detail Sheet: available online, $0.
(c)
Recreation.
Westminster Municipal Pool:
[a] At gate per person: $7.
[b] Family, City: $200.
[c] Individual, City: $128.
[d] Family, county: $260.
[e] Individual, county: $146.
[1]
Westminster Family Center enrollment fees: [Amended
5-24-2010 by Ord. No. 811]
Family:
[i] City: $100.
[ii] County: $125.
[a]
Individual:
[i] City: $50.
[ii] County: $75.
[b]
Youth:
[i] City: $30.
[ii] County: $55.
[c]
Child supervision:
[i] City: $20.
[ii] County: $45.
[d]
[2]
Westminster Family Center monthly membership fees:
[a] Family: $50.
[b] Individual: $25.
[3]
(d)
§ A175-1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § A175-1
150:740
[c] Youth: $15.
[d] Child supervision: $10.
Westminster Family Center one-time guest fees:
[a] Per person: $7.
[b] With a member: $5.
[c] Per child for child supervision: $3.
[4]
Westminster Family Center one-month membership fees:
[a] Family: $60.
[b] Individual: $30.
[c] Youth: $20.
[d] Child supervision: $15.
[5]
Avondale Run Ballfield:
Permit required; permit fee of $75, plus refundable
security deposit of $75.
[a]
[6]
Belle Grove Square Park:
[a] Permit required; permit fee of $75.
[7]
Bishop's Garth Park:
[a] Permit required; permit fee of $75.
[8]
Charles Street Park:
Permit required; permit fee of $75 plus, refundable
security deposit of $75.
[a]
[9]
Community Building at the pool:
Permit required; $30 per hour, plus refundable
security deposit of $75.
[a]
[10]
Dutterer Family Park;
Permit required; pavilion rental at $75 for four hours,
plus refundable security deposit of $75.
[a]
[11]
Green's Tot Lot:
[a] Permit required; permit fee of $75.
[12]
[13] Jaycee Park:
§ A175-1 URBAN RENEWAL § A175-1
150:741
Permit required; permit fee of $75 plus refundable
security deposit of $75.
[a]
[b] Ballfield lights: $25 per hour.
King Park:
Permit required; pavilion rental at $75 for four hours,
plus refundable security deposit of $75.
[a]
[14]
Locust Lane:
[a] Permit required; permit fee of $75.
[15]
Longwell Municipal Center Gym Rental:
Permit required; $30 per hour for gym rental and $20
per hour for room rental.
[a]
[16]
Uniontown Road Athletic Field;
[a] Permit required; permit fee of $75.
[17]
Westminster City Playground:
Permit required; pavilion rental at $75 for four hours,
plus refundable security deposit of $75.
[a]
[18]
Westminster City Park Ballfields:
Permit required; permit fee of $75, plus refundable
security deposit of $75.
[a]
[b] Ballfield lights: $25 per hour.
[19]
Library Park:
Permit required; pavilion rental at $75 for four hours,
plus refundable security deposit of $75.
[a]
[20]
Main Street banners:
[a] Per banner for two-week rental: fee of $150.
[21]
City Clerk:
Maryland public information requests:
[a] Copy costs, per page: $0.25.
Time:
[i] Less than or equal to two hours: free.
Greater than or equal to two hours: actual costs
determined by the City Clerk.
[ii]
[b]
[1]
(e)
§ A175-1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § A175-1
150:742
Police:
Maryland public information requests:
[a] Copy costs, per page: $0.25.
Time:
[i] Less than or equal to two hours: free.
Greater than or equal to two hours: actual costs
determined by the Chief of Police.
[ii]
[b]
[1]
[2] Accident report: $5.
Police report:
[a] Initial: $5.
[b] Supplemental pages: $1 per page.
[3]
[4] Research fee: $15; deposit of $10 required, first hour free.
Photographs:
[a] Standard: $2.
[b] Eight inches by 10 inches: $8.
[5]
[6] Audio tapes (cassette): $10.
[7] CDs: $10.
[8] Video tapes: $25.
Fingerprints:
[a] Per card: $5.
[b] Child prints: free.
[9]
Meter bags:
[a] Single-head meter bag: $4 per day.
[b] Double-head meter bag: $8 per day.
[10]
"No Parking" pedestal:
[a] Half day: $5.
[b] Full day: $5.
[11]
(f)
Issuer's fee for conduit revenue bonds, notes or other
evidences of obligation as to which closing occurs on or after
July 15, 2014, and which relate to projects located outside the
City's corporate limits: [Added 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 850]
(g)
§ A175-1 URBAN RENEWAL § A175-1
150:743
§ A175-2. Title.
This article constitutes the General Fee Ordinance as referenced in § 1-12A
of the Westminster City Code and shall be known as the "General Fee
Ordinance." For the purposes of this art icle, the term "fee" includes any
fee, charge or cost authorized or referenced in the Westminster City Code.
The lesser of:
One percent of the original principal amount of such
obligations; and
[a]
Ten thousand dollars, provided that, to the extent the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, or the
regulations promulgated thereunder (collectively, the
"Tax Code") require that a lesser amount be charged
than the amount determined by application of such
formula, such lesser amount as determined in
accordance with the Tax Code; such fee to be payable
by the obligor as a one-time fee at closing.
[b]
[1]
§ A175-1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § A175-2
150:744
ARTICLE II
Utility Fees
[Adopted 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 795]
§ A175-3. Utility fees, charges and costs adopted; Utility Fee
Schedule established.
The Mayor and Common Council of Westminster hereby enacts and adopts
the following fees, charges and costs relating to the utility services provided
pursuant to Chapters 124 and 160 of the Westminster City Code.
Chapter 124, Sewers and Sewage.
Section 124-3.1:
(a) Application for service: $50.
Good cause waiver:
[1] More than five acres: $175.
[2] Less than five acres: $300.
(b)
(1)
(2) Section 124-12D, industrial waste permit: $500.
Section 124-23, extension of service, review and approval of
construction drawings:
(a) County: $1,000.
(b) City: $2,000.
(3)
Section 124-24, Schedule of charges - sewer benefit assessment:
Type of Use
Amount of
Assessment
Dwelling and Dwelling Units (including
mobile homes)
Each single-family dwelling unit or the
first unit in a multifamily dwelling unit as
defined in Chapter 164 of this Code
$5,496
Each dwelling unit in a multifamily dwelling
unit over and above the first unit:
1-bedroom or efficiency $2,858
2-bedroom $3,517
3-bedroom $4,616
4-bedroom $5,496
Industrial Manufacturing
Minimum (includes buildings containing
up to 5,000 square feet total floor space)
$5,496
(4)
A.
§ A175-3 URBAN RENEWAL § A175-3
150:745
Type of Use
Amount of
Assessment
Next 10,000 square feet $0.92 per square
foot
Next 15,000 square feet $0.84 per square
foot
All over 30,000 square feet $0.74 per square
foot
Industrial Warehousing
Minimum (includes buildings containing
up to 2,000 square feet total floor space)
$5,496
Next 3,000 square feet $1.02 per square
foot
Next 5,000 square feet $0.84 per square
foot
Next 20,000 square feet $0.67 per square
foot
All over 30,000 square feet $0.46 per square
foot
Schools and Colleges, including
Dormitories (students and staff)
1 to 100 persons $10,992
101 to 250 persons $27,701
251 to 400 persons $43,969
401 to 1,000 persons $88,598
Each additional 400 persons or fraction
thereof over 1,000
$38,780
Hospitals, Care Homes and Nursing Homes
1 to 20 beds $8,794
21 to 60 beds $21,985
Each additional bed over 60 $330
Hotels and Motels
1 to 10 rooms $5,496
11 to 50 rooms $13,850
Each additional bed over 50 $462
Commercial (retail, wholesale and business
offices)
Minimum (includes buildings containing
up to 5,000 square feet total floor space)
$5,496
§ A175-3 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § A175-3
150:746
Type of Use
Amount of
Assessment
Next 5,000 square feet $0.92 per square
foot
Next 10,000 square feet $0.74 per square
foot
All over 20,000 square feet $0.56 per square
foot
Existing structure converted to
additional dwelling units, commercial
units or business offices
$562, plus $0.74 per
square foot
Section 124-26B, Avondale Sewer Service Area special benefit
assessment charge:
(a) Industrial and commercial: $1,200 per acre.
(b) Residential and agricultural: $600 per acre.
(5)
Section 124-27B, Air Business Center drainage area special
acreage assessment charge:
(a) Industrial: $1,400 per acre.
(b) Commercial: $1,100 per acre.
(c) Residential: $750 per acre.
(d) Agricultural: $550 per acre.
(6)
Section 124-28A, connection charges: Minimum $1,500 or actual
cost determined by Director of Public Works, whichever is greater.
(7)
Section 124-29, Sewer charges: consist of fixed quarterly charge
plus sewer usage charge. [Added 4-13-2009 by Ord. No. 802;
amended 5-11-2015 by Ord. No. 854; 5-9-2016 by Ord. No.
865]
July 1, 2016 to June 30, 2017:
Fixed quarterly charge:
Tier 1 rates.
Meter Size
(inches)
AWWA
Meter
Equivalent
Inside City
Sewer
Outside
City Sewer
5/8 1.00 $26.16 $36.75
3/4 1.00 $26.16 $36.75
[a]
[b] Tier 2 rates.
[1]
(a)
(8)
§ A175-3 URBAN RENEWAL § A175-3
150:747
Meter Size
(inches)
AWWA
Meter
Equivalent
Inside City
Sewer
Outside
City Sewer
1 2.50 $65.40 $91.89
1 1/2 5.00 $130.80 $183.79
2 8.00 $209.27 $294.06
3 16.00 $418.55 $588.13
4 25.00 $653.99 $918.96
6 50.00 $1,307.97 $1,837.94
8 80.00 $2,092.73 $2,940.69
Plus quarterly sewer usage charge (unit rate per 1,000
gallons):
Inside City Outside City
$6.34 $9.48
[2]
Section 124-30, Additional charges.
Pretreatment: actual costs determined by Director of Public
Works.
(a)
Monitoring: actual costs determined by Director of Public
Works.
(b)
Discharge: actual costs determined by Director of Public
Works.
(c)
(d) Permit applications: $50.
(e) Appeals: $50.
Surcharge: $330 for each thousand pounds over limit.
Substance
Limit
(mg/l)
BOD5 220
TKN 20
TSS 250
TP 5
(f)
Other fees: actual costs determined by Director of Public
Works.
(g)
(9)
Chapter 160, Water.
Article I, Potable Water
B.
§ A175-3 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § A175-3
150:748
Section 160-2, Metered service: Consists of fixed quarterly charge
plus water usage charge. [Added 4-13-2009 by Ord. No. 802;
amended 5-11-2015 by Ord. No. 854; 5-9-2016 by Ord. No.
865]
July 1, 2016 to June 30, 2017:
Fixed quarterly charge:
Tier 1 rates:
Meter Size
(inches)
AWWA
Meter
Equivalent
Inside City
Sewer
Outside
City Sewer
5/8 1.00 $23.09 $24.71
3/4 1.00 $23.09 $24.71
[a]
Tier 2 rates:
Meter Size
(inches)
AWWA
Meter
Equivalent
Inside City
Sewer
Outside
City Sewer
1 2.50 $57.72 $61.78
1 1/2 5.00 $115.44 $123.57
2 8.00 $184.70 $197.71
3 16.00 $369.39 $395.41
4 25.00 $577.18 $617.83
6 50.00 $1,154.35 $1,235.66
8 80.00 $1,846.96 $1,977.06
[b]
[1]
Plus quarterly water usage charge.
Tier 1 rates (unit rate per 1,000 gallons):
Number of
Gallons Inside City` Outside City
0 to 18,000 $3.92 $5.29
Over 18,000 $9.79 $13.24
[a]
Tier 2 rates (unit rate per 1,000 gallons):
Inside City Outside City
$5.29 $7.15
[b]
[2]
(a)
(1)
(2) Section 160-3, fire prevention:
§ A175-3 URBAN RENEWAL § A175-3
150:749
Type Rate Per Annum
3/4-inch connection $150
1-inch connection $200
2-inch connection $250
4-inch connection $600
6-inch connection $1,000
8-inch connection $1,200
10-inch connection $1,600
Each fire hydrant $200
Sprinkler systems per inch of inside
diameter
$400
Section 160-4, Flat-rate service and tank truck sales: Rates as
established under § 160-2.
(3)
Section 160-6A:
(a) Application for service: $50.
Good cause waiver:
[1] Less than five acres: $175.
[2] More than five acres: $300.
(b)
(4)
Section 160-7A, service connections, excluding meter costs size
of service lines: Actual cost as determined by Director of Public
Works.
Size of Service Line
(inches) Charge
3/4 $800
1 $850
1 1/2 $900
2 $950
2 1/2 $1,000
3 $1,050
Greater than 3 Actual cost as
determined by Director of
Public Works
Owner installed $0
(5)
Section 160-8 Schedule of charges - special water benefit
assessment:
(6)
§ A175-3 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § A175-3
150:750
Type of Use Amount of Assessment
Dwelling and Dwelling Units (including
mobile homes)
Each single-family dwelling unit or
the first unit in a multifamily
dwelling unit as defined in Chapter
164 of this Code
$5,244
Each dwelling unit in a multifamily
dwelling unit over and above the first
unit:
1-bedroom or efficiency $2,797
2-bedroom $3,846
3-bedroom $4,544
4-bedroom $5,768
Industrial Manufacturing
Minimum (includes buildings
containing up to 5,000 square feet
total floor space)
$5,244
Next 10,000 square feet $0.90 per square foot
Next 15,000 square feet $0.84 per square foot
All over 30,000 square feet $0.77 per square foot
Industrial Warehousing
Minimum (includes buildings
containing up to 2,000 square feet
total floor space)
$5,244
Next 3,000 square feet $1 per square foot
Next 5,000 square feet $0.84 per square foot
Next 20,000 square feet $0.69 per square foot
All over 30,000 square feet $0.46 per square foot
Schools and Colleges, including
Dormitories (students and staff)
1 to 100 persons $12,061
101 to 250 persons $28,492
251 to 400 persons $45,622
401 to 1,000 persons $91,243
Each additional 400 persons or
fraction thereof over 1,000
$39,853
Hospitals, Care Homes and Nursing
Homes
1 to 20 beds $9,089
§ A175-3 URBAN RENEWAL § A175-3
150:751
Type of Use Amount of Assessment
21 to 60 beds $22,723
Each additional bed over 60 $307
Hotels and Motels
1 to 10 rooms $5,244
11 to 50 rooms $13,984
Each additional bed over 50 $437
Commercial (retail, wholesale and
business offices)
Minimum (includes buildings
containing up to 5,000 square feet
total floor space)
$5,244
Next 5,000 square feet $0.90 per square foot
Next 10,000 square feet $0.77 per square foot
All over 20,000 square feet $0.62 per square foot
Existing structure converted to
additional dwelling units or business
offices
$604, plus $0.82 per
square foot
Section 160-10, Main extensions, review and approval of
construction drawings:
(a) County: $1,000.
(b) City: $2,000.
(7)
Section 160-11, Meters:
Meter size.
Size
(inches) Fee
3/4 $300
1 $355
1 1/2 $600
2 $700
Greater than 2 Actual cost as determined by
Director of Public Works
(a)
(b) Meter testing fee: $100.
(8)
Section 160-12, Discontinuance of service:
(a) Nonpayment of bill: $100.
(9)
§ A175-3 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § A175-3
150:752
§ A175-4. Title.
This article constitutes the Utility Fee Ordinance as referenced in § 1-12A
of the Westminster City Code and shall be known as the "Utility Fee
Ordinance." For the purposes of this article, the term "fee" includes any
fee, charge or cost authorized or referenced in Chapters 124 and 160 of
the Westminster City Code, Article 23A and the Environment Article of the
Annotated Code of Maryland.
All other reasons:
[1] Initial occasion: $300.
[2] Repeat occasions: $500.
(b)
Section 160-14, allocation application: $250.
Article II, Reclaimed Water
§ 160-25. Rates, fees and charges: [Added 1-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 831; amended 5-9-2016 by Ord. No. 865]
(1) Application for service: $25.
(2) Extension of service, review and approval of construction
drawings:
(a) County: $500.
(b) City: $1,000.
(3) Reclaimed water charge, comprised of a fixed charge
plus a reclaimed water quantity charge.
Fixed quarterly charge:
Meter Size
(inches) Inside City Sewer Outside City Sewer
1 $53.08 $74.58
1 1/2 $106.16 $149.17
2 $169.85 $238.67
3 $339.70 $477.34
4 $530.79 $745.85
6 $1,061.58 $1,491.71
8 $1,698.53 $2,386.73
(a)
Reclaimed water quantity charge (unit rate per 1,000 gallons):
Inside City Outside City
$2.58 $3.85
(b)
(10)
§ A175-3 URBAN RENEWAL § A175-4
150:753
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
686 9-23-2002 Water amendment Ch. 160
687 11-11-2002 Buildings amendment Ch. 56
688 10-28-2002 Zoning and subdivision of
land amendment
Ch. 164
689 11-11-2002 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
690 Tabled
691 11-25-2002 Zoning Map amendment NCM
692 12-9-2002 Zoning Map amendment NCM
693 1-27-2003 Sewers amendment Ch. 124
694 1-27-2003 Special capital benefit
assessment amendment
Ch. 133
695 1-27-2003 Water amendment Ch. 160
696 2-10-2003 Loitering amendment Ch. 106
697 2-24-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
698 3-24-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 155
699 4-14-2003 Department of Finance
amendment
Ch. 19
700 4-28-2003 Zoning and subdivision of
land amendment
Ch. 164
701 4-28-2003 Zoning and subdivision of
land amendment
Ch. 164
702 4-21-2003 Review and enforcement of
parades and processions
NCM
703 4-28-2003 Annual tax levy NCM
704 7-28-2003 Parades and demonstrations
amendment
Ch. 109, Art. II
705 8-11-2003 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 139
706 10-13-2003 Zoning and subdivision of
land amendment
Ch. 164
§ A175-4 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § DL-1
150:754
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
707 7-28-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
708 7-28-2003 Procurement and contracts
amendment
Ch. 36
709 8-25-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
710 1-12-2004 Zoning and subdivision of
land amendment
Ch. 164
711 Zoning and subdivision of
land
Tabled
712 10-21-2003 Zoning Map amendment NCM
713 5-10-2004 Annual tax levy NCM
714 6-14-2004 Water amendment Ch. 160
715 6-14-2004 Sewers amendment Ch. 124
716 6-14-2004 Special capital benefit
assessment amendment
Ch. 133
717 7-26-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 155
718 7-26-2004 Zoning and subdivision of
land amendment
Ch. 164
719 7-26-2004 Disorderly house nuisances Ch. 68
720 8-9-2004 Zoning Map amendment NCM
721 8-9-2004 Zoning Map amendment NCM
722 9-13-2004 Zoning and subdivision of
land amendment
Ch. 164
723 1-10-2005 Zoning and subdivision of
land amendment
Ch. 164
724 11-22-2004 Extension of effective date of
annexation
NCM
725 1-10-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
726 1-10-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
727 1-24-2005 Zoning and subdivision of
land amendment
Ch. 164
728 3-14-2005 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 33
729 3-28-2005 Bonds NCM
730 3-28-2005 Department of Finance
amendment
Ch. 19
731 Police procurement Tabled
§ DL-1 URBAN RENEWAL § DL-1
150:755
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
732 4-11-2005 Extension of effective date of
annexation
NCM
733 5-9-2005 Annual tax levy NCM
734 8-8-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
735 9-26-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
736 9-12-2005 Sale of property NCM
737 11-14-2005 Bond NCM
738 11-14-2005 Taxation amendment Ch. 143
739 12-12-2005 Stormwater management Ch. 136
740 1-9-2006 Taxation amendment Ch. 143
741 1-23-2006 Parks Board amendment;
Code of Ethics amendment;
Recreation and Parks
Director; picketing and
parades amendment
Chs. 7, Art. I; 16; 29,
Art. VI; 109
742 2-27-2006 Police Department Ch. 33
743 3-13-2006 Zoning Map amendment NCM
744 3-27-2006 Zoning Map amendment NCM
745 7-10-2006 Zoning and subdivision of
land amendment
Ch. 164
746 7-10-2006 Zoning and subdivision of
land amendment
Ch. 164
747 4-26-2006 Floodplain management Repealed by Ord.
No. 821
748 4-26-2006 Storm sewer systems
environment management
Ch. 135
749 4-26-2006 Intergovernmental relations
amendment
Ch. 24
750 4-26-2006 City Administrator Chs. 1, Art. II; 4,
Arts. I and III; 16;
19; 20 (Ch. 20
repealed by Ord. No.
796); 29, Arts. I, II,
III, IV, V (Art. V only
repealed by Ord. No.
773) and VI; 33; 36
751 5-8-2006 Annual tax levy NCM
752 5-8-2006 Water amendment Ch. 160
§ DL-1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § DL-1
150:756
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
753 5-8-2006 Sewers and sewage
amendment
Ch. 124
754 6-12-2006 Zoning and subdivision of
land amendment
Ch. 164
755 5-22-2006 Officers and employees:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 29, Art. I
756 7-24-2006 Quit claim deed NCM
757 1-22-2007 Elections amendment Ch. 14
758 2-12-2007 Zoning and subdivision of
land amendment
Ch. 164
759 2-12-2007 Bond NCM
760 2-12-2007 Zoning Map amendment NCM
761 2-12-2007 Sale of property NCM
762 3-12-2007 Zoning and subdivision of
land
Ch. 164
763 4-9-2007 Water amendment Ch. 160
764 5-21-2007 Annual tax levy NCM
765 6-11-2007 Recreation and Parks
Advisory Board amendment
Ch. 7, Art. I
766 6-11-2007 Recreation and Parks
Director amendment
Ch. 29, Art. VI
767 7-9-2007 Property maintenance
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 820
768 7-9-2007 Financing equipment
installment
NCM
769 Water amendment Tabled
770 9-24-2007 Zoning Map amendment NCM
771 9-24-2007 Zoning and subdivision of
land amendment
Ch. 164
772 11-26-2007 Taxation amendment Ch. 143
773 12-6-2007 Reorganization of
Department of Planning and
Public Works amendments
Chs. 1, Art. II; 7, Art.
III; 16; 29, Arts. V
and VII; 56; 68; 83;
100; 109; 119; 124;
130; 133; 135; 136;
139; 148; 160
774 1-28-2008 Zoning and subdivision of
land amendment
Ch. 164
§ DL-1 URBAN RENEWAL § DL-1
150:757
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
775 2-11-2008 Pawnbrokers and secondhand
dealers
Ch. 103
776 2-25-2008 Zoning Map amendment NCM
777 3-10-2008 Bond NCM
778 3-10-2008 Solid waste amendment Ch. 130
779 6-9-2008 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 106
780 5-12-2008 Annual tax levy NCM
781 5-12-2008 Sale of property NCM
782 6-9-2008 Sale of property NCM
783 7-14-2008 Uninhabitable buildings Ch. 56
784 7-14-2008 Disorderly house nuisances
amendment
Ch. 68
785 7-14-2008 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 139
786 7-9-2008 Bond NCM
787 Sale of property Tabled
788 10-27-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 164
789 10-27-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 164
790 10-27-2008 Zoning Map amendment NCM
791 11-24-2008 General fees amendments;
junkyards repealer
Chs. 1, Art. II; 14;
78, Art. II; 80; 83;
90, reference only;
94, Art. II; 109; 119;
130; 133; 136; 139;
145; 148; 155
792 11-24-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 164
793 11-24-2008 Sewers and sewage
amendment; water
amendment
Chs. 124, 160
794 11-24-2008 General fees Repealed by Ord.
No. 798
795 11-24-2008 Utility fees Ch. A175, Art. II
796 2-23-2009 Fiscal matters Ch. 20
797 2-23-2009 Taxation amendment Ch. 143
798 12-8-2009 General fees Ch. A175, Art. I
799 12-8-2008 Licenses amendment Ch. 94, Art. I
§ DL-1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § DL-1
150:758
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
800 1-12-2009 Fire Department amendment Ch. 21, Art. I
801 4-13-2009 Sewers and sewage
amendment; water
amendment
Chs. 124; 160
802 4-13-2009 Utility fees amendment Ch. A175, Art. II
803 Number not used
804 Number not used
805 7-13-2009 Picketing and parades
amendment
Ch. 109
806 7-27-2009 Sewers and sewage
amendment
Ch. 124
807 8-10-2009 Transfer of property NCM
808 9-14-2009 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 106
809 2-22-2010 Sale of property NCM
CAR
01-10
3-22-2010 Charter amendment Charter § 13
810 4-12-2010 Sale of property NCM
811 5-24-2010 General fees amendment Ch. A175, Art. I
812 5-24-2010 Annual tax levy NCM
813 7-26-2010 Stormwater management
amendment
Ch. 136
814 9-13-2010 Zoning and subdivision of
land amendment
Ch. 164
815 11-8-2010 Zoning and subdivision of
land amendment
Ch. 164
816 11-8-2010 Zoning and subdivision of
land amendment
Ch. 164
817 11-22-2010 Zoning Map amendment NCM
818 11-22-2010 Zoning Map amendment NCM
819 10-25-2010 Zoning Map amendment NCM
820 10-25-2010 Property maintenance Ch. 119
821 11-22-2010 Floodplain management Ch. 83
822 11-8-2010 Stormwater management
amendment
Ch. 136
823 4-11-2011 Zoning and subdivision of
land amendment
Ch. 164
§ DL-1 URBAN RENEWAL § DL-1
150:759
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
824 5-23-2011 Zoning and subdivision of
land amendment
Ch. 164
825 5-9-2011 Budget; annual tax levy NCM
826 5-23-2011 Procurement and contracts
amendment
Ch. 36
827 6-13-2011 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 119
828 6-13-2011 Taxation amendment Ch. 143
829 7-11-2011 Administration of government
amendment (legislative
body); elections amendment
Ch. 4, Art. I; Ch. 14
CAR
01-11
7-11-2011 Charter amendment Charter § 3
830 10-10-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 155
831 1-9-2012 Water amendment; utility fees
amendment
Chs. 160; A175, Art.
II
832 4-23-2012 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 106
833 5-14-2012 Budget; annual tax levy NCM
834 5-13-2013 Budget; annual tax levy NCM
835 11-12-2012 Sale of certain property NCM
836 12-10-2012 Zoning and subdivision of
land amendment
Ch. 164
837 12-10-2012 Officers and employees:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 29, Art. I
838 1-14-2013 Zoning and subdivision of
land amendment
Ch. 164
839 2-11-2013 Property maintenance
amendment; general fees
amendment
Chs. 119; A175
840 2-11-2013 Zoning and subdivision of
land amendment
Ch. 164
841 3-25-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
842 3-25-2013 Zoning and subdivision of
land amendment
Ch. 164
843 Number not issued
§ DL-1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § DL-1
150:760
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
844 7-8-2013 Procurement and contracts
amendment
Ch. 36
845 8-12-2013 Zoning and subdivision of
land amendment
Ch. 164
846 9-9-2013 Zoning and subdivision of
land amendment
Ch. 164
847 11-11-2013 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 119
848 2-10-2014 Pawnbrokers and secondhand
dealers amendment
Ch. 103
848-A 11-25-2013 Zoning and subdivision of
land amendment
Ch. 164
849 5-12-2014 Budget; annual tax levy NCM
850 7-14-2014 Fees: general fees
amendment
Ch. A175, Art. I
851 12-8-2014 Zoning and subdivision of
land amendment
Ch. 164
852 4-13-2015 Code of Ethics amendment Ch. 16
853 4-13-2015 Sewers and sewage
amendment; water: potable
water amendment; zoning
and subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 124; Ch. 160;
Ch. 164
854 5-11-2015 Fees: utility fees amendment Ch. A175, Art. II
855 7-13-2015 Code of Ethics amendment Ch. 16
856 7-13-2015 Bond NCM
Res. No.
15-05
7-13-2015 Business regulation:
designation of primary law
enforcement unit
Ch. 58, Art. I
857 9-28-2015 Floodplain management Ch. 83
858 9-28-2015 Bond NCM
859 10-26-2015 Zoning and subdivision of
land amendment
Ch. 164
860 9-28-2015 Zoning and subdivision of
land amendment
Ch. 164
861 12-14-2015 Zoning and subdivision of
land amendment
Ch. 164
862 2-22-2016 Budget; annual tax levy NCM
§ DL-1 URBAN RENEWAL § DL-1
150:761
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
863 5-9-2016 Zoning and subdivision of
land amendment
Ch. 164
864 5-23-2016 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 119
865 5-9-2016 Fee schedule: utility fees
amendment
Ch. A175, Art. II
866 7-12-2016 Cable television Ch. 61
867 6-13-2016 Budget; annual tax levy NCM
868 8-22-2016 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 139
869 9-25-2017 Zoning and subdivision of
land amendment
Ch. 164
870 10-24-2016 Zoning and subdivision of
land amendment
Ch. 164
871 10-24-2016 Procurement and contracts
amendment
Ch. 36
872 11-28-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
873 2-27-2018 Zoning and Subdivision of
Land Amendment
Ch. 164
874 1-23-2017 Budget Amendment NCM
875 Not Adopted
876 Development Plan
Amendment
Disapproved
877 3-27-2017 Reconveyance of Surplus
Property
NCM
878 4-24-2017 Zoning and Subdivision of
Land Amendment
Ch. 164
879 5-8-2017 Budget; Annual Tax Levy NCM
880 6-12-2017 Peace and Good Order
Amendment
Ch. 106
881 6-12-2017 Budget Amendment NCM
882 6-12-2017 Bond NCM
883 Budget Amendment Not Adopted
884 11-27-2017 Acquisition of Property NCM
885 2-26-2018 Zoning and Subdivision of
Land Amendment
Ch. 164
886 2-12-2018 Zoning and Subdivision of
Land Amendment
Ch. 164
§ DL-1 CHARTER AND CODE OF WESTMINSTER § DL-1
150:762
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
887 2-12-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
888 3-12-2018 Boards and Commissions:
Planning and Zoning
Commission Amendment
Ch. 7, Art. II
889 4-23-2018 Denial of Rezoning
Application
NCM
890 3-26-2018 Sewers and Sewage
Amendment; Potable Water
Amendment
Ch. 124; Ch. 160,
Art. I
891 4-9-2018 Zoning and Subdivision of
Land Amendment
Ch. 164
892 4-9-2018 Budget Amendment NCM
893 5-14-2018 Budget; Annual Tax Levy NCM
894 6-26-2018 Acquisition of Property NCM
895 8-13-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
896 8-13-2018 Property Maintenance
Amendment
Ch. 119
897 11-12-2018 Zoning and Subdivision of
Land Amendment
Ch. 164
898 11-12-2018 Zoning and Subdivision of
Land Amendment
Ch. 164
899 11-26-2018 Zoning and Subdivision of
Land Amendment
Ch. 164
900 11-26-2018 Acquisition of Property NCM
901 1-14-2019 Zoning and Subdivision of
Land Amendment
Ch. 164
902 1-14-2019 Budget NCM
903 1-14-2019 Zoning and Subdivision of
Land Amendment
Ch. 164
904 1-28-2019 Disposition of Real Property NCM
905 1-14-2019 Elections Amendment Ch. 14
§ DL-1 URBAN RENEWAL § DL-1
150:763