Town of Buxton 
Zoning Ordinance 


And Other Town Ordinances 
Including all changes and amendments Through 
June 17, 2017 
Price: $6.50 
TOWN OF BUXTON ZONING ORDINANCE 

An ordinance to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the community by regulating the use of land and the use and construction of buildings and premises in the Town of Buxton, Maine. 
ARTICLE 1 -PREAMBLE 
1.1 Authority. 
This ordinance has been prepared in accordance with the Revised Statutes of Maine, as amended. 

1.2 Title. 
This ordinance and the accompanying land use regulation maps, including the report entitled "Flood Insurance Study-Town of Buxton in the County of York, Maine" and accompanying "Flood Insurance Rate Map" and "Flood Boundary and Floodway Map" dated July 5, 1982 shall be known as and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Buxton, Maine." 

1.3 Purpose. 
The purpose of this ordinance is to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the Town; to encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the Town; to promote traffic safety; to provide safety from fire and the elements; to prevent overcrowding of real estate; to prevent housing development in inappropriate areas; to conserve natural resources; to provide for adequate public services; to prevent water pollution; to protect fish spawning grounds, aquatic life, bird and other wildlife habitat; to protect buildings and lands from flooding and accelerated erosion; to protect archaeological and historic resources; to protect freshwater wetlands; to control building sites, placement of structures and land uses; to conserve shore cover and visual as well as actual points of access to waters; to conserve natural beauty and open space; and to anticipate and respond to the impacts of development in shoreland areas, as an integral part of a comprehensive plan for municipal development. 

1.4 Jurisdiction. 
The provisions of this ordinance shall govern all land and structures within the boundaries of the Town of Buxton, Maine. 

1.5 Conflict with Other Ordinances. 
This Ordinance shall not in any way impair or remove the necessity of compliance with any other applicable rule, ordinance, regulation, bylaw, permit or provision of law. Where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of the land, buildings or structures, the provisions of this Ordinance shall control. 

1.6 Separability. 
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of this ordinance. 
1.7 Repeal of Existing Ordinances.: All prior Land Use Ordinances are repealed. 


ARTICLE 2 -DEFINITIONS 
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this Ordinance shall have the same meaning as they have at common law and to give this Ordinance its most reasonable application. Words used in the present tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the singular. The word "may" is permissive; "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. 
Abutting Property Owners: The owners of parcels of property having one or more common boundaries, and shall include owners of property located directly across the road such that the lots would have a common boundary if there were no road. 
Acre: 40,000 square feet. 
Accessory Dwelling Unit: A room or suite of rooms used by a one, two or three member family which is separate from other existing suites of rooms which comprise the principal living space of the home and which contains independent living, cooking, sleeping, bathing and sanitary facilities. No such accessory dwelling unit shall contain more than 500 square feet of floor space. 
Accessory Structure: means a small detached structure that is incidental and subordinate to the principal structure. 
Accessory Use or Buildings: A use or structure on the same lot with and customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or building. The term "incidental" in reference to the principal use or structure shall mean both a) subordinate and minor in significance to the principal use or structure, and b) related to the principal use or structure.  Such accessory uses or structures, shall not subordinate the alleged principal or structures use of the lot. A deck or similar extension of the principal structure or a garage attached to the principal structure by a roof or a common wall is considered part of the principal structure. 
Active Outdoor Recreation: Recreational activities which necessitate some degree of structural or mechanical components for participation in the activity such as ball fields, tennis courts and/or swimming pools. 
Adjacent Grade: means the natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure 
Agriculture: Agriculture includes the cultivation of the soil for food products or other useful or valuable growth of the field or garden, nursery stock and greenhouse, but does not include animal husbandry, forest management and timber harvesting activities. 
Amusement Center: Any private commercial premises which are maintained or operated for the amusement, patronage or recreation of the public containing a total of four or more pinball machines, table sports, video games or similar mechanical or electronic games, whether activated by coins, tokens, discs or by remote control by the management. 
Animal Husbandry: Raising, breeding or keeping of more than ten fowl or any number of other animals except customary household pets. 
Antenna: Any system of poles, panels, rods, reflecting discs or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of radio or electromagnetic frequency signals. 
Area of Special Flood Hazard -means the land in the floodplain having a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year, as specifically identified in the Flood Insurance Study cited in Section 14.1 of this Ordinance. 
Automobile Graveyard: A yard, field or other area used to store 3 or more unserviceable, discarded, worn-out or junked motor vehicles as defined in 29-A M.R.S.A. Section 101 or parts of such vehicles. "Automobile Graveyard" does not include any area used for temporary storage, not exceeding six (6) months, by an establishment or place of business, which is primarily engaged in doing auto body repair work. 
Auto Repair Garage: A place where, with or without the attendant sales of engine fuel, the following services may be carried out: general repair; engine rebuilding; rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles; collision service, such as body, frame or fender straightening and repair; overall painting and under-coating of automobiles, as a full or part time business. 
Auto Service Station: A place where gasoline, or any other automobile engine fuel, kerosene or motor oil and lubricants or grease (for the operation of motor vehicles) are retailed directly to the public on the premises; including the sale of minor accessories and the servicing and minor repair of automobiles, not including storage of unregistered vehicles and not including body, frame or fender straightening and repair. 
Bar: A place or business where the principal activity is the sale, consumption or dispensation of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. Included but not limited to bars, function or meeting halls or profit and non-profit organizations where alcoholic beverages are served, taverns, pubs, brewpubs, cocktail lounges, bottle clubs, 
B.Y.O.B. functions halls, on premise catering facilities where alcoholic beverages are served and similar types of facilities. Specifically not included in this definition are businesses or places that are Class A restaurants as defined in Title 28-A, Section 2 of the Maine Revised Statutes Annotated or bed and breakfast establishments that sell alcoholic beverages for consumption only to overnight guests. 
Base Flood: means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, commonly called the 100-year flood. 
Basement: Any portion of a structure with a floor-to-ceiling height of six feet or more and having more than 50% of its volume below the existing ground level. Basement: (for the purpose of flood plain management) means any area of the building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Bed & Breakfast: An owner-occupied residential structure in which no more than six rooms are made available for a fee to overnight travelers and which may provide guests with a morning meal.  Such establishments are further distinguished from a motel or hotel in that they do not provide guests with the independent living quarters and eating facilities normally associated with a motel or hotel. 
Boarding, Rooming or Lodging House: Any dwelling in which lodging is offered for compensation to three or more persons either individually or as families with or without meals. 
Boat Launching Facility: A facility designed primarily for the launching and landing of watercraft, and which may include an access ramp, docking area and parking spaces for vehicles and trailers. 
Building: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or personal property. 
Buildable Area: The area of the site, which may be altered, disturbed or re-graded for development purposes. The buildable area may contain buildings, parking areas, septic systems and storm water management facilities. The buildable area may not contain required open space, Resource Protection Districts or those items subtracted in determining Net Residential Acreage, as defined herein. 
Building Inspector: A person duly authorized and qualified to inspect buildings for the Town of Buxton and also to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. This person shall also be known as the Code Enforcement Officer (CEO). 
Bulk Fuel Storage: The storage of gasoline, diesel fuel, heating oil or other liquid fuels in a tank or storage container of 1,000 gallons or more for private use or for resale to the public. 
Business and Professional Offices: A building in which there is located the offices of a profession or business including, but not limited to, banks, insurance offices, realtors, barber shops or beauty salons. Added 6-14-03 
CEO: Code Enforcement Officer/Building Inspector. 
Campground: Any premises established for overnight use for the purpose of temporary camping for which a fee is charged. 
Cemetery: A burial ground maintained by the town or other public or non-profit body or private individual. Added 6-14-2003 
Certificate of Compliance: A document signed by the Code Enforcement Officer stating that a structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of this Ordinance 
Church: A building or structure designed and used primarily for conducting organized religious services regardless of religious denomination. The term “church” includes customary accessory facilities located within the principal building, such as meeting rooms, assembly space, administrative offices, classrooms for religious education and living quarters for clergy.  
Class A Cluster Subdivision Map: A map that meets the following requirements: 
1) Mapping units to the soils series of 1/8 acre or less; 
2) Scale is 1 inch equals 100 feet or larger; 
3) Ground control base line and test pits accurately located either under 
the direction of a registered land surveyor or qualified professional 
engineer or by a sub-meter accuracy GPS unit; and 
4) Base map with 2 foot contour lines, with ground survey or aerial survey 
with ground control.  
Cluster Development: A residential development by a single developer which is undertaken in a manner that treats the developed area as an entirety to promote the use of land including keeping common open space, a reduction in the size of road and utility systems, and the retention of the natural characteristics of the land. 
Code Enforcement Officer:  A qualified person duly authorized by the Town of Buxton to enforce the provisions of the Ordinance. 
Co-location: The use of a wireless telecommunications facility by more than one wireless telecommunications provider. 
Commercial Recreation: Recreational activities operated in return for a fee from the participants. 
Commercial Use: The use of lands, buildings or structures other than a "home occupation", defined below, the intent and result of which activity is the production of income from the buying and selling of goods and/or services, exclusive of rental of residential buildings and/or dwelling units. 
Conditional Use: A use that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout the land use district but which, if controlled as to number, location or relation to the neighborhood would promote the public health, safety, morals, order, comfort, convenience, appearance, prosperity or general welfare. Such uses may be permitted in land use districts where specific provision for such conditional use is made in this Ordinance. 
Daycare Facilities: A facility that provides care during the day for 3 or more individuals. 
Daycare Home: The primary residence of the Daycare provider as certified by the Department of Human Services to care for 3 – 12 children under 13 years old as defined in P.L. 1997, Chapter 494 (L.D. 1893).  The provider must live full time at the residence. 
Development: means any change caused by individuals or entities to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to the construction of buildings or other structures; the construction of additions or substantial improvements to buildings or other structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials; and the storage, deposition, or extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities. 
Dimensional Requirements: Numerical standards relating to spatial relationships including but not limited to setback, lot area, shore frontage and height. 
Driveway: A vehicular access-way less than five hundred (500) feet in length serving two lots or less. 
Duplex: A building containing only two dwelling units having a common separation wall or floor between them.  
Dwelling: A fixed structure containing one or more dwelling units. 
Dwelling Unit: A room or suite of rooms used by a family as a habitation which is separate from other such rooms or suites of rooms and which contains independent living, cooking, sleeping, bathing and sanitary facilities. No dwelling unit shall contain less than 480 square 
feet of floor space. For Subdivision purposes a “Dwelling Unit” means any part of a 
structure, which, through sale or lease, is intended for human habitation, including single-family and multifamily housing, condominiums, apartments and time-share units. Amended June 14, 2003 
Elderly Housing: A building or buildings containing dwelling units constructed or reconstructed specifically for occupancy by families in which at least one member is 62 years of age or older. 
Elevated Building: means a non-basement building 
a. 	
built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-30 or A, to have the top of the  elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns, post, piers, or "stilts;" and 

b. 	
adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to one foot above the magnitude of the base flood. 


In the case of Zones A1-30 or A, Elevated Building also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with hydraulic openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters. 
Elevation Certificate: An official form (FEMA Form 81-31, 03/97, as amended) that: 
a. 	
is used to verify compliance with the floodplain management regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program; and, 

b. 
is required for purchasing flood insurance. 


Emergency Operations: Operations conducted for the public health, safety or general welfare, such as protection of resources from immediate destruction or loss, law enforcement and operations to rescue human beings, property and livestock from the threat of destruction or injury. 
Essential Services: The construction, alteration or maintenance of gas, electrical or communication facilities; steam, fuel, electric power or water transmission or distribution lines, towers and related equipment; telephone cables or lines, poles and related equipment; gas, oil, water, slurry or other similar pipelines; municipal sewage lines, collection or supply systems; and associated storage tanks. Such systems may include towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarms and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar accessories, but shall not include service drops or buildings which are necessary for the furnishing of such services. 
Expansion of a Structure: An increase in the floor area or volume of a structure, including all extensions such as, but not limited to attached decks, garages, porches and greenhouses. 
Expansion of Use: The addition of weeks or months to a use's operating season; additional hours of operation; or the use of more floor area or ground area devoted to a particular use. 
Extractive Industry: The excavation, processing or storage of twenty-five cubic yards of soil, topsoil, peat, loam, sand, gravel, rock or other mineral deposits from a lot in any twelve month period. 
Family: One or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit as distinguished from a group occupying a motel or boarding house. 
Fisheries: Areas identified by a governmental agency such s the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, Atlantic Salmon Authority or Department of Marine Resources as having significant value as fisheries and any areas so identified in the Comprehensive Plan. 
Flea Market: An occasional or periodic market held in a structure or open area where vendors offer goods for sale to the public. 

Flood or Flooding -means: 
a. 	A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
1. 	
The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 

2. 	
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 


b. 	The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in paragraph a.1. of this definition. 
Flood Elevation Study: means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the Town of Buxton. 
Flood Insurance Study: see Flood Elevation Study. 
Flood Way: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map: The official map on which FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the Town of Buxton. 
Floor Area: The sum of the horizontal areas of the floor(s) of a structure enclosed by exterior walls plus the horizontal area of any unenclosed portions of a structure such as porches and decks. 
Floodplain or Flood-prone Area: means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see flooding). 
Floodplain Management: means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management regulations. 
Floodplain Management Regulations: means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance, and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
Flood proofing: means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and contents. 
Floodway: see Regulatory Floodway. 
Floodway Encroachment Lines: mean the lines marking the limits of floodways on federal, state, and local floodplain maps. 
Forested Wetland: A freshwater wetland dominated by woody vegetation that is six 

(6) meters tall (approximately twenty (20) feet) or taller. 
Forestry: Timber cruising and other forest resource evaluation activities, management planning activities, insect and disease control, timber stand improvement, pruning, other similar or associated activities, exclusive of timber harvesting and the construction, creation or maintenance of roads. 
Foundation: The supporting substructure of a building or other structure including but not limited to basements, slabs, sills, posts or frost walls. 
Freeboard: means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions. 
Frontage, Street: The linear distance of the line separating the lot from a public or private road which is a traveled thoroughfare open to the public. All lots created after the effective date of this definition shall have frontage on a road.  Any lot which has frontage on two or more roads shall have the required minimum frontage on at least one road. 
Frontage, Shoreline: The linear distance measured in a straight line between the points of the lot lines with the shoreline at the normal high water elevation. 
Function Hall, Reception Hall, or Banquet Hall: is a room or building for the purpose of hosting a party, banquet, wedding or other reception, or other social event. 
Functionally Dependent Use: for the purpose of floodplain management means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Functionally Water-Dependent Uses: Those uses that require, for their primary purpose, location on submerged lands or that require direct access to, or location in, waters and which cannot be located away from these waters. The uses include, but are not limited to boating facilities, marinas, industrial uses requiring large volumes of cooling or processing water and which cannot reasonably be located or operated at an inland site, and uses which primarily provide general public access to waters. 
Hammerhead – A roadway termination that provides a “T” shaped three-point turn around for emergency and snow removal equipment, being no narrower than the road that serves it.  The hammerhead shall be located on the right hand side as you approach it. 
High Intensity Soil Survey: A soil map prepared by a soils scientist certified in the State of Maine showing soil types, compositions and limitations at a scale detailed enough to provide important information for the development of engineering, storm water management, septic and other design components for the subdivision process. The surveys are divided into four (4) levels or classes, depending on intensity desired. 
Height of Building: The vertical distance between the highest point of the roof and the average grade of the ground adjoining the building. 
Historic or archaeological resources: Areas identified by a governmental such as the Maine Historic Preservation Commission as having significant value as historic or archaeological resource and any areas so identified in the Comprehensive Plan. 
Historic Structure: means any structure that is: 
a. 	
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 

b. 	
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior to qualify as a registered historic district; 

c. 	
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 

d. 	
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 


1. 	
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 

2. 	
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 


Home Occupation: An occupation or profession which is: customarily carried on in a dwelling unit or in a building or other structure accessory to a dwelling unit; carried on by a member of the family residing in the dwelling unit; clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes. 
Individual Private Campsite: An area of land which is not associated with a campground, but which is developed for repeated camping by only one group not to exceed ten (10) individuals and which involves site improvements which may include but not be limited to gravel pads, parking areas, fireplaces or tent platforms. 
Junkyard: Shall be defined as in 30-A MRSA § 3752.   
Kennel: An establishment where five (5) or more dogs or other domesticated animals over the age of 6 months are kept for commercial purposes, including but not limited to grooming, breeding, training or selling. 
Locally Established Datum: means, for purposes of this ordinance, an elevation established for a specific site to which all other elevations at the site are referenced. This elevation is generally not referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or any other established datum and is used in areas where Mean Sea Level data is too far from a specific site to be practically used. 
Lot: A parcel of land described on a deed, plan or similar document. 
Lot Size: The horizontally projected area of a lot computed exclusive of any portion of a right-of-way for any thoroughfare or easement other than utility easement and any land below the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland. 

Lot Lines: 
Front Lot Line: The line separating the lot from the street or road on which the lot 
has frontage. 
Rear Lot Line: The line opposite the front lot line. On irregularly shaped lots, the rear lot line shall be that imaginary line, not less than ten feet in length, which is parallel to and farthest from the front lot line. 
Side Lot Line: Any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line. 
Lot Depth: The required depth of a lot from front lot line to rear lot line in the shoreland zone. 
Lot of Record: A parcel of land, a legal description of which or the dimension of which is recorded on a document or map on file with the County Registrar of Deeds. 
Lot Width: the horizontal distance parallel to the street frontage measured at the required building setback. 
Lot, Corner: A lot having two or more street frontages. 
Lowest Floor: means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements described in Section 14.6 of this ordinance. 
Low Income Housing: A housing project that is subsidized by a Federal or State Funding program. 
Manufactured Home: (for the purpose of flood plain management) means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term manufactured home also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. 
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: (for the purpose of flood plain management) means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Manufactured Housing Unit: Structures, transportable in one or two sections, which were constructed in a manufacturing facility on a permanently attached chassis and are transported to a building site and designed to be used as dwellings when connected to the required utilities, including the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. Amended 6/18/05 
Marina: A place adjacent to waters which offers, for rent or sale to the public, moorings, dock space, boats or marine equipment, and gasoline and other related oil products, and where boats may be hauled, stored, repaired and/or constructed, and subject to the performance standards in Article 11.13. 
Market Value: The estimated price a property will bring in the open market and under prevailing market conditions in a sale between a willing seller and a willing buyer, both conversant with the property and with prevailing general price levels. 
Mean Sea Level: means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate map are referenced. 
Mechanized Outdoor Recreation: Recreation activities which require the use of motors or engines for the operation of equipment or participation in the activity. 
Minor Development: means all development that is not new construction or a substantial improvement, such as repairs, maintenance, renovations, or additions, whose value is less that 50% of the market value of the structure. It also includes, but is not limited to: accessory structures as provided for in Section 14.6.J., mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, deposition or extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities that do not involve structures; and non-structural projects such as bridges, dams, towers, fencing, pipelines, wharves, and piers. 
Mobile Home Lot: A part of a mobile home park which has been reserved for the placement of a manufactured housing unit and appurtenant structures or additions within a mobile home park. 
Mobile Home Park: A parcel of land under unified ownership approved by the municipality for the placement of three or more manufactured housing units. 
Modular Unit: Structures, transportable in one or more sections, which were constructed in a manufacturing facility and are transported on removable frames/trailers to a building site for placement on a permanent foundation.  For the purpose of this Ordinance a Modular Home is considered a Single Family Residence. 
Motel, Hotel or Inn: A building or group of buildings containing guest rooms kept, used, maintained or offered to the public as a place where lodging and/or meals are provided for compensation. A motel, hotel or inn may also contain such accessory services and facilities for the benefit of its guests, and only incidental to the general public, as newsstands, personal grooming facilities and restaurants. These terms shall also include motor or tourist courts, cabins and motor lodges. 
Multi-Family Dwelling: A building containing three or more dwelling units. 
Municipal Uses: A facility which is open to the public and which is owned by the municipality and operated under its direction or supervision including, but not limited to, schools, libraries, offices and garages. Added 6-14-2003 
Natural communities and natural areas: Areas identified by a governmental agency such as the Maine Department of Conservation Natural Areas Program as having significant value as a natural area and any areas so identified in the Comprehensive Plan. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD): means the national vertical datum, whose standard was established in 1929, which is used by the National Flood Insurance Program 
(NFIP). NGVD was based upon mean sea level in 1929 and also has been called “1929 Mean Sea Level (MSL)”. 
Net Residential Acreage: The area of any parcel generally suitable, in its natural state, for development and theoretically related to the natural capacity of the land to support a certain intensity of use. Net residential acreage shall be determined by subtracting the following from the gross site area: 
1. 	
The area located within the full width of the right-of-way (ROW) of any proposed public or private street or access drive. If a ROW is not delineated, an area equal to a minimum 50 foot ROW shall be deducted; 

2. 	
Any land area which is regularly covered by water, including ponds, rivers and streams; 

3. 	
Any land area identified as having soil that is very poorly drained in accordance with the classifications of the National Cooperative Soil Survey; 

4. 	
Any land area with sustained slopes of 20% or more; 

5. 	
Any land area with identified wetlands or 100 year floodplains, as defined herein; and 

6. 	
Any land located within utility easements or ROW’s if the restrictions preclude use of the land for development. 


Net Residential Density: The number of dwelling units per net residential acre. The net residential density shall be determined by dividing the net residential acreage by the minimum buildable area required in the zoning district in which the project is located. 
New Construction: means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the Town of Buxton and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
Non-Conforming Lot: A single lot of record which, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, does not meet the lot size, street frontage or lot width requirements of the district in which it is located, but is allowed solely because it was in lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent amendments took effect. 
Non-Conforming Structure: A structure which does not meet any one or more of the following dimensional requirements; setback, height or lot coverage, but which is allowed solely because it was in lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent amendments took effect. 
Non-Conforming Use: Use of buildings, structures, premises, land or parts thereof which is not permitted in the district in which it is situated, but which is allowed to remain solely because it was in lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent amendments took effect. 
Nursing Home: Any dwelling in which three or more aged, ill, chronically ill or incurably ill persons are housed and furnished with meals and nursing care for compensation. 

100-year flood: see Base Flood. 
Passive Outdoor Recreation: Outdoor recreation activities which involve no motorized equipment, structural or mechanical components for participation in the activity, such as hiking, cross-country skiing, hunting, fishing, etc. 
Personal Services: A retail business which provides services but not goods, such as hairdressers, shoe repair, etc. 

Piers, Docks, Wharfs, Bridges and other structures and uses extending over or beyond the normal high-water line or within a wetland: 
Temporary: Structures which remain in or over the water for less than seven (7) months in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months. 
Permanent: Structures which remain in or over the water for seven (7) months or more in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months. 
Principal Structure: A building other than one which is used for purposes wholly incidental or accessory to the use of another building or use on the same premises. 
Principal Use: A use other than one which is wholly incidental or accessory to another use on the same premises. 
Private Club: Any association of persons organized for social, religious, benevolent or academic purposes whose facilities are generally open only to members and their guests, including fraternities, sororities and social organizations, but not including golf clubs, swimming clubs and commercially operated establishments. 
Privies: A facility used for the direct disposal and storage of human waste into a vault or pit. 
Public Facility: Any facility including but not limited to, buildings, property, recreation areas and roads which are owned, leased or otherwise operated or funded by a governmental body or public entity. 
Public Utility: A facility, whether publicly or privately owned, which provides direct or indirect utility service to the public, such as, but not limited to, sewage and water pumping stations and treatment facilities, telephone electronic equipment structures, electric power sub-stations and transformer stations, and major electrical power lines or pipelines whose major purpose is transport through a municipality. Local utility transmission lines are excluded from this definition. Wireless telecommunications facilities, as defined in this section, are not considered public utility facilities. 
Recreational Vehicle: (for the purposes of flood plain management) means a vehicle which is: 
a. 
built on a single chassis; 

b. 	
400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, not including slideouts; 

c. 	
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a motor vehicle; and 

d. 	
designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 


Recreational Vehicle:  A vehicle or vehicular attachment which is designed for temporary sleeping or living quarters for one or more persons, and which is not a dwelling. The term may include pick-up campers, travel trailers, tent trailers and motor homes. In order to be considered as a vehicle and not as a structure subject to the requirements of this Ordinance the vehicle must: 1) remain with its tires on the ground; 2) possess a current registration sticker or plate from any State Division of Motor Vehicles; and 3) not be occupied for more than 90 consecutive days, or more than 120 days in any calendar year. 

Regulatory Floodway: 
a. 	
means the channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot, and 

b. 	
when not designated on the community’s Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, it is considered to be the channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas to a distance of one-half the width of the floodplain, as measured from the normal high water mark to the upland limit of the floodplain. 


Replacement System: A subsurface sewage disposal system intended to replace: 1) an existing system which is either malfunctioning or being upgraded with no significant change of design flow or use of the structure, or 2) any existing overboard wastewater discharge. 
Required Improvements: Sidewalks, drainage facilities, parking areas, lighting, signs, landscaping and buffer areas plus any other improvements necessary to meet the performance standards of this ordinance. 
Restaurant: a commercial establishment where food and drink are prepared, served and consumed primarily within the principal structure. 
Retail Business: Any business engaged primarily in the sale, rental or lease of goods and/or services individually or in small quantities to the ultimate consumer for direct consumption and/or use, and not for resale. The term retail business shall not include auto service stations, auto repair service garage, and all types of restaurants, or any use that is specifically defined elsewhere. The term retail business shall include furniture/ large appliance showrooms, which are retail business establishments where the major activity is display area for furniture such as but not limited to tables, chairs, bureaus and sofas, and/or large appliances such as but not limited to refrigerators, stoves, washers, and dryers. The furniture and large appliances are large pieces, which are placed on the floor for customers to view. 
Riprap: Rocks, irregularly shaped and at least six (6) inches in diameter used for erosion control and soil stabilization, typically used on ground slopes of two (2) units horizontal to one (1) unit vertical or less. 
Riverine: means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
Roads: A route or track consisting of a bed of exposed mineral soil, gravel, asphalt or other surfacing material constructed for or created by the repeated passage of motorized vehicles. 
School: A building, the principal use of which is conducting educational classes, including nursery schools. Added 6-14-2003 
Setback from Water or Wetlands: The nearest horizontal distance from the normal high-water line of a body of water or upland edge of a wetland to the nearest part of a structure, road, parking space or other regulated object or area. 
Shoreland Zone: The land area located within two hundred and fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance of the normal high-water line of Bonny Eagle Pond, Saco River or the upland edge of a freshwater wetland; and also including the land area located within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance of the normal high water line of all streams, as defined. The shoreland zone is divided into two districts; the Resource Protection District and Shoreland District. 
Sign: An attached or free-standing structure or part of a structure designed to convey to persons not on the premises some information. The area of a sign shall not be construed to be poles, standards or other parts which perform solely a weight-bearing function. 
Single Family Dwelling: A building containing only one dwelling unit. 
Small Wind Energy System: A residential wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind turbine, a tower, and supporting structures (e.g. guy wires, if needed), and associated control or conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity of not more than 25Kw and which is primarily intended for the production of energy on site consumption. 
Special Flood Hazard Area: see Area of Special Flood Hazard. 
Start of Construction: means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, substantial improvement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Stream: A free-flowing body of water which is either the outlet of Bonny Eagle Pond or the confluence of two (2) perennial streams as depicted on the most recent edition of a United States Geological Survey 7.5 minute series topographic map to the point where the body of water becomes a river. 
Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a fixed location on or in the ground or an attachment to something having a fixed location on the ground including buildings, billboards, signs, commercial park rides and games, carports, porches and other building features but not including fences, access stairs, landings and handicap ramps. Structure: means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building. A gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground is also a structure. 
Subdivision: A subdivision is the division of a tract or parcel of land into three (3) or more lots within any five (5) year period, which period begins after September 22, 1971, whether accomplished by sale, lease, development, buildings or otherwise provided that a division accomplished by devise, condemnation, order of court, gift to a person related to the donor as long as the donor has held the property for a continuous period of 5 years prior to the division, or a gift to a municipality or by the transfer of any interest in land to the owner of land abutting that land does not create a lot or lots for the purposes of this definition, unless the intent of the transferor in any transfer or gift is to avoid the objectives of subdivision review. The term "subdivision" also includes the division of a new structure or structures on a tract or parcel of land into three (3) or more dwelling units, the construction or placement of 3 or more dwelling units on a single tract or parcel of land and the division of an existing structure or structures previously used for commercial or industrial use into three (3) or more dwelling units within a five (5) year period. "New structure or structures" includes any structure for which construction begins on or after September 23, 1988. The area included in the expansion of an existing structure is deemed to be a new structure for the purpose of this definition. In determining whether a tract or parcel of land is divided into three (3) or more lots, the first dividing of such tract or parcel, unless otherwise exempted herein, shall be considered to create the first two lots and the next dividing of either of said first two lots, by whomever accomplished, unless otherwise exempted herein, shall be considered to create a third lot, unless both such dividings are accomplished by a subdivider who has retained one of the lots for the subdivider's own use as a single family 
residence that has been the subdivider’s principal residence for a period of at least five (5) 
years immediately preceding the second division. A lot of forty (40) or more acres shall not be counted as a lot except when the lot or parcel from which it was divided is located entirely or partially within any shoreland zone. For the purpose of this definition, a tract or parcel of land is defined as all contiguous land in the same ownership provided that lands located on the opposite side of a public or private road shall be considered each a separate tract or parcel of land unless such road was established by the owner of land on both sides thereof. If the real estate exempt under this definition by a gift to a person related to the donor is transferred within five years to another person not related to the donor of the exempt real estate then the previously exempt division creates a lot or lots for the purposes of this definition. Notwithstanding the provisions of this definition, leased dwelling units are not subject to subdivision review if the municipal review is at least as stringent as that required under this subchapter. The grant of a bona fide security interest in an entire lot that has been exempted from the definition of subdivision as a gift to a relative or subsequent transfer of that entire lot by the original holder of the security interest or that person's successor in interest does not create a lot for the purpose of this definition unless the intent of the transferor is to avoid the objectives of this subchapter. 
Substantial Damage: means, damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial Improvement: means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures, which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed.  The term does not, however, include either: 
a. 	
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 

b. 
Any alteration of a Historic Structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, and a variance 


is obtained from the community’s Board of Appeals. 
Substantial Start: Completion of thirty (30) percent of a permitted structure or use measured as a percentage of estimated total cost. 
Subsurface Sewage Disposal System: A collection of treatment tank(s), disposal area(s), holding tank(s) and pond(s), surface spray system(s), cesspool(s), well(s), surface ditch(es), alternative toilet(s) or other devices and associated piping designed to function as a unit for the purpose of disposing of wastes or wastewater on or beneath the surface of the earth. The term shall not include any wastewater discharge system licensed under 38 M.R.S.A. Section 414, any surface wastewater disposal system licensed under 38 M.R.S.A. Section 413 Subsection 1-A, or any public sewer. The term shall not include a wastewater disposal system designed to treat wastewater which is in whole or in part hazardous waste as defined in 38 M.R.S.A. Chapter 13 Subsection 1. 
Sustained Slope: A change in elevation where the referenced percent grade is substantially maintained or exceeded throughout the measured area. 
Timber Harvesting: The cutting and removal of trees from their growing site and the attendant operation of cutting and skidding machinery but not the construction or creation of roads. Timber harvesting does not include the clearing of land for approved construction. 
Total Height: The vertical distance from the ground level to the tip of the rotating blades at their highest point. 
Tower Height: The distance from the base to the system hub shall be no greater than 100 feet in height or no greater than 35 feet above any surrounding canopy. 
Town (Municipality): The Town of Buxton. 
Tributary Stream: A channel between defined banks created by the action of surface water whether intermittent or perennial and which is characterized by the lack of upland vegetation or presence of aquatic vegetation and by the presence of a bed devoid of topsoil containing waterborne deposits on exposed soil, parent material or bedrock and which flows to a water body or wetland as defined. This definition does not include the term "stream" as defined elsewhere in this Ordinance and only applies to that portion of the tributary stream located within the shoreland zone of the receiving water body or wetl 
Undue Hardship: A situation where owing to the conditions peculiar to a property: 
1.The land in question cannot yield a reasonable return under the requirements of this ordinance; 
2.The need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and not the general condition in the neighborhood; 
3.The granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the locality; and 
4.These conditions are not the result of action taken by the applicant for a variance or a prior owner. 
Hardship is not, therefore, a condition experienced by an individual.  It is a 
characteristic of the property itself. 
Upland Edge: The boundary between upland and wetland. 
Variance: A relaxation in the terms of this Ordinance which impose restrictions on height, buildable area, lot coverage, lot size or setback as permitted by section 6.2.B of this Ordinance. 
Vegetation: All live trees, shrubs, ground cover and other plants including without limitation, trees both over and under 4 inches in diameter measured at 4 1/2 feet above ground level. 
Veterinary Clinic: A building used for the diagnosis, care and treatment of ailing or injured animals which may include overnight stays. The overnight boarding of healthy animals shall be considered a kennel. 
Violation: means the failure of a structure or development to comply with the ordinance. 
Volume of a Structure: The volume of all portions of a structure enclosed by roof and fixed exterior walls as measured from the exterior faces of these walls and roof. 
Water Body: Any great pond, river or stream. 
Warehouse and outdoor storage: A land area where goods or materials are stored in a warehouse facility and/or in specific outdoor areas. 
Warehouse Facility: An enclosed structure used primarily for the storage of goods or materials. Added 6-14-2003 
Water Crossing: Any project extending from one bank to the opposite bank of a river or stream whether under, through or over the water course. Such projects include but may not be limited to roads, fords, bridges, culverts, water lines, sewer lines and cables as well as maintenance work on these crossings. 
Wetland: Freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and open waters less than six (6) feet deep, other than forested wetlands, as shown on either a U.S. Geological Survey Map (at 1:24000 or 1:25000 scale), or a National Wetlands Inventory Map (at 1:24000 or 1:25000 scale), or a FEMA (Federal Emergency Management Agency) floodplain map, or as identified by a professional wetland delineation based on vegetation, soils and hydrology are: 
1.Ten or more contiguous acres; or of less than 10 contiguous acres and adjacent to a surface water body excluding any river, stream or brook such that in a natural state the combined surface area is in excess of 10 acres; and 
2.Inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and for a duration sufficient to support and which under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of wetland vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils. 
Wetlands may contain small stream channels or inclusions of land that do not conform to the criteria of this definition. 
Wetlands Associated with Great Ponds and Rivers: Wetlands contiguous with or adjacent to Bonny Eagle Pond or the Saco River and which during normal high water are connected by surface water to the pond or river. Also included are wetlands which are separated from the pond or river by a berm, causeway or similar feature less than 100 feet in width and which have a surface elevation at or below the normal high water line of the great pond or river. Wetlands associated with great ponds or rivers are considered to be part of the pond or river. 
Wholesale Business: One that buys large quantities of goods and resells to other distributors rather than the ultimate consumers. 
Wildlife habitat: Areas identified by a governmental agency such as the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife as having significant value as habitat for animals and any areas so identified in the Comprehensive Plan. 
Wireless Telecommunications Facility: Any structure, antenna, tower, or other device which provides radio/television transmission, commercial mobile wireless services, unlicensed wireless services, cellular phone services, specialized mobile radio communications (SMR), common carrier wireless exchange phone services, common carrier wireless exchange access services, and personal communications service (PCS) or 
pager services. The Federal Telecommunications Act exempts amateur “ham” radio 
station antennas from municipal regulation. 
Wireless Service: Any service using antenna to send or receive electromagnetic waves of any bandwidth. 
Yard: The area of land on a lot not occupied by buildings. 
Front yard: The area between the street line and the nearest part of a building. For the purpose of this Ordinance, a corner lot shall be deemed to have two or more front yards. 
Side yard: The area of land between the side lot line and the nearest part of a building. 
Rear yard: The area of land between the rear lot line and the nearest part of a building. 
ARTICLE 3 -ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 
3.1 Districts. 
To implement the provisions of the Ordinance, the Town of Buxton is hereby divided into the following districts as defined in Article 9: 
Village  V  
Residential  Res  
Resource Protection  RP  
Rural  Ru  
Shoreland  S  
Business and Commercial  BC  
Light Commercial  LC  


3.2 Zoning Map. 
3.2.A. The Buxton Zoning Map shall be identified by the signatures of the Planning Board attested to by the Town Clerk under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the Buxton Zoning Map referred to in Article 1 of the Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Buxton, Maine, adopted March 8, 1986." 
3.2.B. If action of the Town Meeting amends the Ordinance necessitating changes in district boundaries or other matters portrayed on the Buxton Zoning Map, such changes shall be entered on the Buxton Zoning Map and certified on the Map as follows: "On (date) by action of the Town Meeting the following changes were made in the Buxton Zoning Map: (brief description of nature of change)" which entry shall be signed by the Planning Board and attested by the Town Clerk. 
3.2.C. The Buxton Zoning Map which shall be located in the office of the Town Clerk shall be the final authority as to the current status of zoning district boundaries in the Town. 
3.2.D. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Buxton Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply: 
3.2.D.1. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets, highways, pole lines or alleys shall be construed to follow such center lines or such lines extended. 
3.2.D.2. Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines and in the event of change in the shoreline shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline; boundaries indicated as approximately following the normal high-water line or center lines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such lines. The depiction of the Resource Protection and Shoreland Districts on the map is merely illustrative of their general location. The boundaries of these districts shall be 250 feet from the normal high-water mark of the water body or the upland edge of wetland vegetation regardless of the location of the boundary shown on the map. 
3.2.D.3. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official Buxton Zoning Map or in other circumstances not covered by subsections 3.2.D.1. and 3.2.D.2. above, the Board of Appeals shall interpret the district boundaries. 
3.2.D.4. When a lot is divided by a zoning district boundary other then a boundary of the resource Protection or Shoreland Districts, the requirements and standards of this Ordinance shall apply as follows: 
3.2.D.4.a. When the lot is equal to or less than two acres in area the provisions of this Ordinance which apply to the larger portion of the lot shall apply to the lot as a whole. 
3.2.D.4.b. When the lot is larger than two acres in area the provisions of this Ordinance which apply to either portion of the lot may be extended for a distance of up to 50 feet beyond the district boundary. 
3.2.E. In the event that the Buxton Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the Town Meeting may by resolution adopt a new Buxton Zoning Map which shall supersede the prior Buxton Zoning Map. The new Buxton Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Planning Board attested by the Town Clerk under the following words: "This is to certify that this Buxton Zoning Map, adopted (date of adoption) supersedes and replaces the Buxton Zoning Map adopted (date of adoption of map being replaced) as part of the Buxton Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Buxton, Maine." The superseded Buxton Zoning Map shall be preserved together if possible with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 
3.2.F. The attached map and amendments thereto is hereby adopted and made a part of this Ordinance. 
3.3. Flood Maps. 
The areas of special flood hazard Zones A and A1-30, are identified by the Federal 
Emergency Management Agency in a report entitled “Flood Insurance Study – Town of Buxton, Maine, York County,” dated January 5, 1982 with accompanying "Flood 
Insurance Rate Map" dated January 5, 1982 and "Flood Boundary and Floodway Map" dated July 5, 1982, which are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance. 
ARTICLE 4 -CONFORMANCE WITH REGULATIONS 

4.1. Conformity. 
4.1.A. All buildings or structures hereinafter erected, reconstructed, altered, enlarged or moved and uses of premises in the Town of Buxton shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. No building, structure, land or water area shall be used for any purpose or in any manner except as permitted within the district in which such building, structure, land or water area is located. 
4.1.B. The regulations specified by this Ordinance for each district shall be minimum requirements. 
4.1.C. Land within the limits of a street on which a lot abuts shall not be considered as part of such lot for the purposes of meeting the area or setback requirements of this Ordinance. 

4.2. Non-Conformance. 
4.2.A. Purposes. The intent of this section is to regulate non-conforming lots, uses and structures. This section intends to be realistic so that: non-conforming vacant lots of record can be reasonably developed; non-conforming existing structures can be properly maintained or repaired; and non-conforming uses can continue or be changed to other less non-conforming uses or to conforming uses. When non­conforming uses fall into disuse, the intent of these regulations is to not allow them to be reestablished after a 12 month period of dormancy. These regulations are designed for the betterment of the community and for the improvement of property values. 
4.2.B. Deleted. 
4.2.C. General. 
4.2.C.1. Continuance, Enlargement & Reconstruction. Any use of land, or any building, structure, or parts thereof, legally existing at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance, or at any time a district is changed by amendment hereafter, which does not conform to the requirements of this Ordinance or its amendments may continue but may not be extended, reconstructed, enlarged or structurally altered except as specified below after approval of the proposed change by the board of Appeals.  An expansion of the use shall not exceed 30% of the space in use prior to the first expansion. The Board of Appeals in reviewing an application for an expansion shall determine that the proposed changes are consistent with all applicable standards contained in Section 8.2. 
and Articles 10, 11, and 14 of this Ordinance. In reviewing the application the Board will follow the appeal procedure contained in Section 6.3. of Article 6. including the provision for a public hearing. The Board may approve an application with such conditions as it finds necessary to ensure compliance with this Ordinance. 
4.2.C.1.a. Expansions within Shoreland District. Legally existing non­conforming principal and accessory structures that do not meet the water body or wetland setback requirements may only be expanded or altered as follows, as long as all other applicable standards contained in this ordinance are met: 
4.2.C.1.a.i. Expansion of any portion of a structure, part of a structure or entire structure within 25 feet of the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland is prohibited, even if the expansion will not increase non-conformity with the water body or wetland setback requirement. 
4.2.C.1.a.ii. Expansion of an accessory structure that is located closer to the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland than the principal structure is prohibited, even if the expansion will not increase non-conformity with the water body or wetland setback requirement. 
4.2.C.1.a.iii. For structures located less than 75 feet from the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland, the maximum combined total floor area for all structures is 1,000 square feet, and the maximum height of any structure is 20 feet or the height of the existing structure, whichever is greater. 
4.2.C.1.a.iv. For structures located less than 100 feet from the normal high-water line of a great pond classified as GPA or a river flowing to a great pond classified as GPA, the maximum combined total floor area for all structures is 1,500 square feet, and the maximum height of any structure is 25 feet or the height of the existing structure, whichever is greater, except that any portion of those structures located less than 75 feet from the normal high-water line or upland edge of a wetland must meet the floor area and height limits of 4.2.C.1.a.iii. 
4.2.C.1.a.v. In meeting the foregoing conditions, a basement is not counted towards floor area. 
4.2.C.2. Transfer of Ownership. Ownership of lots, structures and uses which remain lawful but become non-conforming by the adoption or amendment of this Ordinance may be transferred and the new owner may continue to use the non-conforming structure, lot or use subject to the provisions of this Ordinance. 
4.2.C.3. Restoration or Replacement. This Ordinance allows the normal upkeep and maintenance of non-conforming uses and structures; repairs, renovations or modernization which do not involve expansions of the non­conforming use or structure; and such other changes in a non-conforming use or structure as federal, state or local building and safety codes may require. Except within the Shoreland Zone, and areas of Special Flood Hazard as established in Article 3.3, any non-conforming structure which is hereafter removed, damaged or destroyed may be restored or reconstructed provided that a permit is obtained within one year of the date of the removal, damage or destruction, and will be located within the original building footprint, and will not create or expand any nonconformities.  Reconstruction or replacement of a non-conforming structure not in compliance with these limitations may be permitted provided that such reconstruction or replacement is in compliance with the setback requirement to the greatest practical extent as determined by the Board of Appeals. 
In determining whether the building reconstruction or replacement meets the setback to the greatest practical extent, the Board of Appeals shall consider the criteria cited in Section 4.2.E.4. Relocation. Amended April 10, 2002 
4.2.C.3.a. such non-conforming structure shall not be enlarged except in conformity with this Ordinance and the Maine State Plumbing Rules and does not exceed the degree of non-conformity existing prior to the damage or destruction; and 
4.2.C.3.b. any non-conforming use shall not be expanded in area except in conformance with this Ordinance. 
4.2.C.3.c increase in nonconformity of a structure: Any change in a structure or property which causes further deviation from the dimensional standard(s) creating the nonconformity such as, but not limited to, reduction in water body, tributary stream, or wetland setback distance, increase in lot coverage, or increase in height of a structure. Property changes or structure expansions which either meet the dimensional standard or which cause no further increase in the linear extent of nonconformance of the existing structure shall not be considered to increase nonconformity. For example, there is no increase in nonconformity with the setback requirement for water bodies, wetlands, or tributary streams if the expansion extends no further into the required setback area than does any portion of the existing nonconforming structure. Hence, a structure may be expanded laterally provided that the expansion extends no closer to the water body or wetland than the closest portion of the existing structure from the water body or wetland. Included in this allowance are expansions which fill-in irregularly shaped structures. 
4.2.D. Non-Conforming Use. 
4.2.D.1. Resumption Prohibited: A building or structure in which a non-conforming use is discontinued for a period exceeding one year or which is superseded by a conforming use shall not thereafter be used in a non-conforming manner even if the owner has not intended to abandon the use. 
4.2.D.2. A Structure Non-Conforming as to Use: A building or structure, non­conforming as to use, shall not be enlarged in any manner or direction unless the non-conforming use is terminated except that a non-conforming single family home in the Business and Commercial District may be expanded provided that the expansion complies with all other regulations of the Zone in which it is located, in addition, State laws must be adhered to. 
A non-conforming use of part of a building or structure shall not be extended throughout other parts of the building or structure unless those parts of the building or structure were manifestly arranged or designed for such use prior to the adoption of this Ordinance or of any amendment. 
4.2.D.3. Change of Use: An existing non-conforming use may be changed to another non-conforming use provided that the proposed use is equally or more appropriate to the district than the existing non-conforming use and the impact on the subject and adjacent properties and resources is less adverse than the impact of the former use as determined by the Board of Appeals. The case shall be heard as an Administrative Appeal. 
The determination of appropriateness shall include consideration of the probable changes in traffic (volume and type), parking, noise, and potential for litter, wastes or by-products, fumes, odors or other nuisances likely to result from such change of use. When located within the Resource Protection or Shoreland Districts, the Board of Appeals shall require written documentation from the applicant regarding the probable effects on erosion and sedimentation, water quality, fish and wildlife habitat, vegetative cover, visual and actual points of public access to waters, natural beauty, flood plain management and archaeological and historic resources. The performance standards in Articles 10 and 11 of this Ordinance shall apply to such requests to establish new non-conforming uses. 
4.2.D.4. Use of Land: A non-conforming use of land may not be extended into any part of the remainder of a lot of land except as provided in Section 4.2.C.1. A non­conforming use of land which is incidental to or accessory to a non-conforming use of a building shall be discontinued at the same time the non-conforming use of the building is discontinued. In the case of earth removal operations, the removal of earth may not be extended as a non-conforming use beyond the required set-back lines of the specific parcel upon which such operations were in progress when such use became non-conforming. Adjacent parcels in the same or different owner-ship shall not be eligible for exemption under the non-conforming use provisions unless earth removal operations were in progress on these parcels before these provisions were enacted. 
4.2.E. Non-Conforming Structures. 
4.2.E.1. Enlargements Controlled: A non-conforming structure shall not be added to or enlarged except as provided in Section 4.2.C.1. unless the addition complies with the regulations of the Zone in which it is located or a Variance is obtained. In addition, state laws must be adhered to. Except within the Shoreland Zone, the addition of an open patio with no structures elevated above ground level or the addition of steps shall not constitute the expansion of a non-conforming structure. But the addition of a deck or the enclosure of an existing porch does constitute the expansion of a non-conforming structure and therefore the deck or enclosure shall meet all the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance. The placing of a foundation below a lawfully existing non-conforming structure shall not constitute the expansion of the structure so long as additional bedrooms are not located in the basement; the structure and new foundation are placed such that the setback requirement is met to the greatest practical extent as determined by the Board of Appeals basing its decision on the criteria specified in paragraph 4 below; the completed foundation does not extend beyond the exterior dimensions of the structure; the foundation does not cause the structure to be elevated by more than three (3) additional feet; and the first floor space of the structure is not increased.  Construction or expansion of a foundation under an existing dwelling which expands habitable space shall be considered an expansion and shall be subject to the State Plumbing Laws, (Title 30-A, Maine Revised Statues Annotated, Section 4211)requiring new soils documentation. 
4.2.E.2. Discontinuance: Discontinuance of the use of a non-conforming structure shall not constitute abandonment of the structure. Conforming use of the structure may be revived at any time. 
4.2.E.3. Lack of Required Parking or Loading Space: A building or structure which is non-conforming as to the requirements for off-street parking and/or loading space shall not be enlarged, added to or altered unless off-street parking and/or loading space is provided to bring parking and/or loading space into conformance with the requirements of this Ordinance for both the addition or alteration and for the original building or structure or a Variance is obtained. 
4.2.E.4. Relocation: A non-conforming structure may be relocated within the boundaries of the parcel on which the structure is located provided that the site of relocation conforms to all setback requirements. If the site of relocation does not conform to all setback requirements, the Board of Appeals shall determine if the site meets the setback requirements to the greatest practical extent. In either case the applicant shall demonstrate that the present subsurface sewage disposal system meets the requirements of State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules or that a new system can be installed in compliance with the law and said Rules. In no case shall a structure be relocated in a manner that causes that structure to be more non­conforming. In determining whether the building relocation meets the setback to the greatest practical extent, the Board of Appeals shall consider the size of the lot, the slope of the land, the potential for soil erosion, the location of other structures on the property and on adjacent properties, the location of the septic system and other on-site soils suitable for septic systems and the type and amount of vegetation to be removed to accomplish this relocation. 
4.2.E.5. Reconstruction or Replacement: Within the Shoreland Zone, any non­conforming structure which is located less than the required setback from the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream or upland edge of a wetland and which is removed, damaged or destroyed by more than 50% of the market value of the structure before such damage, destruction or removal may be reconstructed or replaced, provided that a permit is obtained within one year of the date of said damage, destruction or removal and provided that such reconstruction or replacement is in compliance with the water setback requirement to the greatest practical extent as determined by the Board of Appeals in accordance with the purposes of this Ordinance. In no case shall a structure be reconstructed or replaced so as to increase its non-conformity. Any non-conforming structure which is damaged or destroyed by 50% or less of the market value of the structure excluding normal maintenance and repair may be reconstructed in place with a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer. In determining whether the building reconstruction or replacement meets the water setbacks to the greatest practical extent, the Board of Appeals shall consider in addition to the criteria in paragraph 4 above, the physical condition and type of foundation present, if any. 
4.2.E.6. Reconstruction or Replacement: Within any area of Special Flood Hazard as established in Article 3.3 reconstruction or replacement shall comply with the provisions of Article 14 of this Ordinance. 
4.2.F. Non-Conforming Lots of Record. 
4.2.F.1. Vacant Lots: A non-conforming vacant lot may be built upon provided that such lot is in separate ownership and not contiguous with any other vacant lot in the same ownership and that all provisions of this Ordinance, except lot size, street frontage or lot width, can be met. Variance of dimensional requirements not involving lot size, street frontage or lot width shall be obtained only by action of the Board of Appeals. 
4.2.F.2. Built Lots: A non-conforming lot that was built upon prior to the enactment or subsequent amendments of this Ordinance is subject to the following restrictions. The structure(s) may be repaired, maintained or improved and may be enlarged in conformity with all dimensional requirements of this Ordinance. If the proposed enlargement of the structure(s) cannot meet the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance, a Variance shall be obtained from the Board of Appeals. 
4.2.F.3. Contiguous Built Lots: 
4.2.F.3.a. If two or more contiguous lots or parcels are in single or joint ownership of record at the time of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, if all or part of the lots do not meet the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance, and if a principal use exists on each lot, the non-conforming lots may be conveyed separately or together providing the State Minimum Lot Size Law and Subsurface Waste Water Disposal Rules are complied with. 
4.2.F.3.b. If two or more principal uses existed on a single lot of record on the effective date of this Ordinance, and if a principal use exists on each lot, the non­conforming lots may be conveyed separately or together providing the State Minimum Lot Size Law and Subsurface Waste Water Disposal Rules are complied with, 
4.2.F.4. Contiguous Lots -Vacant or Partially Built: Subject to applicable state and local requirements, if two or more contiguous lots or parcels are in single or joint ownership of record and were as of March 8, 1986 and continuously since, in the same ownership and if any of those lots do not individually meet  the lot size, street frontage and lot width requirements of this Ordinance, as it may from time to time be amended, such lot or lots if vacant or containing only an accessory structure may be built upon notwithstanding the failure to meet those requirements provided that each buildable lot have a lot size of at least 20,000 sq. ft. The applicant for a building permit on such a lot shall have the burden of proving to the Code Enforcement Officer that the requirements of this section have been met. 
4.2.G. 	Vested Rights. Non-conforming use rights cannot arise by the mere filing a notice of intent to build, an application for building permits or an application for required state permits and approvals. Such rights arise when actual construction has begun or in the case of pending applications, when the review process on a complete application commences. Such construction must be legal at the time it is commenced and the owner must be in possession of and in compliance with all valid issued permits, both state and local. 
ARTICLE 5 -ADMINISTRATION 
5.1 Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer or other person duly qualified and authorized by the Town of Buxton to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance and/or any applicable Ordinance of this Town. If the Code Enforcement Officer shall find that any of the provisions of this Ordinance are being violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for the violations indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall take any other action authorized by this Ordinance to insure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. 

5.2 Legal Action and Violations. 
When any violation of any provision of the Ordinance shall be found to exist, the Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized and directed to institute any and all actions and proceedings either legal or equitable that may be appropriate or necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance, the same to be brought in the name of the Town. This provision shall not prevent any person aggrieved by a violation of this Ordinance from taking appropriate legal action against the violator. 

5.3 Fines. 
Any person, firm or corporation being the owner of or user of any building or premises or a landowner's agent or a contractor who violates any of the provisions hereof shall be fined in accordance with Title 30-A M.R.S.A., Section 4452. Each day such violation exists after notification in writing, sent by certified mail, shall constitute a separate offense. All fines collected hereunder shall inure to the Town of Buxton. 

5.4 Building Permit. 
Except as provided in Section 5.5, no building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to or structurally altered without a permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer. In areas of Special Flood Hazard, as established in Article 3.3, permits shall be issued according to the provisions of Article 14 of this Ordinance, without regard to section 5.5. No building permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance except after written order from the Board of Appeals. All building permits shall be void unless work there under is commenced within six months from the date of issuance. A renewal of the permit shall be required if work is not completed within eighteen (18) months of the date of issuance. Permit may be renewed only upon application with required fees. 

5.5 Minimum Amount. 
No permit shall be required for the construction, alteration, relocation or replacement of any building or part thereof, so long as it conforms with the provisions of the Building Code of the Town of Buxton and this Ordinance to the extent of $1,000 or less in total estimated project value. The burden of proof in regard to this value rests with the property owner. 

5.6 Application for Building Permit. 
5.6.A. All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans clearly showing the lot lines, the size and location of proposed and existing structures. Where applicable, the location of parking areas, subsurface sewage disposal systems, wells, landscaping and signs shall also be shown. Copies of all other 
required permits and surveys (State of Maine, etc…) shall be included for the town 
records. The application shall also include other information as lawfully may be required by the Code Enforcement Officer to determine the conformance with this Ordinance. 
5.6.B. The approval of all building permit applications shall be subject to evidence of compliance with the State Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules and Title 30-A, M.R.S.A., Section 4211. 
5.6.C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall approve or deny an application for a permit within ten working days of receipt of a complete application. 

5.7 Certificate of Occupancy. 
5.7.A. No new building or addition shall be occupied after its construction, alteration or relocation, nor shall a new use be established in an existing building until a Certificate of Occupancy has been issued by the Code Enforcement Officer. Upon notification by the owner or his agent, the Code Enforcement Officer shall, within 72 hours, make proper examination to verify that the work or new use is in compliance with this Ordinance and the Buxton Building Code. If all work is found to be in compliance, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a Certificate of Occupancy. 
5.7.B. Temporary Certificate -The Code Enforcement Officer may issue a temporary Certificate of Occupancy for a period of six (6) months for part of a building or structure, provided that such temporary occupancy or use will not jeopardize health, life or property. Renewal of a temporary Certificate may be issued by the Code Enforcement Officer when the owner or his agent can show reasonable cause. 

5.8 Permit Fees. 
An application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a fee. The Municipal Officers shall establish the fee schedule each calendar year. 
ARTICLE 6 -BOARD OF APPEALS 
6.1 Appointment and Composition. 
The Municipal officers shall appoint a Board of Appeals consisting of five (5) members all of whom shall be residents of Buxton. The terms of members shall be three (3) years except that initial appointments shall be at least three (3) years and not more than five (5) years such that the terms of office of no more than two (2) members shall expire in any single year. The Board shall elect annually a Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Secretary from its membership. Neither a Municipal Officer nor his or her spouse may be a member of the Board. A quorum shall consist of three (3) members and all questions shall be decided by majority vote. 

6.2 Powers and Duties. 
The Board shall hear appeals from actions or failure to act of the Code Enforcement Officer. The Board shall have the following powers and duties. 
6.2.A. Administrative and Interpretive Appeal. Where it is alleged that an administrative or interpretive error has been made by the Code Enforcement Officer in the enforcement of this Ordinance, the actions of the Code Enforcement Officer may be affirmed, modified or reversed by the Board. The Board may also affirm, modify or set aside the action or decision of the Planning Board in administering Article 8 of this Ordinance. The Board of Appeals' jurisdiction shall be limited to administrative matters. Appeals involving conditions imposed by the Planning Board or a decision to grant or deny approval shall be directed to Superior Court. 
6.2.B.Variance Appeals. The Board may grant a Variance only from the terms of this Ordinance which impose restrictions on height, buildable area, lot coverage, lot size or setback and only where strict application of those terms to the petitioner and his property would cause undue hardship to the petitioner, owing solely to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of actions of the petitioner. A financial hardship shall not constitute grounds for granting a Variance. The crucial points for obtaining a Variance are undue hardship and unique circumstances applying to the property, neither of which are the results of actions taken by the applicant or a prior owner. A Variance shall not be granted unless all four elements contained in the definition of undue hardship in Article 2 are presented to the Board. In granting Variance appeals, the Board may prescribe such conditions and safeguards as are appropriate under the Ordinance. In areas of Special Flood Hazard, as established in Article 3.3, permits shall be issued according to the provisions of Article 14 of this Ordinance, without regard to section 5.5. 
6.2.B.1. Notwithstanding the above requirements and the definition of undue hardship in Article 2, the Board may grant a Variance to a property owner for the purpose of making that property accessible to a person with a disability who is living on the property. The Board shall restrict any Variance granted under this paragraph solely to the installation of equipment or the construction of structures necessary for access to or egress from the property by the person with the disability. The Board may impose conditions on the Variance, including limiting the Variance to the duration of the disability or to the time that the person with the disability lives on the property. For the purposes of this paragraph, a disability has the same meaning as a physical or mental handicap under Title 5 MRSA, Section 4553 and the term "structures necessary for access to or egress from the property" is defined to include railing, wall or roof systems necessary for the safety or effectiveness of the structure. 
6.2.B.2. Notwithstanding the above requirements and the definition of undue hardship in Article 2, the Board may grant a setback or yard width Variance for a single family dwelling without the need for the Board to determine that the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless the Variance is granted. When considering a request for a Variance under this paragraph the Board shall in addition to determining the remaining three aspects of undue hardship are met, determine that granting the Variance will not substantially reduce or impair the use of abutting property and that granting the Variance is based upon demonstrated need, not convenience and no other feasible alternative is available which meets the setback requirements. A Variance granted under this paragraph is strictly limited to those from setback and yard width requirements for single family dwelling that is the primary year-round residence of the applicant. A Variance granted under this paragraph may not exceed 20% of a setback or yard width requirement and may not be granted if the Variance would cause the area of the dwelling to exceed the maximum permissible lot coverage. 
6.2.B.3. If the Board grants a variance under this section, a certificate indicating the name of the current property owner, identifying the property by reference to the last recorded deed in its chain of title and indicating the fact that a variance, including any conditions on the variance, has been granted and the date of the granting, shall be prepared in recordable form. The applicant is responsible for the recording of this certificate in the York County Registry of Deeds within 90 days of the date of the final written approval of the variance or the variance is void. The variance is not valid until recorded as provided in this subsection. For the purpose of this subsection, the date of the final written approval shall be the date stated on the written approval. Added June 15, 2002 

6.3 Appeal Procedure. 
6.3.A. The Chairman shall call hearings of the Board as required. The Chairman shall also call hearings of the Board when requested to do so by a majority of the members or by the Municipal Officers. The Chairman, or in his absence, the Vice-Chairman shall preside at all hearings of the Board and be the official spokesman of the Board. 
6.3.B. The Secretary shall maintain a permanent record of all Board hearings and all correspondence of the Board.  The Secretary shall be responsible for maintaining those records which are required as part of the various proceedings which may be brought before the Board. All records to be maintained or prepared by the Secretary are deemed public and shall be filed in the municipal clerk's office and may be inspected at reasonable times. 
6.3.C. Notification of an appeal shall be filed with the Board in writing on forms provided for that purpose. The specific grounds for the appeal shall be set forth on the application. The application shall be accompanied by a fee of $50.00 to cover the Town's cost of notification and advertisements. Prior to the Public Hearing, the applicant shall pay any additional costs over the $50.00. The Board shall hold a Public Hearing within thirty days of receipt of an application. 
6.3.D. The Board shall reasonably notify of any hearing, the petitioner, the Code Enforcement Officer, the Planning Board and Municipal Officers, and such persons shall be made parties to the action. The Board shall notify by certified mail all owners of property abutting the property for which an appeal is taken of the nature of the appeal and the time and place of the hearing thereon. Owners of property shall be considered to be those against whom taxes are assessed. Failure of any property owner to receive such notice of hearing shall not necessitate another hearing nor invalidate any action by the Board. The Board shall publish a notice of appeal at least once in newspaper of general circulation in the area at least seven days prior to the hearing. 
6.3.E. Every party shall have the right to present his case or defense by oral or documentary evidence, to submit rebuttal evidence and to conduct such cross-examinations as may be required for a full and true disclosure of the facts. 
6.3.F. The transcript of testimony, if any, and exhibits together with all papers filed in a proceeding shall constitute the record. All decisions shall be made within thirty (30) days of the hearing and shall become a part of the record and shall include a statement of findings and conclusions as well as the reasons or basis therefore, upon all the material issues of fact, law or discretion presented and the appropriate order, relief or denial thereof. Notice of the Board's decision shall be mailed or hand delivered to the petitioner, his representative or agent, the Code Enforcement Officer, the Planning Board and the Municipal Officers within seven 
(7) days of such decision. A copy of all Variances granted by the Board of Appeals within the shoreland zone shall be submitted to the Department of Environmental Protection within fourteen (14) days of the decision. 
6.3. G.An appeal from any order, relief or denial of the Board of Appeals may be taken by any party to Superior Court in accordance with the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 80B. 
ARTICLE 7 -AMENDMENTS 
7.1 Initiation of Amendment. 
An amendment to this Ordinance shall be initiated by: 
7.1.A. The Planning Board provided a majority of the Board has so voted; 
7.1.B. Request of the Municipal Officers to the Planning Board; In such case, the Planning board shall review and comment on the proposed amendment prior to the Public Hearing, which shall be held as required; or 
7.1.C. Written petition of a number of voters equal to at least ten percent (10%) of the number of votes cast in the municipality at the last gubernatorial election. 
7.1.C.1 Petitioners shall be responsible for the publication costs of all legal notices required for the change requested and shall, prior to the Public Hearing, pay to the Town Clerk the estimated cost for publication. 

7.2 Hearing. 
The Planning Board shall hold a Public Hearing on the proposed amendment at least fifteen (15) days prior to the meeting of the governing body. Notice of the hearing shall be given at a time and method current with state statues. The Planning Board shall report its recommendations to the meeting of the governing body. (Amended 6/11/13) 

7.3 Repetitive Petitions. 
No proposed change in this Ordinance which has been unfavorably acted upon by the governing body shall be considered on its merits by the governing body within one (1) year after the date of such unfavorable action unless adoption of the proposed change is recommended by unanimous vote of the Planning Board. 

7.4 Effective Date of Amendments. 
Except as provided as follows, amendments to this Ordinance shall take effect when enacted by the governing body unless the warrant otherwise specifies. Copies of amendments which affect the shoreland zone, attested and signed by the Municipal Clerk, shall be submitted to the Department of Environmental Protection following adoption by the governing body and shall not be effective unless approved by the Department of Environmental Protection. If the Department of Environmental Protection fails to act on any such amendment within forty-five (45) days of the Department's receipt of the amendment, the amendment is automatically approved. Any application for a permit submitted to the municipality within the forty-five day period shall be governed by the terms of the amendment, if such amendment is approved by the Department. 
ARTICLE 8 -CONDITIONAL USES 
8.1 Procedures. 
8.1.A. The Planning Board is hereby authorized to hear and decide upon applications for Conditional Uses in accordance with State Law and the provisions of this Ordinance. The Planning Board shall hear and approve, approve with conditions or disapprove an application for Conditional Use. No Conditional Use shall be authorized unless specific provision for such Conditional Use is made in this Ordinance and unless all requirements of this Ordinance have been shown to be met. 
8.1.B. A use which is a Conditional Use and which existed prior to the effective date of this Ordinance may not be expanded, altered or changed to another Conditional Use without submitting an application to the Planning Board. All uses must be in conformity with all regulations of this Ordinance pertaining to Conditional Uses.  Amended 6/18/05 
8.1.C. A person informed by the Code Enforcement Officer that he requires a Conditional Use Permit shall file an application for the permit with the Planning Board on forms provided for the purpose. 
8.1.D. The Planning Board shall hold a Public Hearing within thirty (30) days of the submission of a completed application. The applicant shall pay a fee of $50.00 to cover the Town's cost of notification and advertisements. Prior to the Public Hearing, the applicant shall pay any additional costs over the $50.00. 
8.1.E. All procedures for notification, advertising, conduct of the hearing and deliberations of the Board shall be as required in Section 6.3 except for the purposes of this Section, the word "appeal" shall mean "application for the Conditional Use". 
8.1.F. Upon notification of the decision of the Planning Board, the Code Enforcement Officer, as instructed, shall immediately issue, issue with the conditions prescribed by the Planning Board or deny a Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy as appropriate. 
8.1.G. A Conditional Use Permit secured under the provisions of this Section shall expire if the work or change involved has not commenced within one year of the date on which authorization is given. 
8.1.H. An Appeal may be taken within thirty days after a decision is rendered by the Planning Board. Appeals of administrative procedures only shall be taken to the Board of Appeals. All other appeals shall be directed to Superior Court. 

8.2 Factors Applicable to Conditional Uses. 
8.2.A. In considering an application for a Conditional use, the Planning Board shall evaluate the immediate and long-range effects of the proposed use. For applications in the Shoreland Zone, in addition to meeting criteria in Section 8.2.B. below, the applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed use will: 
8.2.A.1. Maintain safe and healthful conditions. 
8.2.A.2. Not cause water pollution, erosion or sedimentation. 
8.2.A.3. Not have an adverse impact on spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life, bird or other wildlife habitat. 
8.2.A.4. Conserve shore cover and visual as well as actual access to water bodies. 
8.2.A.5. Protect archaeological and historic resources as designated in the Comprehensive Plan. 
8.2.B.The applicant shall present adequate evidence, where appropriate, in order for the Planning Board to find that: 
8.2.B.1. The proposed use will not adversely affect the value of adjacent properties. The proposed use will not have a significant detrimental effect on the use and peaceful enjoyment of adjacent properties as a result of noise, vibrations, fumes, odor, dust, glare or other cause. 
8.2.B.2. Access to the site from existing and proposed roads is safe and adequate. The proposed use will not cause or aggravate undue traffic congestion. 
8.2.B.3. Any proposed development is in conformance with all flood hazard protection regulations as outlined in Article 14. 
8.2.B.4. Adequate provision for the disposal of all waste water and solid waste has been made. 
8.2.B.5. Adequate provision for the transportation, storage and disposal of any hazardous materials has been made. 
8.2.B.6. A storm water drainage system capable of handling a 25 year storm without adverse impact on adjacent properties has been designed. 
8.2.B.7. An erosion and sedimentation control plan has been prepared by a qualified professional source. 
8.2.B.8. There is adequate water supply to meet the demands of the proposed use and for fire protection purposes. 
8.2.B.9. That all performance standards in this Ordinance, applicable to the proposed use will be met. 

8.3 Conditions Attached to Conditional Uses. 
8.3.A. Upon consideration of the factors listed above, the Planning Board may attach such conditions, in addition to those required elsewhere in this Ordinance, that it finds necessary to further the purposes of this Ordinance. Violation of any of these conditions shall be a violation of this Ordinance. Such conditions may include but are not limited to specifications for: type of vegetation; increased setbacks and yards; specified sewage disposal and water supply facilities; landscaping and planting screens; period of operation; operational controls; professional inspection and maintenance; sureties; deed restrictions; restrictive covenants; location of piers, docks, parking and signs; type of construction; or any other conditions necessary to fulfill the purposes of this Ordinance. 
8.3.B. In order to secure information upon which to base its determination, the Planning Board may require the applicant to furnish, in addition to the information required for a Conditional Use Permit, the following information: 
8.3.B.1. A plan of the area showing contours at intervals to be determined by the Planning Board and referred to Mean Sea Level, high water elevation, groundwater conditions, bedrock, slope and vegetative cover. 
8.3.B.2. A soils report identifying the soils boundaries and names in the proposed development with the soils information superimposed upon the plot plan in accord with the USDA Soil Conservation Service National Cooperative Soil Classification. 
8.3.B.3. Location of existing and proposed buildings, parking areas, traffic access, driveways, walkways, piers, open spaces and landscaping. 
8.3.B.4. Plans of buildings, sewage disposal facilities and water supply systems. 
8.3.B.5. Other pertinent information necessary to determine if the proposed use meets the provisions of this Ordinance. In evaluating each application, the Planning Board may request the assistance of the Regional Planning Commission, County Soil and Water Conservation District and any other state and federal agency which can provide technical assistance. 
8.3.B.6. A comprehensive Signage Plan that includes signage details indicating size, materials, anchorage and power and lighting. The plan shall identify any free-standing signs and indicate dimensional off-sets from property lines. The plan shall identify any building-attached signs and include scaled building elevations with proposed signage indicated. 

8.4 Performance Guarantees. 
8.4.A.At the time of approval of the application for Conditional Use, the Planning Board may require the applicant to tender either a certified check payable to the Town or a performance bond payable to the Town issued by a surety company in an amount adequate to cover the total costs of all required improvements taking into account the time-span of the bond and the effects of inflation upon costs. The conditions and amount of the certified check or performance bond shall be determined by the Board of Selectmen, Planning Board and Public Works Directors with advice from the Town Attorney. 
8.4.B. Performance guarantees, when required, shall be tendered for all improvements required under this Ordinance, including but not limited to sidewalks, drainage facilities, parking areas, lighting, signs, landscaping and buffer areas. 
8.4.C. Prior to the release of any part of or the entire check or bond the Planning Board shall determine to its satisfaction, in part upon the report of the engineer hired by the Town to inspect the development and whatever other agencies and departments may be involved, that the proposed improvements meet or exceed the design and construction requirements for that portion of the improvements for which the release is requested. Any interest accumulated on an escrow account shall be returned with any money owed by the Town to the applicant after it has been determined that the proposed improvements meet all design and construction requirements. 
8.4.D. If the appointed engineer finds upon inspection of the improvements performed before release of the guarantee that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with plans and specifications filed by the applicant, he shall so report to the Planning Board and Code Enforcement Officer. The Planning Board shall then notify the applicant and if necessary, the bonding company and take all necessary steps to preserve the Town's rights under the bond. 
8.4.E. At least five days prior to commencing construction of required improvements, the applicant shall pay an inspection fee equal to two percent (2%) of the cost of the required improvements, payable by check to the Town and stating the purpose of the fee. The applicant shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer in writing of the time when he proposes to commence construction of the improvements so that the Code Enforcement Officer can cause inspections to be made to assure that all municipal specifications and requirements are met during the construction of required improvements and to assure the satisfactory completion of improvements and utilities required by the Board. If the inspection costs amount to less than the fee collected, the surplus shall be returned to the applicant when inspections are completed. 
ARTICLE 9 -DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
9.1 Village District (V). 
These are areas where units of residential, commercial and municipal activities currently exist and are to be encouraged in the future, to provide for the continuation of Buxton's Village centers and provide economies in providing municipal services. 

9.2 Residential District (Res). 
These are areas which will not be sewered and therefore will provide for residential development at a lower density in a rural environment. 

9.3 Rural District (Ru). 
It is the intent of this Ordinance to protect the natural rural quality of the community by prescribing the most appropriate uses and standards. It is proposed that these areas remain in very low density of development in order to prevent future land-use problems. 

9.4 Shoreland Zones (S). 
9.4.A. Shoreland District (S). The purpose of this district is to guarantee the safe and healthful conditions of our water bodies and shoreland areas by preventing and controlling water pollution; protecting spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life, waterfowl, birds, wildlife and wildlife habitat; conserving the natural tree canopy and shore cover along the shoreline; retaining ground vegetation to protect against erosion; providing access (visual as well as actual) to the inland waters and their natural beauty and controlling building sites and land uses. 
This district applies to all land areas within 250 feet horizontal distance of the normal high water mark around Bonny Eagle Pond and along the Saco River. In addition, the Shoreland District shall include the land area within 250 feet horizontal distance of freshwater wetlands as indicated on the Official Zoning Map, and the land area within 75 feet of all streams as defined in Article 2 of this Ordinance. 
The Shoreland District is an overlay zone and all land uses and buildings shall conform to the stricter requirements where there are conflicts between Sections of this Ordinance. (amended June 14, 2011 by secret ballot) 
9.4.B. Resource Protection District (RP). The purpose of this district is to protect environmentally sensitive areas adjacent to water bodies and significant wildlife habitat adjacent to water bodies and wetlands from the impacts of development. 

9.5 Business and Commercial District (BC). 
This district is to provide areas within the Town of Buxton for manufacturing as well as wholesale and retail distribution of products and services and to provide standards for these uses which will produce a healthy, safe environment for the economic well-being of the community. 
9.5A Light Commercial District (LC). 
The Light Commercial District is established to accommodate the daily or frequent shopping and other service needs of the community. In this zone land uses are limited primarily to retail stores, service businesses and light industrial activity. The developer or occupant of any use in the Light Commercial District must take such steps as necessary to minimize adverse effect of such development on neighboring residential properties. Methods of providing such protection will be consistent with the applicable standards in Article 10 and Article 11 of the Buxton Zoning Ordinance and will be discussed with the developer at the pre-application meeting. 

9.6 Lot and Yard Requirements. 
In each district, the division of land and placement of structures shall conform to the 
following table:  
TABLE A. Dimensional Requirements(1)  
Lot Size (sq. ft.)  Village  Res  Rural  BC  LC  
Non Residential  80,000  120,000  200,000  80,000  80,000  
Residential Single Family  80,000(2)  120,000(2)  200,000(2)  80,000(2)  80,000(2)  
Duplex for first Dwelling Unit for each additional Dwelling Unit  80,000 40,000  120,000 60,000  200,000 100,000  n/a n/a  n/a n/a  
Multi-family for first Dwelling Unit for each additional Dwelling Unit  80,000 40,000  120,000 60,000  n/a n/a  n/a n/a  n/a n/a  
Elderly & Low Income Housing for first Dwelling Unit for each additional Dwelling Unit  80,000 20,000  120,000 20,000  200,000 20,000  n/a n/a  n/a n/a  
Buildable Area (sq ft)(2) 40,000(2) Street Frontage(ft) 150 Lot Width(ft) 150 Front Yard(ft) 40 Side Yard(ft)(3) (4) (5) 20 Rear Yard(ft)(4) (5) 20 Shore Frontage(ft) 200  40,000(2) 200 200 40 30 30 200  60,000(2) 250 250 50 50 50 250  40,000 150 150 40 20 20 300  40,000 150 150 40 20 20 300  

(1) 	
All figures are minimum requirements. 

(2) 	
Per dwelling unit. 

(3) 	
Side yards may be reduced to 20% of the frontage but no less than 20 feet for non­conforming lots of record. 


(4) 	For accessory buildings, the CEO shall allow a reduction, but in no case to less than 20 feet, if the following conditions are met: 
1. 
The building is not used to house animals. 

2. 
There will remain a 40 ft. separation of buildings and structures from those on adjoining lots. 

3. 
The accessory building is no larger than 750 sq. ft. and not greater than 18 feet in height. 


(5) For accessory buildings on non-conforming lots of record in existence on the date   of passage of this amendment, October 28, 1989, the CEO shall allow a reduction, but in no case to less than 12 feet, if the following conditions are met: 
1.
 The building is not used to house animals. 

2.
 The Fire Chief has stated in writing that the proposed structure will not cause                    an increased risk of fire hazard considering the proximity of neighboring structures, the construction material to be used and the proposed use of the structure and that adequate room remains elsewhere on the lot for access of emergency equipment as for fire-fighting. 

3. 	
There will remain a 24 foot separation of buildings from those on adjoining lots. 

4. 	
The accessory building is no larger than 750 sq. ft. and not greater than 18 feet in height. 


(6) 	For non-conforming vacant lots which fail to meet the required lot size, the required buildable area shall be computed as follows:  als x ba/ls = rba; where als = actual lot size, ba = buildable area for the district; ls = lot size for the district and use; and rba = required buildable area. (added 11/6/12) 

9.7 Height Restrictions. 
The maximum building height permitted shall be two stories or thirty feet. However, this height requirements shall not apply to farm buildings, flagpoles, chimneys, ventilators, domes, water towers, church steeples, tanks, windmill towers or other structures or building accessory features usually erected at a height greater than the main roofs of buildings provided that such structures or accessory features are not for human habitation or occupancy and further provided that any structure or accessory features higher than thirty feet is set back from all property lines a distance at least equal to its height. 

9.8 Land Use Regulations. 
The Permitted Uses and Conditional Uses for each district are shown on the following Table. Uses similar to Permitted Uses shall be Permitted Uses. Uses similar to Conditional Uses shall be Conditional Uses. Uses similar to Not Permitted Uses shall be Not Permitted Uses. 
9.8.A. All permitted uses which exist or have been issued a Certificate of Occupancy signifying that the Code Enforcement Officer has found the principal use to be in compliance with this Ordinance may also use the lot for accessory uses and may apply for building permits for accessory structures. 
9.8.B. All conditional uses which exist or have been issued a Certificate of Occupancy signifying approval by the Planning Board and compliance with conditions of approval shall apply to the Planning Board for building permits or Certificates of Occupancy for any proposed accessory use or structure. The Board shall treat such secondary applications as if the application were for a Conditional use and follow the procedures and provisions of Article 8. 








In the following table, the symbols have the following meanings: 
P -The use is permitted without Board review (except that approval from the Code Enforcement Officer is required in the BC Zone, -see Section 11.28) in conformance with all applicable performance standards, subject to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. E -Conditional Use, permitted after review and approval by the Planning Board in 
accordance with Article 8.  
N -Use not permitted.  
* -See specific performance standards in Article 11.  
TABLE B -LAND USE  
LAND USE  Ord. Ref  V6  Res  Rur  S  RP  BC6 LC6  
Accessory Dwelling Unit*  11.23  P  P  P  N  N  N  N  
Active Outdoor Recreation*  11.19  E  E  P  P  N  N  E  
Agriculture*  11.1  P  P  P  P  E  P6  P  
Amusement Centers*  11.2  E  N  N  N  N  E6  E  
Animal Husbandry*  11.3  E  E  P/E1  E  E  E6  E  
Auto Repair Garage  (#)  E  N  E  N  N  P6  E  
Auto Service Station  (#)  E  N  N  N  N  P6  E  
Automobile Graveyards & Junkyards (#)  N  N  N  N  N  E  N  
Bar  E  N  N  N  N  P6  P  
Bed & Breakfast  P  E  P  N  N  N  N  
Breakwaters & Causeways*  11.13  N  N  N  P*  E*  N  E  
Bulk Fuel Storage  (#)  E  N  N  N  N  E6  E  
Bus. & Professional Offices(2)  P  N  N  N  N  P6  E  
Bus. & Professional Offices(3)  E  N  N  N  N  E6  E  
Campgrounds*  11.4  N  N  E  E  N  N  E  
Cemeteries  E  E  E  N  N  N  N  
Churches  E  E  E  E  N  E6  N  
Cluster Development*  11.6  P  P  P  P  N  N  N  
Commercial Recreation  E  N  E  N  N  E6  E  
Daycare Facility  E  N  E  N  N  E6  E  
Daycare Home  E  E  E  N  N  E6  E  
Duplexes  P  P  P  P  N  N  N  
Elderly & Low Income Housing *  11.22  E  E  E  N  N  N  N  
Extractive Industry*  11.7, 11.9  N  N  E  N  N  N  N  
Flea Market  N  N  P  N  N  N  N  
Forestry*  11.5, 11.18  P  P  P  P8  P8  P6  P  
Function, Reception or Banquet Hall  E  N  E  N  N  E6  E  
Funeral Homes  E  E  E  N  N  E6  E  
Golf Course  N  N  P  E  N  P6  E  
Home Occupations*  11.10  P  P  P  P  N  P6  P  
Individual Private Campsites*  11.21  P  P  P  P  P  N  E  

Table B. Land Use (continued)  * Ref  V  Res  Ru  S  RP  BC6  LC  
Kennels*  11.11  E  E  E  E  N  E6  E  
Manufactured Housing Units*  11.14  P  P  P  P  N  N  N  
Manufacturing*  11.12  N  N  E  N  N  E6  E  
Marinas*(#)  11.13  N  N  N  E*  N  N  E  
Mechanized Outdoor Recreation*  11.19  N  N  N  N  N  E6  E  
Medical Marijuana Dispensaries*  11.27  N  N  N  N  N  E6  E  
Medical Offices & Clinics  E  E  E  N  N  E6  E  
Mobile Home Parks*  11.15  N  E  N  N  N  N  N  
Motels, Hotels & Inns*  11.16  E  N  N  N  N  E6  E  
Motor Vehicle Sales  N  N  N  N  N  E6  E  
Multi-Family Dwellings*  11.17  E  E  N  N  N  N  N  
Municipal Uses  E  E  E  E  N  E6  E  
Nursing Homes  E  E  E  N  N  N  N  
Passive Outdoor Recreation*  11.19  P  P  P  P4  P4  P6  P  
Personal Service Establishments  P  N  N  N  N  P6  E  
Piers Shorter than 20 ft.*  11.13  N  N  N  P*  P*  N  E  
Private Clubs  E  N  E  E  N  E6  E  
Public & Private Parks  P  P  P  E  E  P  E  
Public Utilities  E  E  E  E  N  E6  E  
Research & Testing Facilities  N  N  E  N  N  E  E  
Restaurants  P  N  E  N  N  P6  E  
Retail Business(2)  E  N  N  N  N  P6  E  
Retail Business(3)  E/N7  N  N  N  N  E6  E  
Schools  E  E  E  N  N  E6  N  
Single Family Dwellings  P  P  P  P  N  N  E  
Small Wind Energy Systems*  11.26  E  E  P  N  N  E6  E  
Spreading/Storage of Sludge & Septage*  11.24  N  N  P  N  N  N  N  
Timber Harvesting*  11.8  P  P  P  P8  P8  P6  P  
Veterinary Clinic  E  N  E  N  N  E6  E  
Warehouses & Outdoor Storage  N  N  N  N  N  E6  E  
Wholesale Business  N  N  N  N  N  E6  E  
Wireless Telecommunications Facility*  11.25  N  N/E5  E  N  N  E6  E  

Footnotes: 
1 Permitted on three acres or more; Conditional Use on less than three acres. 
2 Smaller than 2,000 sq. ft. floor area. 
3 Larger than 2,000 sq. ft. floor area. 
4 Without any structures only. 
5 Not permitted except as conditional use on municipally owned lots larger than 20 acres. 
6 Per Section 11.28, Commercial structures and uses in the BC, LC, and V Zones must conform 

with the Buxton Business and Commercial Zone Design Standards 7 Conditional Use if floor area is not more than 3,000 sq. ft.; Use not permitted if floor area is more 
than 3,000 sq. ft. 
Footnotes Continued: 
8. By repeal of all local provisions that regulate timber harvesting and timber harvesting 
activities in shoreland areas, statewide standards apply pursuant to 38 M.R.S. 438-B # Per Section 10.14.G.  use may not be allowed over aquifer or recharge areas. 

ARTICLE 10 -PERFORMANCE STANDARDS --GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
The following standards shall apply to all uses as appropriate in the various Zoning Districts: 
10.1 Access to Lots. 
10.1.A. No building permit shall be issued to erect any structure on a lot without frontage on a public or private way and such lot is not part of a subdivision as defined in Article 2 of this Ordinance unless an access road meeting the following criteria has been constructed within a deeded right-of-way that is fifty (50) feet in width. Any access road serving more than one unit shall have a road maintenance agreement in place prior to the issuance of a permit for a second dwelling. This agreement shall specify the rights and responsibilities of each lot owner with respect to the maintenance, repair and plowing of the access road The finished surface of the access road shall be constructed to a minimum width of twelve (12) feet for the entire length of the road including its most distant terminus if serving one dwelling unit and fifteen (15) feet for the entire length of the road including its most distant terminus if serving two dwelling units. The access road shall contain a minimum depth of fifteen (15) inches of bank-run gravel and have drainage ditches and culverts at all appropriate points. Such an access road shall serve no more than two dwelling units. Any access road serving three or more dwelling units shall meet the road acceptance regulation of this Ordinance for the entire length of the road including its most distant terminus: (amended June 15, 2002, amended June 14, 2003, Amended June 14, 2008) 
10.1.A.1. No building permit shall be issued to erect a structure which is located more than 100 feet from a public or private way unless an access road meeting the construction standards of Section 10.1.A. has been constructed. Any such access road being more than 500 feet in length shall be provided with a 60 foot backing space at the closed end to permit the turning of emergency vehicles. 
10.1A.2 No Access to any lot is permitted by way of the ends of the hammerhead.  (Amended 6/18/05) 
10.1B Gifted Lots: An access road serving three or more dwelling units on individual lots, such lots having been gifts to persons related to the donor by blood, marriage or adoption need not be paved provided that 
10.1.B.1. The lots and access road must be shown on a plan approved by the Planning Board. The plan must be prepared and signed by a registered professional engineer licensed in Maine and must show the information necessary for the Planning Board to determine if all the standards of the road acceptance regulations, with the exception of paving, have been met. At a minimum, the plan must include a plan, profile and cross-sectional view to scale and materials specified to be used. 
Town of Buxton Zoning Ordinance 10-1 June 17, 2017 Edition 
10.1.B.2. The plan must contain the following notation: "The access road shown on this plan is not dedicated to the Town of Buxton. The responsibility for maintenance and plowing the access road is that of the owners of the lots served by the access road. If the access road is ever proposed for acceptance as a town road or public easement, the owners of the lots served by the access road must construct the road to the then current road construction and/or acceptance standards. Planning Board approval of an amendment to this plan must also be obtained prior to dedication of the access road." 
10.1.B.3. An access road maintenance agreement must be approved by the Planning Board. This agreement shall specify the rights and responsibilities of each lot owner with respect to the maintenance, repair and plowing of the access road. 
10.1.B.4. The individual lots served by the private access road must have at least fifty (50) feet of frontage on the access road and must meet the lot width requirement of the zone in which they are located. 
10.1.B.5. The plan with the above notation and maintenance agreement must be recorded at the York County Registry of Deeds and shall be referenced in the Deed of each lot. 
10.1B.6 No access to any lot is permitted by way of the ends of the hammerhead. (amended6/12/04, amended 6/14/08) 

10.2 Dust, Fumes, Vapors and Gases. 
Emission of dust, dirt, fly ash, fumes, vapors or gases which could damage human health, animals, vegetation or property or which could soil or stain persons or property at any point beyond the lot line of the commercial or industrial establishment creating such emission shall be prohibited. All such activities shall also comply with applicable federal and state laws and regulations. 

10.3 Erosion Control. 
Erosion of soil and sedimentation of watercourses and water bodies shall be minimized by employing the following "Best Management" practices: 
10.3.A. Stripping of vegetation, soil removal and regrading or other development shall be accomplished in such a way as to minimize erosion. 
10.3.B. The duration of exposure of the disturbed area shall be kept to a practical minimum. 
Town of Buxton Zoning Ordinance 10-2 June 17, 2017 Edition 
10.3.C. Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect exposed areas during development. 
10.3.C.1. Where mulch is used it shall be applied at a rate of at least one (1) bale per five hundred (500) square feet and shall be maintained until a catch of vegetation is established. 
10.3.C.2. Anchoring the mulch with netting, peg and twine or other suitable method may be required to maintain the mulch cover. 
10.3.C.3. Additional measures shall be taken where necessary in order to avoid siltation into the water. Such measures may include the use of stacked hay bales and/or silt fences. 
10.3.D. Permanent (final) vegetation and mechanical erosion control measures, in accordance with the standards of the County Soil and Water Conservation District or the Maine Soil and Water Conservation Commission shall be installed as soon as possible after construction ends. 
10.3.E. Until a disturbed area is stabilized, sediment in run-off water shall be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps or other acceptable methods as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer. 
10.3.F.  The top of a cut or the bottom of a fill section shall not be closer than twenty 
(20) feet to an adjoining property unless otherwise specified in this Ordinance or specified by the Planning Board or Code Enforcement Officer. 
10.3.G. During grading operations, methods of dust control shall be employed wherever practicable. 
10.3.H. On slopes greater than 25% there shall be no grading or filling within 100 feet of the normal high water mark except to protect the shoreline and prevent erosion. 

10.4 Explosive Materials. 
All flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored in a manner and location which is in compliance with appropriate rules and regulations of the Maine Department of Public Safety and other appropriate federal and state regulations. 

10.5 Construction in Flood Hazard Areas. 
Town of Buxton Zoning Ordinance 10-3 June 17, 2017 Edition 
In those areas designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as being within the 100 year floodplain, as identified in the Flood Insurance Study and on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps adopted in Section 3.3, the provisions of Article 14 of this ordinance shall apply. 
10.5.A. through 10.5.I. Deleted 

10.6 Noise. 
Excessive noise at unreasonable hours shall be muffled so as not to be objectionable due to intermittence, beat frequency, shrillness or volume. 
10.6.A. 	The maximum permissible sound pressure level of any continuous, regular or frequent source of sound produced by any activity regulated by this Ordinance shall be as established by the time period and type of Land Use District listed below. Sound pressure levels shall be measured at all major lot lines at a height of at least four (4) feet above the ground surface. 
Sound Pressure Level Limits 
Measured in dB(A)'s: 
7am-8pm  8pm-7am  
Business-Commercial District  60  50  
Other Districts  55  45  

10.6.A.1. The levels specified may be exceeded by 10dB(A) for a single period, no longer than 15 minutes in any one day. 
10.6.A.2. Sound from any source controlled by this Ordinance shall not exceed the above limits at the lot line of the "receiving" property. 
10.6.A.3. Where the emitting and receiving premises are in different zones, the limits governing the stricter zone shall apply to any regulated noise entering that zone. 
10.6.B. Noise shall be measured with a sound level meter meeting the standards of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI SI.4A 1985) "American Standard Specification for General Purpose Sound Level Meters". The instrument shall be set to the A-weighted response scale and the meter to the slow response. Measurements shall be conducted in accordance with ANSI S1.4 -1983 "American Standard Method for the Physical Measurements of Sound". (Amended 6/16/2007) 
Town of Buxton Zoning Ordinance 10-4 	June 17, 2017 Edition 
10.6.C. No person shall engage in, cause or permit any person to be engaged in loud construction activities on a site abutting any residential use between the hours of 8 pm of one day and 7 am of the following day.  Construction activities shall be subject to the maximum permissible sound level specified for industrial districts for the periods within which construction is to be completed pursuant to any applicable building permit. The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the sound pressure level regulations: 
10.6.C.1. Home maintenance activities (for example: mowing lawns, cutting one's 
own 
firewood, etc.) 

10.6.C.2. Noises created by construction and maintenance activities between 7am and 8pm. 
10.6.C.3. The noises of safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure 
relief 
valves and any other emergency activity. 

10.6.C.4. Traffic noise on existing public roads, railways or airports. 
10.6.C.5. Noise created by refuse and solid waste collection, provided that the activity is conducted during daytime hours. 
10.6.C.6. Emergency construction or repair work by public utilities shall also be exempted at any hour. 
10.6.C.7. Noise created by any recreational activities which are permitted by law and for which a license or permit has been granted by the Town, including but not limited to, parades, sporting events, concerts and fireworks displays. 
10.6.C.8.  Existing industrial noise sources which are in operation at the time of the Ordinance enactment shall be provided a permanent ten dB (A) noise level allowance over noise levels otherwise required herein. 

10.7 Off-Street Parking and Loading. 
10.7.A. General. 
10.7.A.1. 	A permitted use in any district shall not be extended and no structure shall be constructed or enlarged unless off-street automobile parking space is provided in accordance with the following schedule. 
10.7.A.2. An area of 300 square feet shall be considered sufficient for each automobile parking space including room for maneuvering and turning. Parking 
Town of Buxton Zoning Ordinance 10-5 	June 17, 2017 Edition 
areas with more than 2 spaces shall be so arranged that it is not necessary for vehicles to back into the street. 
10.7.A.3. No off-street parking area shall have more than 2 openings onto the same street, each opening not to exceed 26 feet in width. 
10.7.A.4. Required off-street parking for all land uses shall be located on the same lot as the principal building or facility or within 100 feet measured along lines of access. Where residential off-street parking cannot reasonable be provided on the same lot, the Planning Board may authorize its provision on another lot within 300 feet of the residential uses. Such parking areas shall be held under the same ownership or lease, as the residential uses served and evidence of such control or lease shall be required. 
10.7.A.5. Off-street parking and loading spaces for non-residential uses where not enclosed within a building shall be effectively screened from view by a continuous landscaped area not less than 6 feet in height unless waived by the Planning Board for expressed reasons along exterior lot lines adjacent to residential properties and all public roads, except that driveways shall be kept open to provide visibility for entering and leaving. No off-street parking and loading shall be permitted within the front setback or any setback adjoining a public street except as specifically authorized in this Ordinance, unless waived by the Planning Board. 
10.7.A.6. Exterior lighting shall neither create glare nor shine into any residential use or street. 
10.7.A.7. The Planning Board may approve the joint use of a parking facility by two or more principal buildings or uses where it is clearly demonstrated that said parking facility would substantially meet the intent of the requirements by reasons of variation in the probable time of maximum use by patrons or employees of such establishments. 
10.7.A.8. Parking areas shall meet the shoreline setback requirements for structures as specified in Section 11.20A. The setback requirement for parking areas serving public boat launching facilities may be reduced to no less than fifty 
(50) feet from the normal high-water line or upland edge of a wetland if the Planning Board finds that no other reasonable alternative exists 
10.7.B. Additional Requirements for Commercial and Industrial Establishments. 
The Planning Board may waive any of the following requirements based on evidence presented by the developer that public health, safety and welfare is best served by a design other than one that conforms to all of the following requirements: 
Town of Buxton Zoning Ordinance 10-6 June 17, 2017 Edition 
10.7.B.1. Access points from a public road to commercial and industrial operations shall be so located as to minimize traffic congestion and to avoid generating traffic on local access streets of a primarily residential character. 
10.7.B.2. All parking areas shall be located off the street so that vehicles can be turned around within such areas without backing into the street. 
10.7.B.3. All parking areas, driveways and other areas subject to vehicular traffic shall be paved with bituminous concrete or an equivalent surfacing over a gravel sub-base at least 6" in thickness and shall have appropriate bumper or wheel guards where needed. 
10.7.B.4. All driveway entrances and exits shall be kept free from visual obstructions higher than three (3) feet above street level for a distance of 25 feet measured along the intersecting driveway and street lines in order to provide visibility for entering and leaving vehicles. 
10.7.B.5. All parking and loading areas shall be located at the side or rear of the principal building. 
10.7.B.6. Loading facilities shall be located entirely on the same lot as the building or use to be served so that trucks, trailers and containers shall not be located for loading or storage upon any town way. Specific loading requirements are listed below: 
10.7.B.6.a. The following minimum off-street loading bays or berths shall be provided and maintained in the case of new construction, alterations and changes of use: 
10.7.B.6.a.1. Office buildings, hotels and motels with a gross floor area of more than 100,000 square feet require one (1) bay. 
10.7.B.6.a.2. Retail, wholesale, warehouse and industrial operations with a gross floor area of more than 5,000 square feet require the following: 
5,001 to  40,000 sq. ft.  1 bay  
40,001 to 100,000 sq. ft.  2 bays  
100,001 to 160,000 sq. ft.  3 bays  
160,001 to 240,000 sq. ft.  4 bays  
240,001 to 320,000 sq. ft.  5 bays  
320,001 to 400,000 sq. ft.  6 bays  

10.7.B.6.a.3. Each 90,000 square feet over 400,000 square feet requires one 
(1) additional bay. 
Town of Buxton Zoning Ordinance 10-7 June 17, 2017 Edition 
10.7.B.6.a.4. No loading docks shall be on any street frontage. Provisions for handling all freight shall be on those sides of any buildings which do not face on any street or proposed streets. 
10.7.C. 	Parking Lot Design Criteria (Not applicable to single family dwellings and duplexes). 
10.7.C.1. Vehicular Entrance and Exit. 
10.7.C.1.a. 	Entrances and exits should be clearly identified by the use of signs, curb cuts and landscaping. 
10.7.C.1.b. Entrance/exit design shall be in conformance with the standards of the Maine Department of Transportation for size, location, sight-distance, grade separation and possible future changes in highway alignment on any affected public roads. 
10.7.C.2. Interior Vehicular Circulation. 
10.7.C.2.a. Major interior travel lanes should be designed to allow continuous and uninterrupted traffic movement. 
10.7.C.2.b. Painted arrows and/or elevated signs should be used as necessary to define desired circulation patterns. 
10.7.C.2.c. Customer/employee and service traffic should be separated to the greatest extent possible. 
10.7.C.2.d. One-way travel lanes may be used as a traffic control device in conjunction with roadway dividers. 
10.7.C.2.e. Enclosures such as guardrails, curbs, fences, walls and landscaping should be used to identify circulation patterns of parking areas and to restrict driving movements diagonally across parking aisles but not to reduce visibility of oncoming pedestrians and vehicles. 
10.7.C.3. Parking. 
10.7.C.3.a. Access to parking stalls should not be from major travel lanes and shall not be immediately accessible from any public way. 
Town of Buxton Zoning Ordinance 10-8 	June 17, 2017 Edition 
10.7.C.3.b. Parking areas shall be designed to permit each motor vehicle to proceed to and from the parking space provided for it without requiring the moving of any other motor vehicles. 
10.7.C.3.c. Parking aisles should be oriented perpendicular to stores and businesses for easy pedestrian access and visibility. 
10.7.C.3.d. All parking spaces and access drives shall be at least five (5) feet from any side or rear lot line except for the additional requirements in buffer yards. 
10.7.C.3.e.  Lighting of parking areas may be required at the discretion of the Planning Board. All artificial lighting used to illuminate any parking space or spaces shall be shielded and directed in a manner which prevents excessive illumination levels, prevents glare on nearby streets and sidewalks, and prevents light spilling across the property lines. Amended 
6/14/08 
10.7.C.3.f. Parking stalls and aisle layout shall conform to the below standard 

Stripes should be a minimum of 4" in width.  Where double lines are used they should be separated by a minimum of 1'0" on center. 
10.7.C.3.h. In aisles utilizing diagonal parking, arrows should be painted on the pavement to indicate proper traffic flow. 
10.7.C.3.i. Bumpers and/or wheel stops should be provided where overhang of parked cars might restrict traffic flow on adjacent through roads, restrict pedestrian movement on adjacent walkways or damage landscape materials. 
Town of Buxton Zoning Ordinance 10-9 June 17, 2017 Edition 
10.7.D. Parking spaces shall be provided to conform with the number required in 
the following schedule: 


Activity 
Residential & Elderly or Housing 
Tourist home, boarding, for lodging house, motel, hotel, inn 
Church 
Schools: 
Primary 
Secondary 
Post-Secondary 

Daycare Home facility & Daycare Facility 
Private Clubs or lodges 
Theater, Auditorium, Public Assembly 
Funeral Homes 
floor space 


Activity (cont.) 
Medical Care Facilities 
Minimum Required Parking 
2 spaces per dwelling unit with 2 
more bedrooms. 1 1/2 spaces per dwelling unit with 1 bedroom 
1 space per room/unit rental and each employee on the largest shift 
1 space per three seats based upon maximum seating capacity 
1 1/2 spaces per classroom 
8 spaces per classroom 
1 space for each student and 1 
space for each facility and staff 
member 
1 space for every 2 children the or home is licensed to care for 
1 space per every seventy-five (75) square feet of floor space. 1 space per three seats based upon maximum seating capacity 
1 space for every 100 square feet of 
Minimum Required Parking (cont.) 
1 space for every three (3) beds 
and every two (2) employees on 
the maximum working shift 
Offices & Banks 1 space for every 150 square feet floor space 
Town of Buxton Zoning Ordinance 10-10 June 17, 2017 Edition 
Medical Offices 10 spaces for each doctor, dentist or (MD's, OD's, Dentists) other medical practitioner 
Veterinarian Clinic, Kennel 	5 spaces per veterinarian 
Retail & Service businesses 	1 space for every 150 square feet of floor space 
Barber/Beauty shop 	4 spaces per chair 
Restaurant 	1 space per three seats based upon maximum seating capacity. 
Industrial businesses 	1 space per employee on the Maximum working shift 
Warehouse, wholesale 	1 space per 500 square feet of floor area business 
Flea Market 	3 spaces per table 
Automobile repair garages 	5 spaces for each bay or area used for repair work and gasoline filling stations 
Library, Museum, Art Gallery 	1 space for each 150 square feet of floor space 
Marina 	1 space for each boat slip and mooring 
Commercial recreation 1 space for each 100 square feet of facility, fitness spa floor area 

Activity (cont.) 	Minimum Required Parking (cont.) 
Mixed use 	Total of individual uses. 
Notes: 
1. 	Where the calculation of the aforementioned parking spaces results in a fractional part of the complete parking space, the parking spaces required shall be construed to be the next highest number. 
Town of Buxton Zoning Ordinance 10-11 	June 17, 2017 Edition 
2. 	
The above are minimum standards and additional parking spaces shall be required if these prove to be inadequate. 

3. 	
Where floor space is to be used in calculating the number of required parking stalls, gross floor space shall be used unless otherwise noted. 


10.7.E. Access Control. 
Lots in single ownership lying along Routes 202, 4 and 4A may be divided into lots but all vehicular movements to and from the highway shall be via a single common driveway or entranceway serving all lots or premises so created. All lots of record existing at the time of ordinance amendment shall be allowed one direct access to Routes 202, 4 and 4A provided that minimum safe sight-distance standards (below) can be met. Exceptions for a second entrance/exit for a large parking lot may be granted by the Planning Board provided that the two access points are not closer than 500 feet and that they both meet the minimum sight-distance standards (below). 
Types of Roadway from which Access is granted 
Minimum Safe Sight-Distances 
Posted Speed Limit (mph) 30 35 40 45 50 55 
Passenger Cars 300' 350' 400' 450' 500' 550' 
Single-Unit Trucks 415' 475' 540' 600' 675' 750' 
Tractor-Trailers 530' 615' 700' 840' 975' 1100' 

Note: Where it is impossible to meet these sight-distance standards due to physical conditions, a maximum variance of 30% may be permitted. (The 30% variance is consistent with the absolute minimum stopping distance requirement on wet pavements established by the Maine Department of Transportation). 
10.7.F. 	Landscape. Parking lots shall be landscaped with a continuous border of shrubbery along all lot-lines abutting residential properties according to the buffering standards in 10.10.A. Large parking lots shall be provided with at least one tree (of 2”-2 ½” caliper) for every 35 car spaces (4 trees per acre) to be located at representative points throughout such lots. All parking or outdoor storage areas shall be separated from any public road by a landscaped buffer strip at least 15 feet wide planted with shade trees (minimum 2” – 2 ½" caliper planted at least every 50 feet along the road frontage) and dense medium height shrubs (three feet in height on maturity to screen parked vehicles). All such plantings shall be maintained as an effective visual screen. Shrubs or trees which die shall be replaced within one growing season. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Planning Board 
Town of Buxton Zoning Ordinance 10-12 	June 17, 2017 Edition 
may waive planting for purposes of visual screening along the frontage of property located within the Business Commercial, Village and Light Commercial zones. 
10.8 Preservation of Landscape. The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state insofar as practical by minimizing tree removal and any grade changes shall be in keeping with the general appearances of neighboring developed areas. 
10.9 Refuse Disposal. 
The disposal of all solid and liquid wastes shall be provided for on a timely basis and in an environmentally-safe manner. The impact of the disposal of industrial or chemical wastes or by-products on groundwater and surface water quality shall be considered by the Planning Board and Code Enforcement Officer in reviewing applications for Planning Board approvals and building permits. The disposal of such wastes shall be made at an environmentally-acceptable location and shall be in accordance with all applicable local, state and federal requirements. 

10.10 Setbacks and Screening. 
10.10.A. Exposed storage areas, exposed machinery, sand and gravel extraction operations and areas used for the storage or collection of discarded automobiles, auto parts, metals or any other articles of salvage or refuse shall have sufficient setbacks and screening (such as a stockade fence or a dense evergreen hedge 6 feet or more in height) to provide a visual buffer sufficient to minimize their impact on other land uses and properties in the area. 
10.10.B. Where a potential safety hazard to children would be likely to arise, physical screening sufficient to deter small children from entering the premises shall be provided and maintained in good condition. 

10.11 Signs. 
All signs, unless complying with the Maine Traveler Information Services Act, shall relate to goods and services available on the premises or the occupants of the premises on which the sign is located and shall be located within the bounds of the property upon which the business is located. 
10.11.A. Residential uses in any district may display a single sign, not over six (6) square feet in area, attached to a building or detached and located in the front yard. 
Town of Buxton Zoning Ordinance 10-13 June 17, 2017 Edition 
10.11.B. 	In the Village district, any non-residential use may display a sign, attached to the building or free standing. However, only one free-standing sign shall be permitted per lot and one attached sign per use. No sign shall measure larger than twenty 
(20) square feet in area. No free-standing sign shall be higher than 20 feet above the road level nor closer than the height of the sign from any side or rear property line. Attached signs shall not be placed on the roof of a building. 
10.11.C. 	In the Business-Commercial & Light Commercial districts any non-residential use may display a sign, attached to the building. Such signs shall be no larger than the 10% of the total building face area, to a maximum of 120 square feet. Only one free standing sign shall be permitted per lot. No freestanding sign shall measure larger than eighty (80) square feet per side in area. No freestanding sign shall be higher than 20 feet above the road level nor closer than the height of the sign from any side or rear property line. Attached signs shall not be placed on the roof of building. 
10.11.C.1 In 	the Business-Commercial & Light Commercial districts any non­residential use shall be permitted to have, in addition to a freestanding sign, one monument sign at a secondary entrance to the lot, if the lot has frontage and separate entrances on two or more public roads.  Any such monument sign shall be 
(i) located on a different public road, and not closer than 400 feet, form the freestanding sign, (ii) not larger than 40 square feet per side in area, (iii) not higher than 10 feet above the road level, and (iv) not closer than 10 feet from any side or rear property line. 
10.11.D. 	In all other districts, churches, schools and other non-residential uses may display a sign not over twelve square feet in area. 
10.11.E. 	Signs may be illuminated only by shielded, non-flashing lights and shall not cast glare onto any residential premises. 
10.11.F. The above regulations shall not apply to the following: 
10.11.F.1. 	Flags and insignia of any government. 
10.11.F.2. Legal notices, identification, information or directional signs erected or required by governmental bodies. 
10.11.F.3. Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, except letters, trademarks, moving parts or moving or flashing Light. 
Town of Buxton Zoning Ordinance 10-14 	June 17, 2017 Edition 
10.11.F.4. Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on private property but bearing no advertising matter. 
10.11.G 	All signs shall be measured in the most reasonable geometric shapes that encompass the letters and/or logo. 
10.11.H 	No new internally lit or electronic signs shall be located in the Rural or Residential zones. 

10.12 Soil Suitability. 
In all districts, the approval of building permit applications shall be subject to evidence of satisfactory subsurface soil conditions for drainage and sewage disposal and where on-site waste water disposal is proposed, shall be subject to presentation of a completed site evaluation form (HHE-200) which evidences adequate soil conditions for sewage disposal prior to issuance of a building permit. 
Prior to approval of any subdivision with seven or more lots or dwelling units the Planning Board may require a hydrogeologic assessment prepared by a Certified Geologist or Registered Professional Engineer experienced in hydrogeology, if in the opinion of the Board after review of both Table 8-2 and the Ground Water Special Features map in Part I of the Buxton Comprehensive Plan adopted June 8, 1991, the proposed residential density exceeds the recommended residential density for the soil type. The hydrogeologic assessment must include a projection of post development nitrate-nitrogen concentrations at any well(s) within 500 feet of the development and at the development's property lines. No development may increase the level of nitrate-nitrogen to more than one-half of the Primary Drinking Water Standard. If the pre-development level of nitrate-nitrogen in the ground water is in excess of the Primary Standard, the applicant will demonstrate how water quality will be improved or treated.. 

10.13 Storm Water Management. 
Surface water run-off shall be minimized and detained on-site if possible. If it is not possible to detain water on-site, downstream improvements may be required of the developer to minimize off-site impacts. The natural state of watercourses, swales, floodways or existing rights-of-ways and easements shall be maintained as nearly as possible. Storm water management systems and components shall be designed to accommodate a twenty-five storm. ( Amended June 15, 2002) 
Town of Buxton Zoning Ordinance 10-15 	June 17, 2017 Edition 

10.14 Water Quality. 
No activity shall locate, store, discharge or permit the discharge of any treated, untreated or inadequately treated liquid, gaseous or solid materials of such nature, quality, obnoxiousness, toxicity or temperature that run-off, seep, percolate or wash into surface or groundwater so as to contaminate, pollute or harm such waters or cause nuisances such as objectionable shore deposits, floating or submerged debris, oil or scum, color, odor, taste or unsightliness or be harmful to human, animal, plant or aquatic life. 
The Planning Board may require an Aquifer Impact Study if in the opinion of the Board a subdivision poses a danger to a Prime Aquifer or recharge area as shown on the Prime Aquifer Map contained in the Comprehensive Plan adopted on June 8, 1991. Before the Planning Board may approve the proposed subdivision the Board must have determined that the subdivision will not adversely affect the quality or quantity of the ground water in the aquifer. 
To determine this, the Planning Board may require submittal by the applicant of an Aquifer Impact Study. This study must be prepared by a State of Maine Certified Geologist with experience in Hydrogeology. The study must contain the following components unless waived for a specific stated reason by a vote of the Planning Board. 
10.14.A. A map showing the soil types, the surficial geology on the property, the recommended sites for individual subsurface waste water disposal systems and wells in the development and the direction of ground water flow. 
10.14.B. The relation of surface drainage conditions to ground water conditions. 
10.14.C. Documentation of existing ground water quality on the site. 
10.14.D. A nitrate-nitrogen analysis and other contaminant analysis as applicable including calculations of levels at the property lines and well(s) on the site. 
10.14.E. A statement indicating the potential sources of contamination to ground water from the proposed use or development and recommendations as to the best technology or method to reduce the contamination. 
10.14.F. For water intensive uses, analysis of the effects of aquifer draw down on the quantity and quality of water available for other water supplies or potential water supplies. 
Town of Buxton Zoning Ordinance 10-16 June 17, 2017 Edition 
10.14.G. A list of assumptions made to produce the required information. 
The Planning Board may require installation and regular sampling of water quality monitoring wells for any use deemed to be a significant actual or potential source of pollutants or excessive draw down. The number, location and depth of monitoring wells must be determined as part of the Aquifer Impact Study and wells must be installed and sampled in accordance with "Guidelines for Monitoring Well Installation and Sampling" (Tolman, Maine Geologic Survey, 1983). Water quality sample results from monitoring wells must be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer with evidence showing that contaminant concentrations meet the performance standards for pollution level. 
On a Prime Aquifer or recharge area as shown on the Prime Aquifer Map contained in the Comprehensive Plan adopted June 8, 1991, there may be no disposal of other than normal domestic wastewater on-site without approval of the Planning Board. Disposal of wastewater must be in strict compliance with Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules and other relevant state and local laws, rules and ordinances. Any use or development which proposes to use or store hazardous materials, wastes or other liquids with the potential to threaten ground water quality must have water tight, concrete floors with water tight, concrete dikes adequate to contain the largest quantity of liquid on site at any time. 
The following uses are not allowed in the areas shown as Prime Aquifers or recharge areas on the Prime Aquifer Map contained in the Comprehensive Plan adopted June 8, 1991. Auto Service Stations, Auto Repair Garages, Cemeteries, Bulk Fuel Storage, Automobile Graveyards and Junkyards and Marinas. 
When the boundaries of the Prime Aquifers or recharge areas are disputed, the applicant must submit hydrogeologic evidence to support the claim and the change of the boundaries. The evidence must be prepared by a geologist certified in the State of Maine. 

10.15 Archaeological/Historic Sites. 
Any proposed development involving structural development or soil disturbance on or adjacent to sites listed on, or eligible to be listed by, the National Registry of Historic Places or the Buxton/Hollis Historical Society, or listed in the Comprehensive Plan shall be submitted by the applicant to the Maine Historic Preservation Commission and the Buxton/Hollis Historic Society for review and comment at least 20 days prior to action being taken by the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall consider comments received from the Commission and Society prior to rendering a decision on the application. 
Town of Buxton Zoning Ordinance 10-17 June 17, 2017 Edition 
10.16Lighting: 
In all zoning districts all outdoor lighting shall be located, shielded and directed in a manner which prevents excessive illumination levels, prevents glare on nearby streets and sidewalks, and prevents light trespass beyond the property lines. 

10.17 Fire Protection 
10.17.A – PURPOSE: The purpose of this Fire Protection performance standard is to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of Buxton by establishing fire protection measures for residential and commercial occupancies. The performance standard will facilitate 
the following initiatives: 
10.17.A.1. Providing people with protections against fire and its byproducts, in new and renovated buildings in the Town of Buxton, while providing valuable time during a fire for a personal escape. 
10.17.A.2. Ensuring the reasonable protection and safety of firefighters against building collapse and other effects of fires. 
10.17.A.3. Assisting the town in its pursuit of lowering taxpayer’s insurance costs, by 
reducing the communities Insurance Services Office Fire Suppression Rating. 
10.17.A.4. Assist the fire-rescue department in the implementation of a fire inspections program to insure continued compliance with adopted fire safety codes. 
10.17.B – NFPA CODE ADOPTION: 
The Town of Buxton adopts by reference the latest edition of all National Fire Protection Association codes formally adopted by the State of Maine, and those life safety codes 
referenced within this section of the Town of Buxton’s Zoning Ordinance. 
In addition, the Town adopts by reference the latest edition of the National Fire Protection Associations NFPA 1142: Standard on Water Supplies for Suburban and 
Rural Fire Fighting, as referenced in the Town of Buxton’s Zoning Ordinance ARTICLE 
13 Sufficient Water, Subsection 5.K.1c. 
Wherever the words “authority having jurisdiction” are used in an adopted life safety 
code, they shall be held to mean the Chief of the Buxton Fire-Rescue or his or her duly authorized representative. 
Town of Buxton Zoning Ordinance 10-18 June 17, 2017 Edition 
10.17.C – PLANS REVIEW: The Fire-Rescue Chief or designee shall review all plans for new construction, renovation, and additions, to all Buildings within the Town of Buxton, including one or two family residential development that is part of a subdivision that is subject to Article 13, Section 13.5.K.1.c., but excluding other one or two family residential development. 
10.17.D – PERMIT REQUIRED FOR MANDATORY AND VOLUNTARY SPRINKLER SYSTEMS: 
10.17.D.1. Any sprinkler system, whether complete or partial and whether required to be installed by this Performance Standard or elected to be installed voluntarily, that is installed, extended, modified or altered in a structure in the Town of Buxton must be an Approved Automatic Sprinkler System.  When any other applicable Performance Standard, code, regulation, rule or statute requires installation of an automatic sprinkler system, it must be installed pursuant to the provisions of the Performance Standard. 
10.17.D.2. A permit must be obtained from the Fire-Rescue Chief, or designee, before the start of construction or modification of the Approved Automatic Sprinkler System. A set of blue prints showing the entire sprinkler system and the rate of flow, and containing the approval of a licensed fire protection engineer who is licensed or certified to approve sprinkler system designs in residential or commercial buildings, shall be provided to the Fire-Rescue Chief, or designee, when the permit is obtained. A fee of $25.00 shall be charged for the permit, and shall be payable to the Town of Buxton. The Fire-Rescue Chief or his designee shall review and approve the system in accordance with the provisions of this Performance Standard. A copy of the permit shall be forwarded to the Code Enforcement Office.  
10.17.D.3. No Certificate of Occupancy for a building with a sprinkler system shall be issued until the Approved Automatic Sprinkler System has been properly installed, tested and approved by the Fire-Rescue Chief, or designee. The test papers from the installer shall be forwarded to the Fire-Rescue Department upon completion of the system and prior to issuing the Certificate of Occupancy. 
10.17.E -REQUIREMENT FOR AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEM IN NON­RESIDENTIAL OR MULTI FAMILY RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CONSTRUCTION: 
10.17.E.1 	New Construction: An Approved Automatic Sprinkler System must be installed in all areas of all new non-residential buildings or multi-family dwellings meeting any or all of the following criteria: 
Town of Buxton Zoning Ordinance 10-19 	June 17, 2017 Edition 
a. 
Three or more stories in height; 

b. 
36 or more feet in height; 

c. 
150,000 cubic feet in volume or 10,000 square feet in floor area; 

d. 
Multiple family dwellings or new construction of 3 or more multiple occupant dwelling and/or lodging Units of Occupancy which are attached to one another, whether vertically or horizontally, in a configuration of three or more units. Examples include, but not limited to, multiplex housing, condominium units, garden apartments, hotels, motels, boarding homes and lodging houses, or any residential unit attached horizontally, or vertically to a commercial or industrial unit; 

e. 
Mixed occupancy – mixed occupancies shall be defined as any Building containing two or more Units of Occupancy of different occupancy classifications while in the same structure and that share any common egress; or 

f. 
Non-residential Units of Occupancy which are attached to one another, whether vertically or horizontally, in a configuration of three or more units. 


10.17.E.2. Changes of Occupancy: In any Building or structure, whether necessitating physical alteration or not, a change from one occupancy classification to another, or from one occupancy sub classification to another sub classification of the same occupancy, shall be permitted only if such structure, building, or portion thereof conforms with the requirements of the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code and this Performance Standard applying to new construction for the purpose of new use. This section complies with the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code as adopted by the Town of Buxton and State of Maine. 
10.17.E.3. Renovations: When a non-residential building or multifamily dwelling is enlarged, altered, or renovated, an Approved Automatic Sprinkler System must be installed in the enlarged, altered, or renovated portion if, as a result of the enlargement, alteration, or renovations, the building as a whole will meet any of the criteria listed in 10.17.E.1, or if the renovation is equal to or greater than fifty percent (50%) of the current building value as shown on the assessment records of the Buxton Tax Assessor. When the area and/or volume of such enlarged, altered, or renovated portion, together with the area and/or volume of any other enlargements, alterations, or renovations occurring since the effective date of this Performance Standard, exceeds 25% of the area and/or volume of the building existing on the 
Town of Buxton Zoning Ordinance 10-20 June 17, 2017 Edition 
effective date of this Performance Standard, then an Approved Automatic Sprinkler System must be installed. 
10.17.E.4. When an existing Building containing 3 or more Units of Occupancy is enlarged, altered or renovated and the enlarged, altered, or renovated portion, together with the area and/or volume of any other enlargements, alterations, or renovations occurring since the effective date of this Performance Standard, does not exceed 25% of the area and/or volume of the building existing on the effective date of the Performance Standard, then an Approved Automatic Sprinkler System is not required. When the area and/or volume of such enlarged, altered, or renovated portion, together with the area and/or volume of any enlargements, alterations, or renovations occurring since the effective date of this Performance Standard, exceeds 25% of the area and/or volume of the Building existing on the effective date of this Performance Standard, then an Approved Automatic Sprinkler system must be installed in the entire Building. 
10.17.E.5. When a new Unit of Occupancy is created in or added to an existing Building, an Approved Automatic Sprinkler system must be installed in the entire Building if, as a result of the creation of the new Unit, the Building as a whole will meet any of the criteria of 10.17.E.1. 
10.17.E.6. For the purpose of determining whether an Approved Automatic Sprinkler System must be installed under this subsection 10.17.E, the term “building” shall include any garage, out-building or other accessory structure to a non-residential building or multifamily dwelling covered under this subsection, but portions of buildings separated from other portions by a firewall shall not be 
considered a separate building. And the term “Unit of Occupancy” means any 
interior space with defined boundaries described in a deed, lease, license or agreement in which a discreet business, residential living unit, commercial, office, service, professional institutional, or industrial or industrial activity by interior or exterior walls. 
10.17.F – SPRINKLER SYSTEM INSTALLATION AND TESTING REQUIREMENTS – ALL SYSTEMS: 
10.17.F.1. Any installation, extension, modification or alteration of an Approved Automatic Sprinkler System within the Town of Buxton must be done by a State of Maine Licensed Sprinkler Installer. 
Town of Buxton Zoning Ordinance 10-21 June 17, 2017 Edition 
10.17.F.2. Any Approved Automatic Sprinkler System that is installed, that contains twenty (20) or more sprinkler heads, or the modifications of an existing approved automatic sprinkler system, which includes twenty (20) additional 
sprinkler heads, must have the plans approved by the State Fire Marshal’s Office. 
10.17.F.3. Any building containing a sprinkler system shall have a yearly test completed on the system by a qualified sprinkler technician. A written copy of the yearly test report shall be forwarded to the Fire-Rescue Chief’s Office. The Fire-Rescue Chief or his designee shall be notified before such test, alterations, or additions are started. 
10.17.F.4 The Owner and/or Sprinkler Permit holder of any occupied and unoccupied commercial buildings or multifamily dwellings portions thereof having a sprinkler system in place, shall be jointly and severally liable to maintain all sprinklers and standpipe systems and all component parts in a workable condition at all times, and it shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant to reduce the effectiveness of the protection these systems provide, except that this shall not prohibit the owner or occupant from temporarily reducing or discontinuing the protection where necessary for the purpose of conducting test, repairs, alterations, or additions, provided that the test, repairs, alterations, or additions are done in such a way as to avoid the creation of a safety hazard. 
10.17.G – NON-RESIDENTIAL AND MULTIFAMILY SYSTEM STANDARDS: An Approved Automatic Sprinkler System in a non-residential building or multifamily dwelling must conform to the following provisions: 
1. 	It must include a tamper switch alarm (an electric switch on a sprinkler valve that transmits a signal to the fire alarm control panel if the normal position of the valve is changed) at the system shut off, that sends a message through the 
automatic fire alarm system when the systems’ status is changed (Open vs. 
closed). 
2. 	
It must include a flow switch alarm (an electric tamper switch that is activated by water moving through a pipe in a sprinkler system) that shall activate an approved alarm system, which will transmit to a Central Station (an off-premises facility that monitors alarm systems and is responsible for notifying the fire department of an alarm), who will immediately contact Buxton Dispatch when they receive an alarm from the monitored location. 

3. 	
It must include an audible and visual alarm notification device for the building that will sound when the sprinkler system is activated. The 


Town of Buxton Zoning Ordinance 10-22 	June 17, 2017 Edition 
activation alarm shall be audible throughout the entire structure in accordance with latest adopted edition of NFPA 72: National Fire Alarm and Signaling Code. 
4. 	
It must include an outside water flow alarm. 

5. 	
It must not include any butterfly valves. 

6. 	
It must include sprinkler heads above and below ceilings, and in all areas with great than a 6 inch vertical void, and a 24” inch or greater connecting horizontal space. 

7. 	
Any Building having more than one sprinkler riser shall have the risers separately zoned and wired to a local Fire Alarm Control Panel to provide zone identification upon activation. 

8. 	
The Fire Alarm Control Panel must be located as near as possible to the main entry/exit door. There must also be a building map located at the Fire Alarm Control Panel showing each zone. 

9. 	
A lock box or boxes must be provided outside the structure at locations designated by the Fire Department on any buildings regulated hereunder, containing a key to allow the Fire Department access to all areas of the Building. 

10. 
Any structure requiring the installation of a NFPA 13, 13R, 13D, or Maine Life Safety System must have a Fire Department Connection (FDC) where a 


pumping apparatus hooks to a building’s sprinkler/standpipe system to 
supply water during suppression efforts. Its location and signage shall be approved by the Fire-Rescue Chief or designee. The FDC shall be kept clear of any obstruction such as bushes, grass, or debris, by the building owner, year around. Except as otherwise provided in 10.17.H of this Performance Standard, the FDC shall be a 4 inch Storz connection, with cap and chain. 
10.17.H -SPRINKLER SYSTEMS FOR RESIDENTIAL ONE AND TWO FAMILY HOMES: An Approved Automatic Sprinkler System in a single family or two family dwelling, or accessory structure thereto must comply with the following provisions: 
1. 	The Approved Automatic Sprinkler System must be an NFPA 13D, 13R or Maine Life Safety automatic sprinkler system. All areas of the building will have sprinkler coverage, with the following exceptions: 
Town of Buxton Zoning Ordinance 10-23 	June 17, 2017 Edition 
a. 	
Closets as allowed under 13D or 13R unless they are used for laundry room or storage of flammable liquids. 

b. 	
Attics – when the attic is not boarded over, has no stairway or ladder leading to the attic, and the scuttle hole is not bigger than 24” X 24” or 576 square 


inches, and the attic is not used for storage and that at least two (2) smoke detectors, hard wired, into the other detectors in the house are placed in the attic. 
c. 	Attached garages, if there is no living area above or in the garage space and a two-hour firewall is placed between the house and garage. 
2. 	
The sprinkler system is not required to be monitored by an outside source. However, an electric alarm bell located on the outside of the building is required. Where a Multipurpose Residential Sprinkler System is used there is no requirement for an alarm bell. 

3. 	
A single two and one half inch (2 ½) FDC is to be placed on the outside of the building, in a location readily accessible to fire department personnel. Where a Multipurpose Residential Sprinkler System is used there is no requirement for an FDC. 

4. 	
The requirements for fire protection within a residential subdivision are found in the Town of Article 13, Section 13.5.K.1.c. 


10.17.I -FIRE SAFETY INSPECTIONS: The Fire-Rescue Chief or designee shall inspect all commercial, business, board and care, educational, medical, mercantile, daycare, and town owned occupancies twice per year for the purposes of ascertaining, and causing to be corrected, any conditions liable to cause fire, contribute to the spread of fire, interfere with firefighting operations, or endanger life or any violations of the provisions or intent of NFPA 101 Life Safety Code, or NFPA 1 Fire Code. 
10.17.J -RAPID ENTRY SYSTEM: All new Units of Occupancy as defined in 10.17.E.6, or occupancies that have changed occupancy type, or have been renovated, in a manner that requires Planning Board review, shall be required to install rapid entry system boxes (Knox) as determined by the Fire-Rescue Chief, allowing rapid entry by emergency responders during emergencies. Single one and two family dwellings are exempt from this requirement. (Fire Protection Enacted June 13, 2015) 
Town of Buxton Zoning Ordinance 10-24 	June 17, 2017 Edition 
ARTICLE 11 -PERFORMANCE STANDARDS, SPECIFIC ACTIVITIES AND LAND USES 



11.1 Agriculture. 
Within the Shoreland Zone all agricultural activities shall meet the following standards: 
11.1.A. All spreading or disposal of manure shall be accomplished in conformance with the “Manure Utilization Guidelines” published by the Maine Department of Agriculture Food and Rural Resources, in November 1, 2001. amended 6/18/05 
11.1.B. There shall be no new tilling of soil within one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high water line of Bonny Eagle Pond; within seventy five (75) feet, horizontal distance, from other water bodies; nor within twenty five (25) feet, horizontal distance of tributary streams and wetlands. Operations in existence on the effective date of this Ordinance and not in conformance with this provision may be maintained. 
11.1.C. Where soil in excess of 20,000 square feet lying either wholly or partially within the Shoreland District is tilled, such tillage shall be carried out in conformance with the provisions of a Conservation Plan which meets the standards of the State Soil and Water Conservation Commission and is approved by the appropriate Soil and Water Conservation District. The number of the plan shall be filed with the Planning Board. Non-conformance with the provisions of such Conservation Plan shall be considered to be a violation of this Ordinance. 

11.2 Amusement Centers. 
11.2.A. In addition to the automobile parking spaces required in Section 10.7.D., all amusement centers shall provide facilities for the parking of bicycles. Bicycle racks shall be located off the sidewalk or other pedestrian way and away from automobile traffic lanes. A minimum of one bicycle space for every two amusement devises shall be provided. 
11.2.B. Restroom facilities for the patrons shall be provided on the premises. 

11.3 Animal Husbandry. 
When permitted as a Conditional Use, animal husbandry shall meet the following standards: 
11.3.A. All pasture, barns, barnyards and other areas where the livestock, animals or fowl are kept, housed, fed or cared for shall be a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from the nearest dwelling other than the applicant's. 
11.3.B. All uncovered manure shall be kept 150 feet from the nearest dwelling other than the applicant's and 300 feet from any body of water or well. Manure shall not be stored or stockpiled within one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, of Bonny Eagle Pond, or within seventy five (75) feet, horizontal distance, of other water bodies, tributary streams or wetlands. Within five (5) years of the effective date of this Ordinance (March 8, 1986), all manure storage areas within the Shoreland zone must be constructed or modified such that the facility produces no discharge of effluent or contaminated storm water. Existing facilities which do not meet the setback requirement may remain but must meet the no discharge provision within the above five (5) year period. 
11.3.C. All feed and grain shall be stored in rodent proof containers. 
11.3.D. All paddocks, pastures, barnyards or other enclosures must be adequately fenced to contain livestock, animals or fowl. 
11.3.E. The Planning Board shall limit the number and species of animals permitted. The Board shall consider the size and layout of the lot, the size of adjacent lots, the presence of vegetative screening and buffer strips and the potential for noise, odor and vermin problems. 
11.3.F. After the effective date of this Ordinance, newly established livestock grazing areas shall not be permitted within one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high water line of a great pond classified GPA, within seventy five (75) feet, horizontal distance, of other water bodies, nor within twenty five (25) feet, horizontal distance, of tributary streams and wetlands. Livestock grazing associated with ongoing farm activities and which are not in conformance with the above setback provisions may continue, provided that such grazing is conducted in accordance with a Soil and Water Conservation Plan. 

11.4 Campgrounds. 
Campgrounds shall conform to the minimum requirements imposed under State licensing procedures and the following shall apply (in cases of possible conflict, the stricter rule shall apply): 
11.4.A. General. 
11.4.A.1. A campground must be constructed on at least ten acres of land and all camping units or structures shall be located at least 200 feet from any residence (except residences belonging to the campground owners). 
11.4.A.2.  Campsites shall be laid out or screened in such a manner that none are within view from public roads, navigable rivers, existing residences or approved subdivision lots. Any combination of evergreen planting, landscaped earthen berms or solid fencing may be used to achieve this screening standards when campsites would otherwise be visible from the locations described above. 
11.4.A.3. The management of campgrounds shall be responsible for operating their premises in accordance with all Town codes and ordinances and all State laws and regulations. The maintenance of all open spaces, areas, roads and utilities in a campground shall be the responsibility of the management. 
11.4.A.4. A time limit is placed on the occupancy of any one camping space on a continuing basis as follows: Twelve weeks for the period May 15 to September 15 of each year and two weeks for all other time. Only camping units such as defined herein (plus a towing vehicle) shall be permitted within any camp ground, temporarily or otherwise. 
11.4.A.5. No trailers other than such as are recreational vehicles as defined in Article 2 shall be permitted within any campground, temporarily or otherwise. No camping unit shall be stored or exhibited for sale for commercial purposes within the park, 
11.4.A.6. Tent sites and sites for recreational vehicles (RV's) shall be laid out so that the density on each developed acre of land does not exceed the standards below (in terms of sites per acre of land excluding circulation roads). Land supporting wetland vegetation and land below the normal high water line of a water body shall not be included in calculating the land area of the campground. 
Non-Shoreland  Shoreland Area  
Tent sites  14 per acre  8 per acre  
RV sites  11 per acre  7 per acre  

11.4.A.7. Any site intended for the placement of a recreational vehicle, tent or shelter, which has frontage on a water body, or wetland shall have a minimum frontage along the shoreline of one hundred (100) feet.  The areas intended for placement of a recreational vehicle, tent or shelter and utility and service buildings shall be set back a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from the normal high water line of Bonny Eagle Pond and seventy five (75) feet from the normal high water line of other water bodies, tributary streams or the upland edge of a wetland. 
11.4.B. Parking and Circulation. 
11.4.B.1. A minimum of two hundred (200) square feet of off street parking plus maneuvering spaces shall be provided for each recreational vehicle, tent or shelter site. Recreational vehicles shall be so parked in spaces that: 
11.4.B.1.a. There shall be a minimum of 25 feet between vehicles. 
11.4.B.1.b. There shall be a minimum of 45 feet between all recreational vehicles and tents and all public rights-of-way located inside the boundaries of the trailer park or campground. 
11.4.B.2. Vehicular access shall be provided onto a hard surfaced road adequate for the volume and type of traffic likely to be generated. Grades and sight-distances specified in the town's subdivision regulations shall be observed in designing all intersections.  Roads shall be constructed of at least 12" of bank-run (no stone larger than 4"), 2" of crushed gravel (1/2" chips) and two applications of liquid asphalt (1/2" gallon per square yard each application). 
11.4.C. Health and Safety. 
11.4.C.1. Each recreational vehicle, tent or shelter site shall be provided with a picnic table and trash receptacle. Within a maximum of one hundred and fifty 
(150) feet from each campsite there shall be a container capable of storing the amount of refuse that the camping area for which it was designed could generate in one week. The park management shall dispose of refuse from said containers by transporting the refuse from said containers in a closed truck or in enclosed containers or bags to an approved disposal area at least once a week. 
11.4.C.2. A campground shall provide water and sewage systems, sanitary stations and convenience facilities in accordance with the regulations of the State Plumbing Code and the State of Maine Department of Human Services. In no case shall less than one toilet, lavatory and shower be provided for each sex for every ten camping and tent sites. All recreational vehicle sites shall be equipped with water and sewage hook-ups connected to approved distribution or disposal systems. 
11.4.C.3. Fire extinguishers capable of dealing with both electrical and wood fires shall be kept in all service buildings. A suitable ingress and egress shall be provided so that every campground may be readily serviced in emergency situations. Twenty-four (24) hour emergency communication service (e.g., telephones) shall be provided. 
11.4.C.4. The campground shall provide a water supply adequate for fire safety purposes. The Planning Board may require the construction of storage ponds and dry hydrants. 
11.4.D. Planning and Review. 
11.4.D.1. Roads, parking, campsites and required facilities shall be planned in accordance with the basic principles outlined below and shall be shown on the proposed plan which is submitted for review and approval as a Conditional Use: 
11.4.D.1.a. A logical sequence of entry and circulation should be created: entrance, administration and storage, parking, campsites, toilets and laundry, playing fields or shoreline. 
11.4.D.1.b. Campsites should be clustered in groups according to intensity of use (low density, medium density, etc.) and also related to common support services areas (laundries, play areas, etc.) serving a number of campsite clusters. The purpose is to minimize road length, increase accessibility and preserve open space. 
11.4.D.1.c. Footpaths and roads should follow "desire lines" of pedestrian and vehicular movement between campsites and all jointly used facilities. Parking areas may be grassed reinforced with open concrete blocks. 
11.4.D.1.d. Access roads shall be laid out as loops to the greatest extent that is practicable, although "cul-de-sacs" or "dead-ends" may be allowed to serve up to 20 campsites. 
11.4.D.2. A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan meeting the standard of the York County Soil and Water Conservation District or the Maine Soil and Water Conservation Commission shall be submitted. In addition to data on soils, slopes and drainage, a vegetation map showing the following items may be required: 
11.4.D.2.a. The major types of vegetation should be identified and described (as to age, height, openness or density and pattern--either natural or reforested). 
11.4.D.2.b. New planting should be selected to provide screening and shelter, to tolerate existing and proposed site conditions and to blend compatibly with existing natural vegetation. 
11.4.D.2.c. All vegetative clearing should avoid creating straight-line edges between 
open land and surviving stands. 
11.4.D.2.d. Areas of activity and/or traffic should be sited to avoid wildlife areas (such as thickets for birds and small mammals or deer yards and trails). 

11.5 Clearing of Vegetation in the Shoreland Zone. 
11.5.A. In the Resource Protection District, the clearing of vegetation shall be limited to that which is necessary for uses expressly authorized in that district. 
11.5.B. In the Shoreland District, except to allow for the development of permitted uses within a strip of land extending one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, inland from the normal high water line of Bonny Eagle Pond and seventy five 
(75) feet, horizontal distance from any other water body, tributary stream or the upland edge of a wetland, a buffer strip of vegetation shall be preserved as follows: 
11.5.B.1. There shall be no cleared opening greater than 250 square feet in the forest canopy as measured from the outer limits of the tree crown. However, a footpath not to exceed ten feet in width as measured between tree trunks is permitted provided that a cleared line of sight to the water through the buffer strip is not created. Adjacent to Bonny Eagle Pond, the width of the footpath shall be limited to six feet. 
11.5.B.2. Selective cutting of trees within the buffer strip is permitted provided that a well distributed stand of trees and other vegetation is maintained. For the purposes of this Section, a "well-distributed stand of trees and other vegetation" adjacent to Bonny Eagle Pond shall be defined as maintaining a rating score of 12 or more in any 25 foot by 25 foot square (625 square feet) area as determined by the following rating system. 
Tree at 4 1/2 feet Above Ground Level (inches)  Points  
2 -4 in.  1  
4 -12 in.  2  
12 in.  4  

Adjacent to other water bodies, tributary streams and wetlands, a "well distributed stand of trees and other vegetation" is defined as maintaining a minimum rating score of 8 per 25 foot square area. Notwithstanding the above provisions, no more than 40% of the total volume of trees four (4) inches or more in diameter, measured at 4 1/2 feet above ground level may be removed in any ten (10) year period. 
11.5.B.3. In order to protect water quality and wildlife habitat, adjacent to Bonny Eagle Pond, existing vegetation under three feet in height and other ground cover shall not be removed except to provide for a footpath or other permitted uses as described in paragraphs 2 and 2a above. 
11.5.B.4. Pruning of tree branches on the bottom 1/3 of the tree is permitted. 
11.5.B.5. In order to maintain a buffer strip of vegetation, when the removal of storm damaged, diseased, unsafe or dead trees results in the creation of cleared openings, these openings shall be replanted with native tree species unless existing new tree growth is present. 
The provisions contained in paragraph 2 above shall not apply to those portions of public recreational facilities adjacent to public swimming areas. Cleared areas, however, shall be limited to the minimum area necessary. 
11.5.C. Within the Shoreland Zone, at distances greater than one hundred 
(100) feet horizontal distance, from Bonny Eagle Pond and seventy five (75) feet horizontal distance from the normal high water line of any other water body, tributary streams or the upland edge of a wetland except to allow for the development of permitted uses, there shall be permitted on any lot in any ten year period, selective cutting of not more than 40% of the volume of trees four inches or more in diameter, measured 4 1/2 feet above ground level. Tree removal in conjunction with the development of permitted uses shall be included in the forty (40) percent calculation. For the purposes of these standards, volume may be considered to be equivalent to basal area. 
In no event shall cleared openings for development, including but not limited to, principal and accessory structures, driveways and sewage disposal areas exceed in the aggregate 25% of the lot area or ten thousand (10,000) square feet, whichever is greater, including land previously developed. This provision shall not apply to the General Development of Commercial Fisheries/Maritime Activities District. 
11.5.D. Cleared openings legally in existence on the effective date of this Ordinance may be maintained but shall not be enlarged, except as permitted by this Ordinance. 
11.5.E. Fields which have reverted to primarily shrubs, trees and other woody vegetation shall be regulated under the provisions of this section. 

11.6 Cluster Development. 
11.6.A. Purpose. 
11.6.A.1. The purpose of these provisions is to allow for new concepts of housing development where variations of design may be allowed provided that the net residential density shall be no greater than is permitted in the district in which the development is proposed. 
11.6.A.2. Notwithstanding other provisions of this Ordinance relating to dimensional standards, the Planning Board in reviewing and approving proposed residential developments located in the Town may modify said provisions related to dimensional standards to permit innovative approaches to housing and environmental design in accordance with the following standards. This shall not be construed as granting variances to relieve hardship. 
11.6.B. Basic Requirements for Cluster Developments. 
11.6.B.1. Cluster developments shall meet all requirements for a subdivision, the street acceptance ordinance and all other applicable Town ordinances including the Performance Standards of Article 10 of this Ordinance. 
11.6.B.2. Each building shall be an element of an overall plan for site development. Only developments having a total site plan for structures will be considered. The developer shall illustrate the placement of the buildings and the treatment of spaces, paths, roads, service and parking and in so doing shall take into consideration all requirements of this section and of other relevant sections of this Ordinance. 
11.6.B.3. The maximum net residential as defined herein, allowable in cluster developments shall be calculated on the basis described in the table below. For example, all of the "well drained" and "moderately well drained" land may be included in the density calculations plus half of the "poorly drained" land when not on public sewer. 
Land Which May be Included as "Suitable Land" when Calculating Net Residential Density 
Excessively  Poorly  Very  Slopes  Borrow  
drained, Well  drained and  Poorly  Greater  Pits  
drained and  somewhat  drained*  than 20%  

Moderately  poorly  
well drained*  drained*  
100%  50%  -0­ -0­ 33%  

*Soil classification by U.S.D.A. Natural Resources Conservation Service. All "poorly" and "very poorly" drained soils are unsuitable for on-site sewage disposal under the Maine Subsurface Waste Water Disposal Rules. (amended 6/13/09 and 6/18/11) 
11.6.B.3.A. The developer shall provide the Planning Board with a copy of a medium intensity soil survey covering the site. If on-site inspection or test pit logs indicate the likelihood of poorly or very poorly drained soils on the site, the Planning Board may request that high intensity soil survey be completed for the project site. 
11.6.B.3.B. The developer shall provide the Planning Board with a Class A Cluster Subdivision Map.  
11.6.B.4. In order to determine the maximum number of dwelling units permitted on a tract of land, the total acreage allowed to be included in net density calculations (according to the table) less the land needed for roads (including shoulders and drainage ditches) shall be divided by the minimum lot size required in the district. The extent of soil types in the six categories listed in the table shall be certified by a Registered Soil Scientist licensed in the State of Maine on a high intensity soil survey map. No building shall be constructed on soil classified as being "very poorly" drained. 
11.6.B.5. Unless a community sewage collection and treatment system is provide no lot shall be smaller in area than 40,000 square feet. 
11.6.B.6. The total area of common land within the development shall equal or exceed the sum of the area by which any building lots are reduced below the minimum lot area normally required in the district. 
11.6.B.7. Every building lot that is reduced in area below the amount normally required should abut such common land for a distance of 50 feet or be within 1,000 feet walking distance of such land. 
11.6.B.8. The distance between buildings shall not be less than 40 feet. Rear setback requirements may be reduced by no more than 50 percent. 
11.6.B.9. Any proposed lot in the cluster subdivision at the time of development, shall have at least 100 feet frontage, except lots abutting a circular turnaround may have 75 feet frontage. No individual lot shall have frontage on an existing public road. 
11.6.B.10. In no case shall shore frontage be reduced below the minimum normally required in the district. 
11.6.B.11. Where a cluster development abuts a body of water, a usable portion of the shoreline as well as reasonable access to it shall be a part of the common land. 
11.6.B.12. Buildings shall be oriented with respect to scenic vistas, natural landscape features, topography, solar energy and natural drainage areas in accordance with an overall plan for site development. 
11.6.B.13. When individual wells are to be utilized, a drilled well with casing shall be provided on each lot by the developer. The applicant shall demonstrate the availability of water adequate for domestic purposes as well as for fire safety. The Planning Board may require the construction of storage ponds and dry hydrants. 
11.6.B.14. The location of subsurface waste water disposal systems and an equivalent reserve area for replacement systems shall be shown on the plan. The report of a licensed Site Evaluator shall accompany the plan. 
11.6.B.15. Utilities shall be installed underground wherever possible. Transformer boxes, pumping stations and meters shall be located so as not to be unsightly or hazardous to the public. 
11.6.B.16. The developer shall file with the Town at the time of submission of the final plans a performance guarantee. This may be tendered in the form of a guarantee. This may be tendered in the form of a certified check payable to the Town, a savings account passbook issued in the name of the Town or a faithful performance bond running to the Town and issued by a surety company acceptable to the municipality. The conditions and amounts of such check, passbook or performance bond shall be determined by the Planning Board with the advice of concerned departments or agencies. The amount shall be equal to the total cost of furnishing, installing, connecting and completing all of the street grading, paving, storm drainage and utilities or other improvements specified in the final plan taking into account the inflation on construction costs and shall guarantee the satisfactory completion of the required improvements. 
11.6.C. Dedication and Maintenance of Common Open Space and Facilities. 
11.6.C.1. Common open space shall be dedicated upon approval of the project. There shall be no further subdivision of this land which shall be used only for non­commercial recreation or conservation. However, easements for public utilities or structures accessory to non-commercial recreation or conservation may be permitted. 
11.6.C.2. The common open space(s) shall be shown on the development plan and with appropriate notation on the face thereof to indicate that: 
11.6.C.2.a. The common open space shall not be used for future building lots; and 
11.6.C.2.b. 	A part or all of the common open space may not be dedicated for acceptance by the Town. 
11.6.C.3. If any or all of the common open space is to be reserved for use by the residents, the applicant shall prepare by-laws for a homeowner's association which shall specify maintenance responsibilities and shall be submitted to the Planning Board prior to approval. 
11.6.C.4. Covenants for mandatory membership in the association setting forth the owner's rights and interest and privileges in the association and the common land shall be reviewed by the Planning Board and included in the deed for each lot. 
11.6.C.5. This homeowner's association shall have the responsibility of maintaining the common open space(s) and other common facilities. 
11.6.C.6. The association shall levy annual charges against all property owners to defray the expenses connected with the maintenance of open space, other common and recreational facilities and Town assessments. 
11.6.C.7. The developer shall maintain control of such open space(s) and be responsible for their maintenance until development sufficient to support the association has taken place. Such determination shall be made by the Planning Board upon request of the homeowner's association or the developer or subdivider. 

11.7 Extractive Industry. 
11.7.A. The purpose of this section is to allow the extraction and processing of valuable sand, gravel, rock, soil, peat and other mineral deposits with a minimum of adverse impact upon groundwater, surface waters and neighboring properties. 
11.7.B. Approval as a Conditional Use. 
11.7.B.1. The excavation, processing or storage of soil, topsoil, peat, loam, sand, gravel, rock or other mineral deposits shall be approved by the Planning Board as a Conditional Use prior to commencing any such operation. 
11.7.B.2. The following earth-moving activities shall be allowed without approval as a Conditional Use: 
11.7.B.2.a. The removal or filling of material incidental to construction, alteration or repair of a building or accessory structure or in the grading and landscaping incidental to such construction, alteration or repair; 
11.7.B.2.b. The removal or filling of material incidental to construction, alteration or repair of a public or private way or public utility; 
11.7.B.2.c. The excavation, processing or storage of less than twenty five 
(25) cubic yards of material on a parcel within the period of one year. 
11.7.C. Application for a Conditional Use. An application for Conditional Use approval by the Planning Board shall include: 
11.7.C.1. A sketch plan which shows: 
11.7.C.1.a. The name and address of the owner of the property involved; 
11.7.C.1.b. The name and address of the operator who will undertake the earth moving activity if different from the property owner; 
11.7.C.1.c. The location and boundaries of the lot or lots for which approval is requested; 
11.7.C.1.d. The names of the owners of all parcels of land directly abutting or directly across any street adjoining the property for which approval is requested; 
11.7.C.1.e. The location of all proposed access roads and temporary or permanent structures; 
11.7.C.1.f. The location of all natural or man-made water bodies and wetlands within the proposed site or within 150 feet of the proposed site; 
11.7.C.1.g. The topography of the proposed site shown with contour lines with a contour interval of not more than five (5) feet; and 
11.7.C.1.h. The specific location of the proposed excavation with an indication of the degree to which earth movement activity will occur within specified time intervals. 
11.7.C.2. Written statements and/or sketch plans which detail: 
11.7.C.2.a. The location and nature of proposed fencing, buffer strips, signs, lighting and parking and loading areas; 
11.7.C.2.b. 	The proposed method of extraction and the type of material to be removed; 
11.7.C.2.c. 	The estimated duration, regularity and working hours of the proposed operation; 
11.7.C.2.d. Plans to control erosion and sedimentation during the operation; 
11.7.C.2.e. Plans to stabilize unstable slopes; 
11.7.C.2.f. Plans to store and/or remove stripped vegetation and topsoil; 
11.7.C.2.g. 	Plans for the rehabilitation and restoration of the site upon completion of the operation including the timing of such site restoration, the final grade and methods to control erosion and sedimentation both during and after reclamation activities; a 
11.7.C.2.h. 	The effect of the proposed activity on existing and foreseeable traffic patterns in the Town. 
11.7.D. Performance Standards. 
The Planning Board in granting Conditional Use approval, shall specify such requirements 
as it deems necessary or desirable to ensure compliance with the following performance 
standards: 

11.7.D.1. No part of any extraction operation, including drainage and runoff control features shall be permitted within 100 feet of any property or street-line except that drainage ways to reduce runoff into or from the extraction area may be allowed up to 50 feet of such line. The 100 foot set back requirement may be waived by the Planning Board, for abutting extractive operations, if there is a written formal contractual agreement between the property owners. Said agreement must be recorded at the York County Registry of Deeds. No part of any extraction operation, including drainage and runoff control features shall be permitted within one hundred (100) feet of the normal high-water line of Bonny Eagle Pond or within seventy five (75) feet of the normal high-water line of any other water body, tributary stream or the upland edge of a wetland. Natural vegetation shall be undisturbed and maintained in buffer areas. (amended 6/12/04) 
11.7.D.2. No slopes steeper than three feet horizontal to two feet vertical shall be permitted at any extraction site unless a fence at least four feet high is erected to limit access to such locations. 
11.7.D.3. Before commencing removal of any earth materials, the owner or operator of the extraction site shall present written evidence to the Planning Board of adequate insurance against liability arising from the proposed extraction operations and such insurance shall be maintained throughout the period of operation. 
11.7.D.4. Any top soil and subsoil suitable for purpose of re-vegetation shall, to the extent required for restoration, be stripped from the location of extraction operations and stockpiled for use in restoring the location after extraction operations have ceased. Such stockpiles shall be protected from erosion according to the erosion prevention performance standards of this Ordinance. 
11.7.D.5.  Sediment shall be trapped by diversions, silting basins, terraces and other measures designed by a professional engineer in order to protect surface water bodies from sedimentation. 
11.7.D.6. The sides and bottom of cuts, fills, channels and artificial watercourses shall be constructed and stabilized to prevent erosion or failure. Such structures are to be designed and built according to the Maine Soil and Water Conservation Commission, Technical Guide, Standards and Specifications. 
11.7.D.7. The hours of operation at any extraction site shall be limited to 7 am to 8 pm during weekdays unless otherwise specified by the Planning Board. 
11.7.D.8. Loaded vehicles shall be suitably covered or trimmed to prevent dust and contents from spilling or blowing from the load. No mud, soil, sand or other materials shall be allowed to accumulate on a public road from loading or hauling vehicles. 
11.7.D.9. All access/egress roads leading to/from the extraction site to public ways shall be treated with suitable materials to reduce dust and mud for a distance of at least 100 feet from such public ways. 
11.7.D.10. No equipment, debris, junk or other material shall be permitted on an extraction site except those directly related to active extraction operations and any temporary shelters or buildings erected for such operations and equipment used in connection therewith shall be removed within thirty days following completion of active extraction operations. 
11.7.D.11. Rubbish shall be removed on a timely basis. 
11.7.D.12. Within twelve (12) months following the completion of extraction operations at any extraction site or any one or more locations within any extraction site, ground levels and grades shall be established in accordance with the approved plans filed with the Planning Board sothat: 
11.7.D.12.a. All debris shall be removed and disposed of in an approved location or buried and covered with a minimum of two feet of earth. All stumps may be buried in a similar manner but not over an aquifer as mapped by the Maine Geological Survey nor within 100 feet of a stream. (amended 6/12/04) 
11.7.D.12.b. Storm drainage and watercourses shall leave the location at the original natural drainage points, where practicable and in a manner such that the amount of drainage at any point is not significantly increased. 
11.7.D.12.c.   At least 4" of top soil or loam shall be retained or obtained to cover all disturbed land areas which shall be reseeded and properly restored to a stable condition. 
11.7.E. 	Surety and Terms of Approval. No approval shall be issued without some form of security to ensure compliance with Such conditions as the Planning Board may impose. 
11.7.F. Existing Operations. 
11.7.F.1. Any commercial operation involving the excavation, processing or storage of soil, earth, loam, sand, gravel, rock or other mineral deposits in lawful operation at the time this Ordinance becomes effective may operate for a period of five years from the effective date of this Ordinance amendment (March 8, 1986) without Planning Board approval. (amended 6/12/04) 
Existing operations, however, must submit to the Planning Board within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this Ordinance (March 8, 1986) a map indicating the area within which earth removal activity is anticipated within the five year period and the area which has already been subject to earth removal activity.  (amended 6/12/04) 
Failure to submit the above map within ninety days shall result in the loss of grandfathered status for that operation. 
Within fifteen (15) days of the effective date of this Ordinance amendment (March 8, 1986), the Code Enforcement Officer shall notify, by certified mail, return receipt requested, the owners of all property which, to the best of his knowledge, contain existing operations informing them of the requirements of this section.  (amended 6/12/04) 
11.7.F.2. Any existing operation which has met the requirements of Section 
11.7.F.1. and is still in lawful operation at the end of the specified five year period may continue to operate provided the following conditions are met: 
11.7.F.2.a. 	Within ninety (90) days from the enactment date of this amendment (June 3, 1991) a map drawn to scale shall be submitted to the Planning Board by the owner or operator of each parcel indicating: (amended 6/12/04) 
11.7.F.2.a.1. The boundaries of the property and the tax map and lot number. 
11.7.F.2.a.2. The names of the abutters to the parcel. 
11.7.F.2.a.3. The area of the property which has already been subject to earth removal activity. 
11.7.F.2.a.4. The area of the property within which the extraction activity is anticipated in the future. 
11.7.F.2.a.5. Any existing or anticipated storage and/or processing areas. 
11.7.F.2.b. Within thirty (30) days from the enactment date of this amendment (June 3, 1991), a plan for the operation and/or storage activities on the site shall be submitted to the Planning Board for approval. The plan shall as a minimum insure that: (amended 6/12/04) 
11.7.F.2.b.1. The boundaries of the property are clearly marked on the ground. 
11.7.F.2.b.2. All access/egress roads leading to or from the extraction site to public ways are gated or otherwise suitably blocked or monitored to control access to the site. 
11.7.F.2.b.3. All access/egress roads are treated with suitable materials to minimize dust and mud for a distance of at least one hundred (100) feet from public ways. 
11.7.F.2.b.4. Loaded vehicles are suitably covered or trimmed to prevent dust or contents from blowing or spilling from the vehicle, and no mud, soil, sand or other material will accumulate on public ways as a result of loading or hauling such materials. 
11.7.F.2.b.5. Whatever measures are necessary will be used to protect restored areas, surface water bodies and adjacent properties from erosion and sedimentation. 
11.7.F.2.b.6. All debris, boulders and similar materials will be disposed of on site and buried or covered with a minimum of two feet of earth. Stumps may be buried in a similar manner providing the stumps originated on the site and are not buried in an area larger than one acre nor within one hundred (100) feet of a stream or other water body. 
11.7.F.2.b.7. All pit faces operated following the effective date of this amendment will be sloped at three feet horizontal to two feet vertical or flatter following the removal of available earth material from the immediate area. At least two inches of topsoil, loam or other material acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer shall be retained or obtained to cover the sloped area which shall be restored to a stable condition and reseeded or replanted to trees. 
11.7.F.2.b.8. Wherever possible, a 25 foot buffer strip shall be marked around the perimeter of a closed site and such markings shall be sufficient to warn of the proximity of slopes not conforming to the requirements of 11.7.F.2.b.7. 
11.7.F.2.b.9. Grandfathered operations where the major activity is the storing and processing of earth materials rather than extraction will comply with all applicable requirements of this section. 
11.7.F.3. Discontinuation of any existing operation for a period of more than one year shall result in the loss of grandfathered status for that operation. 
Discontinuation is defined as being the excavation, processing or storage of less than twenty five (25) cubic yards of material. 
11.7.F.4. Existing operations permitted under the provisions of section 11.7.F. shall be inspected by the Code Enforcement Officer at least once each calendar year to assure compliance with this section. 
11.7.G. Penalty. The owner or operator of an earth removal operation found guilty of a civil violation of any provision of this section of the Ordinance shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000). Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. All fines collected hereunder shall inure to the Town of Buxton. 

11.8 Timber Harvesting. 
In all districts, when a "Notification of Intent to Harvest Forest Products" is filed with the Maine Forest Service as required by Maine Statutory Law, a copy shall be on file with the Buxton Code Enforcement Officer before harvesting operations begin (6/97). 
(Repealed 6/17/17) 

11.9 Groundwater and Aquifer Protection Standards. 
11.9.A. Permit Required. Groundwater or springwater may be extracted and/or bulk stored as part of a commercial, industrial or land excavation operation where allowed under this Ordinance, subject to the approval of the Planning Board as a Conditional Use. The Planning Board shall grant approval if it finds that the proposal, with any reasonable conditions, will conform with the requirements of this section and the requirements of Article 8. 
11.9.B. Submission Requirements. The application together with site plan shall include the following additional information: 
11.9.B.1. Statement of the quantity of groundwater to be extracted, expressed as the annual total, the maximum monthly rate by month and the maximum daily rate; 
11.9.B.2. A letter from the Maine Department of Human Services approving the facility as proposed, where the Department has jurisdiction over the proposal; 
11.9.B.3. Where appropriate, letters from the Department of Environmental Protection when the Site Location Law is applicable or a discharge permit is required; 11.9.B.4. Applications shall present a written report of a hydrogeologic investigation conducted by a certified professional geologist or registered professional engineer except for springwater extraction facilities which meet the following conditions: the spring enhancement will not increase the combined spring's catchment capacity by removing more than four (4) cubic yards of earth and not increase this spring's depth by more than four (4) feet, where the discharge drain is no lower than the existing spring water level, where gravity alone (without the aid of a siphon) is used to with-draw the springwater to other facilities on site and where other movements do not threaten groundwater levels. This report shall include the following information: 
11.9.B.4.a. A map of the aquifer tributary to the spring(s), well(s) or excavation(s) from which water is to be extracted in sufficient detail to support a calculation of sustained yield during a drought with a probability of one in ten years as well as an estimate of any potential interaction between this aquifer and adjacent aquifers. 
11.9.B.4.b. The results of the investigation shall establish the aquifer characteristics, the rates of drawn-down and rebound, the sustainable yearly, monthly (by month) and daily extraction rates, the cone of depression which may develop about the proposed facility and other impacts on the water table in the tributary aquifer and such other private or public wells within 1,000 feet of the proposed extraction facilities shall be assessed. 
11.9.B.4.c. Nothing in this procedure and no decision by the Planning Board shall be deemed to create groundwater rights other than those rights which the applicant may have under Maine law. 
11.9.C. Performance Standards. 
11.9.C.1. The quantity of water to be taken from groundwater sources will not substantially lower the groundwater table, cause saltwater intrusion, cause undesirable changes in groundwater flow patterns or cause unacceptable ground subsidence based on the conditions of a drought with a probability of occurrence of once in ten years. 
11.9.C.2. The proposed facility will not cause water pollution or other diminution of the quality of the aquifer from which the water is to be extracted. 
11.9.C.3. Safe and healthful conditions will be maintained at all times within and about the proposed use. 
11.9.C.4. The proposed use will not cause sedimentation or erosion. 
11.9.C.5. The proposed facility is not within the defined aquifer recharge area of a public water supply unless notice is given to the operator thereof and the Board has considered any information supplied by the operator and finds that no adverse affect on a public water supply will result. 
11.9.C.6. The operator shall make monthly operating records of the quantity of water extracted, stored and removed from the site available to the Code Enforcement Officer or a designee. 
11.9.D. Existing Operations. 
11.9.D.1.  Any operation involving the extraction or storage in lawful operation at the time this section becomes effective and which meet the criteria for requiring a Conditional Use Permit, may operate for a period of five years from the effective date without Planning Board approval. Existing operations, however, must submit to the Planning Board within ninety (90) days of 
the effective date of this section, a statement indicating the location of the existing extraction operation and estimated quantities of groundwater being extracted. Failure to submit the above statement within ninety days shall result in the loss of grandfathered status for that operation. Within fifteen (15) days of the effective date of this section, the Code Enforcement Officer shall notify, be certified mail, return receipt requested, the owners of all property which, to the best of his knowledge, contain existing operations, informing them of the requirements of this section. 
11.9.D.2. Discontinuation of any existing operation for a period of more than one year shall result in the loss of grandfathered status for that operation. 

11.10 Home Occupations. 
11.10.A. A home occupation is an occupation or profession which is carried on in a dwelling unit or structure accessory to a dwelling unit and which is clearly incidental and subordinate to the use of the lot for residential purposes. 
11.10.B. Any home occupation which may be carried out without offending custom or disturbing neighbors; altering residential character of the neighborhood; or changing the character of the lot from its principal use as a residence shall be permitted if it complies with the requirements of this section. 
11.10.C. The following requirements shall be satisfactorily demonstrated to the Code Enforcement Officer before a home occupation permit may be issued: 
11.10.C.1. The home occupation shall be carried on by members of the family residing in the dwelling unit. 
11.10.C.2. The home occupation shall be carried on wholly within the principal or accessory structure. 
11.10.C.3. The home occupation shall not occupy more than 500 square feet of floor area or more than 25% of total floor area of the structure, whichever is less. 
11.10.C.4. The performance standards in Article 10 of this Ordinance shall apply, with regard to noise, smoke, dust, etc. 
11.10.C.5. No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in a volume greater than would normally be expected during the day-time in the residential neighborhood and the off-street parking requirements stated in Section 10.7 shall be met. If existing off-street parking is required to be expanded, it shall be adequately screened from the road and from adjacent house lots (for example, with a dense screen of evergreens) and shall not be located between the house and the road. 
11.10.C.6. No exterior signs or displays other than the one sign permitted in Section 10.11.A., no exterior storage of material or products and no other exterior indication of the home occupation or variation from the residential character of the principal building shall be permitted. 
11.10.C.7. The sale of products shall be limited to those which are crafted, assembled or substantially altered on the premises and to catalog items ordered on the premises by customers. 
11.10.C.8. The term "home occupation" shall also include both professional and personal services (such as physicians, dentists, lawyers, architects, real estate or insurance agents, barbers, hairdressers, watch/clock repair and similar business compatible in residential areas). 
11.10.C.9. Farm produce raised on the premises shall not be classified as a home occupation unless a roadside stand exceeding 35 sq. ft. in area is proposed to be built. Like­wise, yard sales occurring on less than three weekends or less than six consecutive days during the period May 1 through September 30 shall not be considered to be home occupations and shall not require permits. 

11.11 Kennels. 
11.11.A. Structures or pens for housing or containing the animals shall be located not less than one hundred (100) feet from the nearest residence existing at the time of permit issuance (other than the dwelling on the same lot). 
11.11.B. All pens, runs or kennels and other facilities shall be designed, constructed and located on the site in a manner that will minimize the adverse effects upon the surrounding properties.  Among the factors that shall be considered are the relationship of the use to the topography, natural and planted horticultural screening the direction and intensity of the prevailing winds, the relationship and location of residences and public facilities on nearby properties and other similar factors. 
11.11.C. The owner or operator of a kennel shall maintain the premises in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all times. No garbage, offal, feces or other waste material shall be allowed to accumulate on the premises. The premises shall be maintained in such a manner that they will not provide a breeding place for insects, vermin or rodents. 
11.11.D. Temporary storage containers for any kennel or veterinary wastes containing or including animal excrement shall be kept tightly covered at all times and emptied no less frequently than once every four days. Such containers shall be made of steel or plastic to facilitate cleaning and shall be located in accordance with the setbacks required for outdoor runs. 
11.11.E. All enclosed kennels or veterinary buildings shall be constructed of masonry to provide for cleanliness, ease of maintenance and noise control. 
11.11.F. If outdoor dog "runs" are created, they shall be completely fenced in and shall be paved with cement, asphalt or a similar material to provide for cleanliness and ease of maintenance. 
11.11.G. Any incineration device for burning excrement-soaked waste papers and/or animal organs or remains shall be located a minimum distance of 250 feet from any residence other than the applicant's and shall have a chimney vent not less than 35 feet above the average ground elevation.  The applicant shall also provide evidence that he has obtained approval from the Maine Department of Environmental Protection for the proposed incinerator and that it meets state standards for particulate emissions, flue gas temperature and duration of required flue temperatures. 
11.11.H. All other relevant performance standards in Article 10 of this Ordinance (such as for noise) shall also be observed. 
11.11.I The copies of applicable State & Federal approval and permits shall be provided.   (added 6/13/09) 

11.12 Manufacturing and Related Uses. 
11.12.A. Environmental Standards. Accompanying any application for a Conditional Use, the applicant shall submit the following information to the Code Enforcement Officer and to the Planning Board: 
11.12.A.1. A written description of the industrial operations proposed in sufficient detail to indicate the effects of these operations in producing traffic congestion, noise, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, odor, heat, glare, air pollution, waste and other objectionable effect. 
11.12.A.2. Engineering and architectural plans for the treatment of and disposal of sewage and industrial wastes and any on-site disposal of wastes. 
11.12.A.3. Engineering and architectural plans for handling any traffic congestion, noise, odor, heat, glare, air pollution, fire hazard or safety hazard. 
11.12.A.4. Designation of the fuel proposed to be used and any necessary plans for controlling the emission of smoke or particulate matter. 
11.12.A.5. The proposed number of shifts to be worked and the maximum number of employees of each shift. 
11.12.A.6. A site plan indicating the property lines, buildings, driveways and parking areas, sewage disposal, water supply, water bodies and other significant natural features and any other improvements planned to the property. 
11.12.A.7. A list of all hazardous materials to be hauled, stored, used, generated or disposed of on the site and any pertinent state or federal permits required. 
11.12.B. General Requirements. 
11.12.B.1. All business, service, repair, manufacturing, storage, processing or display on property abutting or facing a residential use or property in the Village and Residential Districts shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building unless screened from the residential area by a sight-obscuring fence permanently maintained at least six (6) feet in height. 
11.12.B.2. Doors, windows, loading docks and other openings in structures shall be prohibited on sides of the structure adjacent to or across a street from a residential use or property in the Village and Residential Districts, if such an opening will cause glare, excessive noise or other adverse effects on residential properties. 
11.12.B.3. Front yards shall be continuously maintained in lawn or other landscaping. All other yards abutting or across a street from a residential use or property in the Village or Residential Districts shall be continuously maintained in lawn or other landscaping unless screened from the residential use as provided in Section 11.12.B.1. above. 
11.12.B.4. Access points from a public road to industrial operations shall be so located as to minimize traffic congestion and to avoid directing traffic onto local access streets of a primarily residential character. 
11.12.B.5. All materials including wastes shall be stored and all grounds shall be maintained in a manner which will not attract or aid the propagation of insects or rodents or create a health hazard. 
11.12.B.6. Prior to the issuance of building permits, the applicant shall demonstrate to the Code Enforcement Officer that all applicable State and Federal Standards have been met. 
11.12.B.7. Off-street parking requirements as stated in Section 10.7 must be met. 

11.13 Piers, Docks, Wharves, Breakwaters, Causeways, Marinas, Bridges over 20 feet in length and Uses Projecting into Water Bodies. 
In addition to permits required under Article 14 of this ordinance and to Federal and State permits which may be required for such structures and uses, they shall conform to the following: 
11.13.A. Access from shore shall be developed on soils appropriate for such use and constructed so as to control erosion. 
11.13.B. The location shall not interfere with developed beach areas. 
11.13.C. The facility shall be located so as to minimize adverse effects on fisheries. 
11.13.D. The facility shall be no larger in dimension than necessary to carry on the activity and be consistent with existing conditions, use and character of the area. 
11.13.E. No new structure shall be built on, over or abutting a pier, wharf, dock or other structure extending beyond the normal high-water line of a water body or within a wetland unless the structure requires direct access to the water as an operational necessity. 
11.13.F. No existing structures built on, over or abutting a pier, dock, wharf or other structure extending beyond the normal high-water line of a water body or within a wetland shall be converted to residential dwelling units in any district. 
11.13.G. Structures built on, over or abutting a pier, wharf, dock or other structure extending beyond the normal high-water line of a water body or within a wetland shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height above the pier, wharf, dock or other structure. 

11.14 Manufactured Housing Units. 
Manufactured housing units not in a mobile home park shall meet all of the requirements of this Ordinance for single family dwellings and the provisions of Article 14 of this Ordinance. In addition: 
11.14.A. The manufactured housing unit must be placed on a foundation meeting the requirements of the rules of the Maine Manufactured Housing Board. 
11.14.B. Adequate ventilation shall be provided for the "crawl space" as required by the Buxton Building Code. 
11.14.C. The manufactured housing unit must contain a minimum of 480 square feet and; 
11.14.D The manufactured housing unit either; 
11.14.D.1. must be constructed after June 15, 1976, and the manufacturer must certify its construction was in compliance with the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, U.S. Code, Title 42, Section 5401, et. seq., as amended, or 
11.14.D.2. meet the safety standards for older mobile homes which have been adopted by the State Manufactured Housing Board (02-385 Department of Professional and Financial Regulation dated May 31, 1990). 
11.14.E A manufactured housing unit which does not comply with the requirements of this section but which was lawfully in use as a dwelling in the Town of Buxton on the date of adoption of this Ordinance (November 2, 1976) may be relocated to any lot where a manufactured housing unit is permitted by the regulations of this Ordinance. 
11.14.F Failure to remove the manufactured housing unit from the lot within sixty (60) days of occupying the new dwelling shall be a violation of this ordinance. (amended 6/14/08) 

11.15 Mobile Home Parks. 
11.15.A. Except as stipulated below, mobile home parks shall meet all the requirements for a residential subdivision and shall conform to all applicable State laws and local ordinances, regulations and conditions as determined by Planning Board review. Where the provisions of this section conflict with specific provisions of the Buxton Zoning Ordinance, Shoreland Zoning Ordinance or Subdivision Ordinance, the provisions of this section shall prevail. 
11.15.B. Lot Area and Lot Width Requirements. Notwithstanding the dimensional requirements table located in Section 9.6 of this Ordinance, lots in a mobile home park shall meet the following lot area and lot width requirements. 
11.15.B.1. Lots served by public sewer: 
Min. lot area: 6,500 square feet Min. lot width: 50 feet 
11.15.B.2. Lots served by individual subsurface waste water disposal systems: 
Min. lot area: 20,000 square feet Min. lot width: 100 feet 
11.15.B.3. Lots served by a central subsurface waste water disposal system approved by the Maine Department of Human Services: 
Min. lot area: 12,000 square feet Min. lot width: 75 feet 
11.15.B.4. The overall density of any mobile home park served by any subsurface waste water disposal system shall not exceed one dwelling unit per 20,000 square feet of total mobile home park area. 
11.15.B.5. Lots located within any shoreland zoning district shall meet the lot area, lot width and shore frontage requirements for that district. 
11.15.C. Unit Setback Requirements. 
11.15.C.1. On lots 10,000 square feet in area or larger, structures shall not be located less than 15 feet from any boundary lines of an individual lot and on lots less than 10,000 square feet in area, structures shall not be located less than 10 feet from any boundary lines of an individual lot; provided, however, that on lots that are located within a shoreland zoning district, structures shall meet all setbacks required in the shoreland zoning district. 
11.15.C.2. On lots which abut a public way either within the mobile home park or adjacent to the mobile home park, structures shall meet the front setback requirements in the dimensional requirements table in Section 9.6 of this Ordinance. 
11.15.D. Buffering. If a mobile park is proposed with a residential density at least twice the density of development in existence on immediately adjacent parcels of land or at least twice the density permitted in the zoning district in which the mobile home park is located if the immediately adjacent parcels of land are undeveloped, the mobile home park shall be designed with a continuous landscaped buffer strip not less than fifty feet in width which shall contain no structures, streets or utilities except that utilities may cross a buffer strip to provide service to the mobile home park. 
11.15.E. Road Design, Circulation and Traffic Impacts. 
11.15.E.1. Privately owned roads within a mobile home park shall be designed by a Professional Engineer registered in the State of Maine. 
11.15.E.2. Streets which the applicant proposes to be dedicated as public ways shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards for streets in Article 12 of this Ordinance. 
11.15.E.3. Streets which the applicant proposes to remain privately owned roads shall meet the following minimumgeometric design standards. 
11.15.E.3.a. Minimum right of way width: 23 feet 
11.15.E.3.b. Minimum width of traveled way: 20 feet 
11.15.E.4. Any mobile home park expected to generate average daily traffic of 200 trips per day or more shall have at least two street connections with existing public streets. Any street within a park with an average daily traffic of 200 trips per day or more shall have at least two street connections leading to existing public streets, other streets within the park or other streets shown on an approved subdivision plan. 
11.15.E.5. No individual lot within a park shall have direct vehicular access onto an existing public street. 
11.15.E.6. The intersection of any street within a park and an existing public street shall meet the following standards: 
11.15.E.6.a. Angle of intersection. The desired angle of intersection shall be 90 degrees.  The minimum angle of intersection shall be 75 degrees. 
11.15.E.6.b. Maximum Grade within 75 feet of intersection.  The maximum permissible grade within 75 feet of the intersection shall be 2%. 
11.15.E.6.c. Minimum Sight-Distance. A minimum sight-distance must be provided according to Section 10.7.E. of this Zoning Ordinance. 
11.15.E.6.d. Distance from other intersections. The centerline of any privately owned road within a mobile home park intersecting a public way adjacent to the mobile home park shall be no less than 125 feet from the 
centerline of any other street intersecting that public way. 
11.15.E.7. The application shall contain an estimate of the average daily traffic projected to be generated by the park Estimates of traffic generation shall be based on the TRIP GENERATION MANUAL, 1997 EDITION, or most current edition published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. If the park is projected to 
generate more than 400 vehicle trip ends per day, the application shall also include a traffic impact analysis by a registered professional engineer with experience in transportation engineering. 
11.15.F. Groundwater Impacts. 
11.15.F.1. Assessment Submitted. Accompanying the application for approval of any mobile home park which is not served by public sewer shall be an analysis of the impacts of the proposed mobile home park on groundwater quality. The hydrogeologic assessment shall be prepared by a Certified Geologist or Registered Professional Engineer experienced in hydrogeology and shall contain at least the following information: 
11.15.F.1.a. A map showing the basic soil types. 
11.15.F.1.b. The depth to the water table at representative points throughout the mobile home park. 
11.15.F.1.c. Drainage conditions throughout the mobile home park. 
11.15.F.1.d. Data on the existing groundwater quality, either from test wells in the mobile home park or from existing wells on neighboring properties. 
11.15.F.1.e. An analysis and evaluation of the effect of the mobile home park on groundwater resources. The evaluation shall, at a minimum, include a projection of post development nitrate-nitrogen concentrations at any wells within the mobile home park and at the mobile home park boundaries or at a distance of 1,000 feet from potential contamination sources, whichever is a shorter distance. For mobile home parks within the watershed of a lake, projections of the development's impact on groundwater phosphate concentrations shall also be provided. 
11.15.F.1.f. A map showing the location of any subsurface waste water disposal systems, drinking water wells, public water supplies and aquifers within the mobile home park and within 200 feet of the mobile home park boundaries. 
11.15.F.2. Standards for Acceptable Groundwater Impacts. 
11.15.F.2.a. Projections of groundwater quality shall be based on the assumption of drought conditions (assuming 60% of annual average precipitation). 
11.15.F.2.b. No mobile home park may increases any contaminant concentration in the groundwater to more than one half of the Primary Drinking Water Standards. No mobile home park may increase any contaminant concentration in the groundwater to more than the Secondary Drinking Water Standards. 
11.15.F.2.c. If groundwater contains contaminants in excess of the secondary standards, the mobile home park shall not cause the concentration of the parameters in questions to exceed 150% of the ambient concentration. 
11.15.F.3.  Subsurface waste water disposal systems and drinking water wells shall be constructed as shown on the map submitted with the assessment. If construction standards for drinking water wells are recommended in the assessment, those standards shall be included as a note on the Plan. 
11.15.F.4. If the mobile home park is served by a central subsurface waste water disposal system, a second site withsuitable soils must be shown as a reserve area for future replacement of the disposal area. 
11.15.G. No development or subdivision approved under this section as a mobile home park may be converted to another use without the approval of the Planning Board and without meeting the then appropriate lot size, lot width, setback and other requirements. The plan to be recorded at the Registry of deeds and filed with the municipality shall include the following restrictions as well as any other notes or conditions of approval: 
11.15.G.1. The land within the mobile home park shall remain in a unified ownership and the fee-simple title to lots or portions of lots shall not be transferred. 
11.15.G.2. No dwelling unit other than a manufactured housing unit may be located within the park. 
11.15.H. If a mobile home park is to be located further than 1,000 feet from a fire department, approved fire pond or dry hydrant, storage of 10,000 gallons of water for fire fighting must be provided within the mobile home park. 
11.15.I. If the paved surface of the roads in the mobile home park is less than 24 feet wide, two (2) off-street parking spaces are to be provided for each mobile home. These off-street parking spaces are to be at least 10 feet wide by 20 feet long. 
11.15.J. Outdoor storage of household waste is prohibited except in containers approved by the Planning Board. 
11.15.K. A plan for the maintenance and repair of improvements, including but not limited to the sewage disposal system, waste systems, roads, storm water management, utilities, solid waste collection and storage systems must accompany the application for approval of any mobile home park under this section. 
11.15.L. All improvements required by this section or by Article 13 -Land Development and Subdivision Standards -must be completed prior to the occupancy of any manufactured housing unit in the mobile home park. 
11.16 Motels, Hotels and Inns. (words used interchangeably) All proposals to construct a motel, hotel or inn shall be in conformance with the general performance standards of Article 10 and the design requirements below. 
11.16.A. Design Requirements. For traffic safety on and immediately adjoining each motel or hotel and to assure health, safety and welfare of motel/hotel occupants and of the neighborhood generally, the following land, space, building, traffic, utility and service design requirements shall be complied with: 
11.16.A.1. The lot for any motel shall contain not less than two acres of total area and not less than a two hundred (200) foot lot width at the street and throughout the first two hundred (200) feet of depth of said lot back from the street. 
11.16.A.2. No part of any building on a motel lot shall be closer than forty (40)­feet to the front lot line, rear lot line or either sideline of such lot. A green space, not less than twenty (20) feet wide shall be maintained open and green with grass, bushes, flowers or trees all along each side lot except for entrance and exit driveways. The green space shall not be used for automobile parking. 
11.16.A.3. Buildings on a motel lot shall not cover more than twenty five percent (25%) of the area of the lot. 
11.16.A.4. On each motel site, there shall be provided at least two motor vehicle driveways for customer use, preferably one-way each. These driveways shall intersect the street or highway at an angle not more acute than sixty degrees and this intersection alignment shall prevail along fifty (50)-feet of the driveway centerline from the edge of the street or highway pavement into the motel property. 
11.16.A.5. Motel driveways shall be separated from one another by not less than 125 feet distance along the street. In addition to the two or more motel customers entrance and exit ways required, one or more additional separate access way(s) for service vehicles and for emergency vehicle access may be required. 
11.16.A.6. Each of the above required motel driveways shall be level with the street for the first fifteen (15) feet inside the property from the street line and thereafter shall slope at a grade not exceeding three percent (3%) throughout the rest of the first one hundred (100) feet along the center-line of the driveway into the motel property from the street or highway line. 
11.16.A.7. The means of sewage disposal shall be shown on the plan. Approval of the Department of Human Services of the sewage disposal plans shall be presented to the Planning Board. 
11.16.A.8. Cooking or eating facilities shall not be permitted in motel rental units. 
11.16.A.9. The applicant shall demonstrate that there is adequate water available on the site to provide for the domestic needs of the motel as well as for fire fighting purposes. The Planning Board may require the construction of storage ponds and dry hydrants. 
11.16.A.10. Each motel structure shall contain not less than two hundred (200) square feet habitable floor area enclosed by walls and roof exclusive of any adjoining portions of roofed or covered walkways. Each motel rental sleeping room shall not be less than twelve by fifteen feet horizontal dimensions exclusive of bath. Each rental unit shall include private bathroom facilities. 
11.16.A.11. Each motel structure shall contain not less than five, nor more than ten individual motel rental units unless each section of ten units is separated from any additional sections by an unbroken fire-wall. Each motel structure may be connected with other similar structures by a covered walkway if the walk-way is constructed of fire-resistive materials. Whether or not so connected, the nearest parts of the walls or corners of such structure shall be separated by a land space, open and unbuilt on, of not less than thirty (30) feet and in which there shall be not automobile parking 
or loading. 
11.16.A.12. On each motel lot, one apartment may be provided for a resident owner, manager or other responsible staff person. 

11.17 Multi-Family Dwellings. 
Multi-family dwellings shall meet all of the following standards as well as the general performance standards of Article 10. 
11.17.A. The minimum lot area shall be as follows: The first unit is figured at the minimum lot standards stated in 9.6, table A, all additional units are figured at the reduced figure referred to in 9.6 table A for each additional dwelling unit, whether the units are in the same or separate buildings. 
11.17.B. Deleted June 14, 2003 
11.17.C. No buildings shall contain more than six (6) dwelling units. 
11.17.D. No parking area shall be located between the buildings and the street. Nor shall any parking area be located within the required yard area setbacks. Parking area design and the number of parking spaces shall be in compliance with Section 10.7 of this Ordinance. 
11.17.E. The applicant shall demonstrate the availability of sufficient water for domestic purposes as well as fire safety. All units must meet current National Fire 
Protection Association (“NFPA”) standards set forth in the 1999 edition of NFPA and 
if using a sprinkler system there shall be an outside Fire Department Connection supplied (the location of which shall be approved by the Fire Chief). Amended 6/18/05 
11.17.F. All dwelling units in a multi-family building shall have a minimum habitable floor space of 600 square feet exclusive of balconies, stairways, hallways or other common space. 

11.18 Road Construction within the Shoreland Zone. 
Roads shall be located, constructed and maintained in such a manner that minimal erosion hazard results. Adequate provision shall be made to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation of surface waters. Additionally, all roads constructed within the shoreland zone shall conform with the following standards: 
11.18.A. Roads and driveways shall be set back at least one hundred (100) feet from the normal high-water line of Bonny Eagle Pond and seventy five (75) feet from the normal high-water line of other water bodies, tributary streams or the upland edge of a wetland unless no reasonable alternative exists as determined by the Planning Board. If no reasonable alternative exists, the Planning Board may reduce the road and/or driveway setback requirement to no less than fifty (50)-feet upon clear showing by the applicant that appropriate techniques will be used to prevent sedimentation of the water body. Such techniques may include, but are not limited to, the installation of settling basins, and/or the effective use of additional ditch relief culverts and turnouts placed so as to avoid sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream or wetland. On slopes of greater than twenty (20) percent, the road and/or driveway setback shall be increased by ten (10) feet for each five (5) percent increase in slope above twenty (20) percent. This paragraph shall neither apply to approaches to water crossings nor to roads or driveways that provide access to permitted structures and facilities located nearer to the shoreline due to an operational necessity. 
11.18.B. Existing public roads may be expanded within the legal road right-of-way regardless of its setback from a water body. 
11.18.C. New roads and driveways are prohibited in a Resource Protection District except to provide access to permitted uses within the district or as approved by the Planning Board upon a finding that no reasonable alternative route or location is available outside the district, in which case the road and/or driveway shall be set back as far as practicable from the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream or upland edge of a wetland. 
11.18.D. Road banks shall be no steeper than a slope of two (2) horizontal to one (1) vertical and shall be graded and stabilized in accordance with the provisions for erosion and sedimentation control contained in Section 10.3. 
11.18.E. Road grades shall be no greater than ten (10) percent except for short segments of less than two hundred (200) feet. 
11.18.F. In order to prevent road surface drainage from directly entering water bodies, roads shall be designed, constructed and maintained to empty onto an unscarified buffer strip of at least fifty (50) feet plus two times the average slope in width between the outflow point of the ditch or culvert and the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream or upland edge of a wetland. Road surface drainage, which is directed to an unscarified buffer strip shall be diffused or spread out to promote infiltration of the runoff and to minimize channelized flow of the drainage through the buffer strip. 
11.18.G. Ditch relief (cross drainage) culverts, drainage dips and water turnouts shall be installed in a manner effective in directing drainage onto unscarified buffer strips before the flow in the road or ditches gains sufficient volume or head to erode the road or ditch. To accomplish this, the following shall apply: 
11.18.G.1. Ditch relief culverts, drainage dips and associated water turnouts shall be spaced along the road at intervals no greater than indicated in the following table: 
Road Grade Spacing 
(Percentage) (Feet) 
0-2 250 
3-5 200-135 
6-10 100-80 
11-15 80-60 
16-20 60-45 
21 + 40 
11.18.G.2. Drainage dips may be used in place of ditch relief culverts only where the road grade is ten (10) percent or less. 
11.18.G.3. On road sections having slopes greater than ten (10) percent, ditch relief culverts shall be placed across the road at approximately a thirty (30) degree angle downslope from a line perpendicular to the centerline of the road. 
11.18.G.4. Ditch relief culverts shall be sufficiently sized and properly installed in order to allow for effective functioning and their inlet and outlet ends shall be stabilized with appropriate materials. 
11.18.H. Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts and other storm water runoff control installations associated with roads shall be maintained on a regular basis to assure effective functioning. 

11.19 Outdoor Recreation Facility. 
Active Outdoor Recreation, Mechanized Outdoor Recreation and Passive Outdoor Recreation facilities may be established in those districts indicated on the Land Use Table in accordance with the provisions below: 
11.19.A. There will be adequate off-street parking provided for the anticipated maximum attendance at any event. 
11.19.B. Containers and facilities for rubbish collection and removal will be provided. 
11.19.C. Adequate screening, buffer areas or landscape provisions will be built, planted or maintained to protect adjacent residences from adverse noise, light, dust, smoke and visual impact. 
11.19.D. The proposed use will not create a traffic hazard. 

11.20 Structures in the Shoreland Zone. 
11.20.A. All new principal and accessory structures shall be set back at least one hundred (100) feet from the normal high-water line of Bonny Eagle Pond and seventy five (75) feet from the normal high-water line of other water bodies, tributary streams or the upland edge of a wetland. However, the water body or wetland setback provision shall neither apply to structures which require direct access to the water as an operational necessity such as piers, docks and retaining walls, nor to other functionally water-dependent uses. 
11.20.B. The total area of all structures, parking lots and other non-vegetated surfaces within the Shoreland Zone shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the lot or a portion thereof located within the Shoreland Zone including land area previously developed. 
11.20.C. Notwithstanding the requirements stated above, stairways or similar structures may be allowed with a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer to provide shoreline access in areas of steep slopes or unstable soils provided that the structure is limited to a maximum of four (4) feet in width and that the structure does not extend below or over the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland (unless permitted by the Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act, Title 38, Section 480-C) and that the applicant demonstrates that no reasonable access alternative exists on the property. 

11.21 Individual Private Campsites in the Shoreland Zone. 
Individual private campsites not associated with campgrounds are permitted provided the following conditions are met: 
11.21.A. One campsite per lot existing on the effective date of this Ordinance or thirty thousand (30,000) square feet of a lot area within the Shoreland Zone, whichever is less, may be permitted. 
11.21.B. Campsite placement on any lot including the area intended for a recreational vehicle or tent platform shall be set back one hundred (100) feet from the normal high-water line of Bonny Eagle Pond and seventy five (75) feet from the normal high-water line of other water bodies, tributary streams or the upland edge of a wetland. 
11.21.C. Recreational vehicles shall not be located on any type of permanent foundation except for a gravel pad and no structure(s) except canopies shall be attached to the recreational vehicle. 
11.21.D. The clearing of vegetation for the siting of the recreational vehicle, tent or similar shelter in a Resource Protection District shall be limited to one thousand (1000) square feet. 
11.21.E. A written sewage disposal plan describing the proposed method and location of sewage disposal shall be required for each campsite and shall be approved by the local Plumbing Inspector. Where disposal is off-site, written authorization from the receiving facility or land owner is required. 
11.21.F. When a recreational vehicle, tent or similar shelter is placed on-site for more than one hundred and twenty (120) days per year, all requirements for residential structures shall be met including the installation of a subsurface sewage disposal system in compliance with the State Of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules unless served by public sewage facilities. 

11.22 Elderly and Low Income Housing. 
Elderly and Low Income housing projects shall meet all of the following standards as well as the general performance standards of Article 10: 
11.22.A. All parking areas, driveways and other areas subject to vehicular traffic shall be paved with bituminous asphalt, concrete or an equivalent surfacing over a gravel sub-base at least 6" in thickness and shall have appropriate bumper or wheel guards where needed. 
11.22.B. Only developments having a total site plan for structures will be considered. Each building shall be an element of an overall plan for site development. The developer shall illustrate the placement of the buildings and the treatment of spaces, paths, roads, service and parking and in so doing shall take into consideration all requirements of this section and of other relevant sections of this Ordinance. 
11.22.C. The Planning Board may require the construction of storage ponds and dry hydrants for fire protection purposes, and may require fencing. 
11.22.D. Utilities shall be installed underground wherever possible. Transformer boxes, pumping stations and meters shall be located so as not to be unsightly or hazardous to the public. 
11.22.E. For Elderly Housing, each dwelling unit shall have not more than two (2) bedrooms. 
11.22.F. For Low Income Housing there shall be a 2 story limit on height, and 4 units per building, 5 buildings per development. 

11.23 Accessory Dwelling Unit. 
When permitted, an Accessory Dwelling Unit must meet the following standards: 
11.23.A. The lot must be a legally conforming or grandfathered lot. 
11.23.B. The construction must be in compliance with all frontage and yard dimensions contained in Table A, Section 9.6 of the Buxton Zoning Ordinance. 
11.23.C. The use will not essentially alter the character or appearance of the property. 
11.23.D. The use is confined to expanding or altering existing residential dwellings or garages. 
11.23.E. The floor area of the alteration or expansion shall not exceed 500 square feet. 
11.23.F. Additional parking and turnaround space must be provided if needed. On-street parking will not be permitted. Driveways longer than 200 feet from the street must provide an adequate emergency vehicle turnaround. 
11.23.G. The use must provide for its wastewater disposal and be in accordance with the Maine Disposal Rules. 
11.23.H. The alteration or expansion must be in compliance with all state and local fire code safety standards. 
11.23.I. No open or enclosed outside stairways shall be permitted above the first story. 

11.24 Spreading/Storage of Sludge and Septage.(6/97) 
The spreading and/or storage of sludge and septage within the Town of Buxton must meet the following standards: 
11.24.A. All activities shall be performed in accordance with the regulations and provisions in this Ordinance and the applicable DEP permit. The applicant shall provide to the Code Enforcement Officer all reporting data required by the DEP at the time the permit is issued and all subsequent reports required by that state agency. Any activity not performed in accordance with this Ordinance, and any applicable state standards shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance. 
11.24.B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be notified 48 hours in advance of any septage or sludge spreading activity. 
11.24.C. Upon notification that land spreading of sludge will occur, the Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect the site before, during spreading and within 48 hours after spreading has occurred. The Code Enforcement Officer shall maintain a record of each inspection. 
11.24.E. 
The Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect the site for compliance and shall notify in writing the permittee, the DEP and the landowner of any violation along with steps necessary to remedy the situation. 

11.24.E. 
The Code Enforcement Officer shall be permitted to inspect the activity during reasonable hours. 


11.24.F. Any land spreading of sludge or septage that is legally existing and operating with a permit from the DEP prior to the adoption of this section may continue, but shall become subject to the requirements of this section one year after the date of its adoption. 

11.25 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. 
Wireless Telecommunications facilities (herein after referred to as facilities) shall meet the following standards. 
11.25.A. The applicant shall evaluate the use of co-location and shall demonstrate that they cannot provide adequate communication service utilizing any existing facilities. 
11.25.B. The maximum height of any facility shall not exceed 199 feet. The height of an antenna shall be included in the total height limitation as allowed for a facility. 
11.25.C. The facility shall be set back from all property lines a minimum of 125% of the height of the facility. 
11.25.D. The lot the facility will be constructed on must be a conforming lot in the district it is located in. 
11.25.E. A visual impact analysis shall be prepared by a landscape architect or other qualified professional that quantifies the amount of visual impact to properties located within 500 feet and within 2,500 feet of the proposed facility. This analysis will include recommendations to mitigate adverse visual impacts on such properties. The Planning Board reserves the right to determine the color of the facility based on the visual impact survey recommendations. 
11.25.F. The facility shall not be lighted unless mandated by the Federal Aviation Administration or other applicable State and Federal requirements. 
11.25.G. The tower shall be constructed to the current Electronic Industries Association/Telecommunications Industries Association (EIA/TIA) 222 Revision 
Standard entitled “Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting Structures.” 
11.25.H. A security fence of not less than eight feet in height from the finished grade shall be provided around the facility, and any accessory structures. 
11.25.I. The construction of a Wireless Telecommunications facility shall be considered complete upon the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. The facility must be activated no later than twelve months after receipt of the Certificate of Occupancy. The owner shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer on an annual basis regarding the status of the use of the facility no later than thirty (30) days following the anniversary of the Conditional Use approval. 
Wireless Telecommunications facilities that have remained unused for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned. The Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the owner of an abandoned facility in writing and order the removal of the facility within ninety (90) days of receipt of the written notice. The owner of the facility shall have thirty (30) days from the receipt of the notice to demonstrate to the CEO that the facility has not been abandoned. 
The facility tower, any associated buildings used only for sheltering communications equipment and any fencing or other appurtenances desired by the landowner shall be removed following inactivity over a period longer than twelve months. Upon written notification the Code Enforcement Officer may grant approval to the owner to leave such structures in place with the expectation that use and operation will resume in the subsequent twelve-month period, with one twelve month extension allowed. (amended 6/13/09) 
11.25.J. Prior to approval the applicant shall submit a “performance guarantee"(see Town of Buxton Zoning Ordinance, Section 8. 4) acceptable to the Town of Buxton in an amount and form acceptable to the Board of Selectmen sufficient to pay for the cost of the complete removal of the facility and site re-vegetation. The guarantee shall be made available to the Town upon finding, including adequate written notice to the applicant, that the facilities have not been used for a twelve month period. If the owner fails to show that the facility is in active operation, the owner shall have 60 days to remove the facility.  
If the facility is not removed within this time period, the Town of Buxton may remove the facility at the owner's expense. The owner of the facility shall pay all site reclamation costs deemed necessary and reasonable and to return the site to its pre­construction condition, including removal of roads and re-establishment of vegetation if so desired by the landowner. The owner of the facility may apply to the Town for release of the surety when the facility and related equipment are removed to the satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Officer. (amended 6/13/09) 
11.25.K. Not withstanding the foregoing, Wireless Telecommunications Facilities are a permitted use under the following conditions: 
11.25.K.1 The placement of antennas and associated equipment onto an existing structure may be allowed when they are designed to be incorporated into the architecture of new or existing buildings or into the fabric of other man-made or natural structures or features so as to be inconspicuous when viewed from any point not on the host property. 

11.26 Small Wind Energy Systems 
11.26A Purpose The intent of this section is to regulate the placement and construction of Small Wind Energy Systems (SWES) in order to promote safe and efficient use, to reduce the on-site consumption of utility-supplied electricity, and to minimize the visual, environmental, and operational impacts of SWES on the Town and its residents. 
11.26B The following standards will be met prior to issuance of a building permit for an SWES: 
11.26.B.1 Submission Requirements. The following information shall be submitted as part of the building permit application to the Code Enforcement Office for a SWES: 
1. 	A detailed description of the proposed SWES, to include: 
. 	Specifications and drawings, including power generation capacity, of the generator, hub and blade prepared by the manufacturer or a professional engineer. 
. 	A site plan of the property showing the location of the proposed system, existing and proposed structures, and any other significant features on the property. 
. 	Proposed height, 
. 	A line drawing, photograph or equivalent graphic representation of the Wind Turbine, 
. 	Structural drawings of the wind tower, base or foundation, " prepared by the manufacturer or a professional engineer. If attachment to an existing structure is proposed, a description or drawing acceptable to the Code Enforcement Office shall be submitted, documentation from the manufacturer that the SWES will produce noise levels in compliance with Section 10.6 of the Town of Buxton Zoning Ordinance, 
. 	documentation from the manufacturer that the SWES will produce noise levels in compliance with Section 10.6 of the Town of Buxton Zoning Ordinance, 
. 	Photographs of the proposed site. 
2. 
If connection to the publicly regulated utility grid is proposed, the applicant must submit a copy of the contract between the applicant and the utility and/or other evidence that the utility is aware of the proposed connection and finds it acceptable. 

3. 
The SWES must be constructed on a conforming lot in the district in which it is located. 

4. 
Any additional information deemed necessary by the Code Enforcement Office. The applicant must submit any additional information deemed necessary by the Code Enforcement Office. 


11.26.C Height. SWES height shall be the distance measured from the ground level to center of turbine. Height shall be limited to one hundred (100) feet, excepting municipal parcels or installation, which shall be exempt from height restrictions. 
11.26.D Site Requirements for SWES. The Code Enforcement Officer shall determine that the following standards will be met prior to issuance of a building permit for an SWES: 
1. 	
Illumination, signals and signs and antennas are prohibited on SWES except as required by the Federal Communications Commission or the Federal Aviation Administration. 

2. 	
All elements of a SWES shall be set back a distance equal to 100% of the total height, or shall adhere to the side yard or rear yard setback, whichever is greater. If less than a 100% setback from all boundaries is proposed, the Code Enforcement Officer shall require that the SWES and foundation design, taking into consideration soil conditions at the installation site, be certified by a State of Maine Licensed Professional Engineer. 

3. 	
If site layout is such that the collapse or structural failure of a SWES could reasonably be anticipated to pose a threat of harm to persons, buildings, vehicles, vegetation or other features of abutting property (ies) the applicant shall submit proof of insurance against failure to the Town. Said insurance shall be maintained for as long as the SWES remains in place. 

4. 	
No more than one (1) SWES shall be permitted per lot and that SWES shall only generate energy for consumption by or in support of a main building and/or accessory buildings located on the same lot. This standard is not intended to prohibit the transfer of excess energy to the grid as provided in section 


11.26.B.2. 
5. 	
If site layout is such that the collapse or structural failure of a SWES 
could reasonably be anticipated to pose a threat of harm to persons, 
buildings, vehicles, vegetation or other features of abutting 
property(ies) the applicant shall submit proof of insurance against 
failure to the Town. Said insurance shall be maintained for as long 
as the SWES remains in place. 


6. 	
No more than one (1) SWES shall be permitted per lot and that SWES 
shall only generate energy for consumption by or in support of a 
main building and/or accessory buildings located on the same lot. 
This standard is not intended to prohibit the transfer of excess 
energy to the grid as provided in section 11.26.B.2. 


7. 	
The SWES shall be designed with a monopole with or without guy 
wires support structure.  Lattice towers are prohibited. 


8. 	
The minimum distance between the ground and the protruding 
blades shall be 20-feet as measured at the lowest part of the arc of 
the blades. 



a. 	
Both a manual and automatic braking, governing or feathering system shall be required to prevent uncontrolled rotation 

b. 	
After approval and installation of the SWES, the Code Enforcement Officer may require the applicant to perform sound measurements at the closest property line to determine and report ambient and operating decibel levels. 



11.26.E Noise Requirements: 
Sound from any source controlled by this Ordinance shall not exceed the following limits at the lot line of the "receiving" property: 
SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL LIMITS MEASURED IN dB (A)’s 
7am-8pm  8pm-7am  
Business/Commercial Districts  60  50  
Other Districts  55  45  

11.26.F Aesthetics: The purpose of this section is to ensure that the SWES has as minimal as possible adverse visual impact on the surrounding area and abutters, in particular. The tower’s paint color must be non-reflective and neutral. All signs are prohibited on the SWES except for manufacturer’s standard logo on the turbine and/or appropriate warning signs on the base of the tower not to be placed more than 10 feet above the ground.  The SWES shall not be artificially lit unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
Adverse visual impact may occur when an SWES appears out of context in its setting. When assessing the visual impacts of an SWES, both the visual characteristics of the area in which the SWES will be sited, as well as the visual characteristics of the areas from which the SWES will be seen, shall be considered. Where an SWES presents a potential for an undue adverse visual impact, a view shed analysis, using a Geographic Information System (GIS) or similar technology, may be required to be performed at the 
applicant’s expense. 
11.26.G Decommissioning: If the SWES remains unused for a continuous period of 12 months, it must be disassembled by the property owner unless a specific and time-bound extension is provided by the Code Enforcement Officer. The SWES shall be maintained in working condition at all times. Any structure that is or becomes in disrepair such that it does not meet its intended usage in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, must be repaired within 45 days of receipt of a written notice from the Code Enforcement Officer. If the owner fails to comply, the Code Enforcement Officer shall have the tower removed at the owners' expense and any associated legal fees shall be charged to the owner. 
11.26.H Automatic Over-speed Control: All small wind energy systems shall be equipped with manual (electronic or mechanical) and automatic over-speed controls to limit the blade rotation speed to within the design limits of the system. 
11.26.I State & Federal Requirements: Evidence shall be provided that the system meets all federal and state regulations. 
11.26.J Monitoring Equipment: To determine the efficiency of installing a small wind energy system, a limit of three meteorological towers, including guy wires and monitoring equipment, may be erected per lot at any given time. These structures will conform to all setback and height regulations for a small wind energy system and may remain in place for a period not to exceed 18 months with minimal permitting processes and fees. Fees and permitting shall be determined by the Code Enforcement Officer and will require a building permit. 
11.26.K Modification: Existing small wind energy systems will require a building permit for any changes which result in an increase in size, height, width or sound output. Any change in location of the small wind energy system will be deemed to be a new installation. 
11.26.L Site Preparation: To prevent erosion and to maintain the aesthetics surrounding a proposed tower location, minimal clearing of trees and other natural vegetation is encouraged. 
11.26.M Steep Slope Locations: For SWES located on any geologic prominence whose side(s) are incorporated in the Steep Slopes Protection Area, the highest point of a rotating blade may not extend above the highest point of ground on the geologic prominence on which the system is sited unless the applicant can demonstrate that minimal adverse impact will be created. 

11.26.N Exemptions: The following is exempt from the provisions of this section: 
1. An SWES with a rated capacity of less than 500 watts. (added 6/13/09) 

11.27 Medical Marijuana 
11.27 The State of Maine enacted the Maine Medical Marijuana Act, 22 M.R.S.A.§ 2421, ET SEQ. The Act contemplates the creation of a not-for-profit dispensaries for the provision of marijuana for medical use as well as the creation of cultivation facilities to provide marijuana to legally qualified individuals. Marijuana has both legitimate medical uses and a history of widespread illegal use and trafficking. In order to preserve the safety, health and welfare of the citizens of Buxton and others, the dispensing and cultivation of marijuana requires careful attention and control, including but not limited to reasonable security and oversight requirements. 
a. Security and oversight requirements: 
1. 	
There shall be no outdoor cultivation of marijuana. 

2. 	
Alarm Systems -Registered dispensaries and registered cultivation facilities shall have door and window intrusion alarms with audible and police notification components. 

3. 	
Exterior security lighting – registered dispensaries and registered cultivation facilities shall have spot lights with motion sensors covering the full perimeter of the facility. 

4. 	
Video surveillance – registered dispensaries and registered cultivation facilities shall have recorded video surveillance covering all plants and the entire exterior. For registered cultivation facilities, the recorded video surveillance shall operate 24 hours a day, seven days a week and for registered dispensaries shall, at a minimum, operate at all times that the facility is not open to patients. Records of surveillance shall be kept for a minimum of 30 days. 

5. 
A registered dispensary may not be open to the public between the hours of 8:00 pm and 7:00 am. 

6. 
Sufficient measures must be in place at all times to prevent smoke or order from exiting a registered dispensary or registered cultivation facility. 


b. Registered dispensaries must be located in area defined as Business/Commercial and Light Commercial Districts as of July 1, 2015 with a minimum of 500 feet from any public or private school, public library, playground, public park, church, chapel, parish house, other place of worship, or daycare measured by straight line from the dispensary property line to the property line of the protected location. 
c.  The facility may exist in the Town of Buxton and is limited to 2,500 square feet. 
d. Hours of operation shall be between 8:00 am to 5:00 pm, Monday through Saturday. 


11.28 Design Standards for Buxton’s Business Commercial (BC) District 
In addition to all other applicable performance standards, all commercial buildings and structures erected, reconstructed, renovated, altered, enlarged, or moved, and uses of the premises in the Business and Commercial (BC), Light Commercial (LC) and Village (V) Zones shall be in conformity with the provisions of the Buxton Business and Commercial Zone Design Standards.   (Enacted: 6/18/2016, amended 6/17/17) 
TOWN OF BUXTON 
Design Standards for Buxton’s Business Commercial Zone 

Table of Contents 

SECTION 1.  GENERAL............................................................................................................... 1 


A. Short Title ............................................................................................................................. 1 


B.  Purpose.................................................................................................................................. 1 


C.  Retroactivity; Effective Date................................................................................................. 1 


D. General Provisions ................................................................................................................ 1 


E. Administration....................................................................................................................... 2 

SECTION 2.  DEFINITION OF TERMS ...................................................................................... 3 

SECTION 3.  SITE PLANNING.................................................................................................... 6 


A. Background ........................................................................................................................... 6 


B.  Site Planning Goals ............................................................................................................... 6 


C.  General Site Planning Standards........................................................................................... 6 


D. Circulation Planning ............................................................................................................. 7 


E. Parking Areas ........................................................................................................................ 9 


F.  Pedestrian Spaces ................................................................................................................ 10 


G. Public Sidewalks.................................................................................................................. 11 


H. Internal Sidewalks and Walkways ...................................................................................... 12 


I.  Multiple Building Developments ......................................................................................... 13 


J.  Non-Public Service Areas .................................................................................................... 14 


K. Buffers & Screening ........................................................................................................... 16 


L.  Stormwater Management .................................................................................................... 16 

SECTION 4.  ARCHITECTURE ................................................................................................. 18 


A. Background ......................................................................................................................... 18 



E. Façade Design ..................................................................................................................... 20 


F.  Building Materials ............................................................................................................... 22 


G. Awnings and Canopies ....................................................................................................... 22 


H. Rooflines............................................................................................................................. 23 


I.  Street Corner Buildings ........................................................................................................ 24 


J.  Design Standards for National Franchises ........................................................................... 26 


K. Large Scale Buildings ......................................................................................................... 26 


L. Linear Commercial Buildings (Strip Shopping Centers, Multi-tenant Offices, Commercial Buildings).................................................................................................................................. 28 
M. Linear Commercial Buildings (Service Stations, Car Washes, and Convenience Stores). 28 
N. Office Buildings.................................................................................................................. 29 


O. Drive-Throughs................................................................................................................... 30 

SECTION 5. LANDSCAPING ................................................................................................... 31 


A. Background ......................................................................................................................... 31 


B.  Landscape Goals ................................................................................................................. 31 


C.  General Standards ............................................................................................................... 31 


D. Parking Lots ........................................................................................................................ 33 


E. Tree Selection & Plantings.................................................................................................. 34 


F.  Shrubs & Ornamental Plantings .......................................................................................... 35 


G. Landscape Maintenance...................................................................................................... 35 

SECTION 6.  SIGNAGE .............................................................................................................. 37 


A. Background ......................................................................................................................... 37 


B.  Signage Goals...................................................................................................................... 37 


C.  Sign Design ......................................................................................................................... 37 


D. Maximum Sign Sizes ...........................................................Error! Bookmark not defined. 

E. Façade-Mounted Signs ........................................................................................................ 41 


F.  Multi-tenant Properties ........................................................................................................ 41 


G. Externally-Lit Signs ............................................................................................................ 42 


H. Internally-Lit Signs ............................................................................................................. 43 

SECTION 7.  LIGHTING ............................................................................................................ 46 


A. Background ......................................................................................................................... 46 


B.  Lighting Goals..................................................................................................................... 46 


C.  General Standards ............................................................................................................... 46 


D. Driveway Lighting .............................................................................................................. 48 


E. Parking Lot Lighting ........................................................................................................... 49 


G. Building Façade & Landscape Lighting ............................................................................. 50 


H. Gas Station, Convenience Store & Drive-Through Lighting.............................................. 51 


SECTION 1.  GENERAL 
A. 	Short Title 
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the “Buxton Business and Commercial Zone Design Standards” and maybe referred to herein as “this Ordinance.” 

B.  	Purpose 
A well-designed commercial district being an integral part of the Town of Buxton’s future development and necessary to provide jobs, services, and a diverse tax base, the Business and Commercial Zone Design Standards are intended to establish a benchmark for high-quality New England-style architectural design that provide a greater sense of continuity throughout the business district; offer predictability to existing businesses and residents; encourage future commercial investment and diversification of the tax base; and provide confidence to businesses considering making a significant investment in the Town through building, relocating or renovating.  

C. 	Retroactivity; Effective Date 
Notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S. § 302, and regardless of the date on which it is approved by the voters, this Ordinance shall be retroactively effective as of April 25, 2016 and shall govern any and all pending proceedings on or at any time after April 25, 2016. 

D. 	General Provisions 
1. 	
Authority. This Ordinance is adopted by the Town, under the authority granted by the enabling provisions of the Maine Constitutions, 30-A M.R.S. § 3001, and all other applicable authority. The Board of Selectmen is hereby granted the authority to administer and enforce this Ordinance or any clause or provision thereof, and to promulgate rules and regulations consistent with this Ordinance after holding a public hearing and upon a majority vote of the Board of Selectmen, as may be necessary or desirable in the judgment of the Board of Selectmen to promote the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Town. 

2. 	
Applicability. All commercial buildings and structures hereinafter erected, reconstructed, renovated, altered, enlarged, or moved, and uses of the premises in the Town of Buxton Business and Commercial (BC), Light Commercial (LC) and Village (V) Zones shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. The provisions herein shall be minimum requirements. 

3. 	
Conflict with Other Ordinances. This Ordinance is intended to be complementary to other Town ordinances affecting land uses and structures. Whenever a provision of this Ordinance conflicts, or is inconsistent, with another provision of this Ordinance, or other Town ordinances, or where there is a conflict between this Ordinance and any other federal, state or local rule, regulation, ordinance, statute or other restriction, the more restrictive provision shall control. 

4. 	
Validity and Severability. In the event that any section, subsection or portion of this Ordinance is declared invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction for any reason, such a declaration shall not affect the validity of any other section, subsection or portion of this Ordinance. 



E.  	Administration 
1. 	
Permits. The Town of Buxton Planning Board shall administer the standards of this Ordinance, except that if a use is permitted without Planning Board review pursuant to Table B of Article 9 of the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Buxton, Maine (the “Zoning Ordinance’), the use shall be subject to review and approval by the Code Enforcement 

Officer. All submissions to the Planning Board or the Code Enforcement Officer shall be made through the Code Enforcement Office. 

2. 	
Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer or other person duly qualified and authorized by the Town of Buxton to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance in accordance with the terms set forth in Article 5 of the Zoning Ordinance. 

3. 	
Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall hear appeals from actions or failure to act of the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to Article 6 of the Zoning Ordinance. 

4. 	
Application Fees; Technical Review Fees. An application subject to this Ordinance must be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee. The fee is intended to cover the cost of the Town’s administrative processing of the application, including but not limited to notification, advertising, and mailings.  The fee must be paid to the Town and evidence of payment of the fee must be included in the application.  


In addition to the application fee, an applicant subject to this Ordinance must also pay a 
technical review fee to defray the Town’s legal and technical costs of application review, 
the amount to be determined by the Planning Board. The amount of the technical review fee shall be reasonably related to the necessary or probable costs incurred by the Town which relate directly to the review of the application pursuant to this Ordinance. Such costs may include, but are not limited to, consulting engineering, architectural, design professional and attorney fees. The Town shall provide the applicant, upon written request, with an accounting of the technical review fee and shall refund any amount remaining after the payment by the Town of all costs and services related to its review. Such payment of remaining monies shall be made no later than sixty (60) days after the approval of the application, denial of the application, or approval with condition of the application. Such refund shall be accompanied by a final accounting or expenditures from the fund. The monies in such fund shall not be used by the Town for any enforcement purposes. 
The Municipal Officers, from time to time and after consultation with the Planning Board, establish a schedule of application fees and technical review fees following posting of the proposed schedule of fees and public hearing. 
SECTION 2.  DEFINITION OF TERMS 

1. 	
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)-A 1990 federal law, as amended, designed to bring disabled Americans into the economic mainstream in order to provide them equal access to jobs, transportation, public facilities, and services. (Codified in Title 4, chapter 126, and Title 47, chapter 5, of the United States Code.) 

2. 	
Architectural Feature-A visually prominent or significant part or element of a building, structure or site. 

3. 	
Bollards-Posts used in landscape for functional (e.g., separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic) or decorative purposes.  

4. 	
Buffering-Landscaped areas, berms, fencing, walls or other physical features that are planted or installed to physically or visually separate land uses.  

5. 	
Cross Easement-The reciprocal legal right of vehicular passage from one property to another. 

6. 	
Curb Cut-The opening along the curb line at which point vehicles may enter or leave the roadway.  

7. 	
Cutoff Fixture-A type of light fixture that prevents most light from projecting above the horizontal plane of the fixture. 

8. 	
Fenestration-Window treatment in a building or on a building façade.  

9. 	
Footcandles-The basic unit of illumination. 

10. 	
Gateways-Entrances into recognizable places or areas of significant changes in land use.  

11. 	
Human Scale-The structural features of a development, including their size, height, and massing, which serve to integrate the development with the street environment so as to prevent the development from dominating the pedestrian experience. 

12. 	
IES-Illuminating Engineering Society -the professional society that makes recommendations for lighting standards. 

13. 	
Massing-The grouping of three-dimensional forms to achieve variation (as in a building or landscape planting).  

14. 	
May-A term that indicates authorization or permission to act. 

15. 	
Must-A term that indicates a mandatory duty, action or requirement.  “Shall” and “must” 


are terms of equal weight. 
16. 	Neck downs-Located at the opening of curb lines, an extension of the curb width, usually by 7-8 feet, in order to decrease the distance between opposing curb lines and to prohibit 
parking.  Sometimes referred to as “bump outs.” 
17. 	
Parapet-The extension of the main walls of a building above the roof line. 

18. 	
Peer Review-The use of qualified professionals to review specific aspects of a Site Plan 


application for conformance with the Town’s Ordinances or Design Standards. 
19. 	
Performance Guarantee-Any security that is accepted by the Town to guarantee that improvements required as part of an application for development will be satisfactorily completed.  

20. 	
Practicable-Available and feasible considering cost, existing technology and logistics based on the overall purpose of the development. 

21. 	
Readerboard-A sign affiliated with a business or institution that contains temporary announcements about events or activities occurring on the premises. 

22. 	
Residential Area-Any residential property in the Commercial Business (BC) zone or any residentially zoned property.  

23. 	
Redevelopment-The reconstruction, reuse, or change in use of any developed property, including an increase in intensity of use or structural enlargement.  

24. 	
Renovation-The construction of an addition, alteration, rehabilitation, restoration or upgrade to the design and layout of a building.  

25. 	
Scale-The relationship of the structural features of a development, including their size, height, and massing, to one another and the surroundings.  

26. 	
Service Area-A designated area, either attached to or separated from the main commercial building, where a business accommodates services such as product shipping and delivery, trash pickup, machinery and equipment repair, and utility storage. 

27. 	
Shall-A term that indicates a mandatoryduty, action or requirement. “Shall” and “must” 


are terms of equal weight. 
28. 	
Should-A term that indicates best practices or a recommended (but not mandatory) duty, action or requirement. 

29. 	
Sight Triangle-A triangular-shaped portion of land established at street intersections in which nothing is erected, placed, or planted that would limit or obstruct the motorist’s vision as the motorist enters or departs the intersection. 

30. 	
Site Furnishings-Constructed above-ground objects, such as outdoor seating, kiosks, bus shelters, sculpture, tree grids, trash receptacles, and fountains that provide structural and visual variety to streets, sidewalks, plazas, and other outdoor spaces used by the public.  

31. 	
Strip Shopping Centers-Open-air shopping areas where retail establishments and other commercial structures are arranged in a row along a road, and usually accompanied by multiple roadway access points, highly visible off-street parking, and an assortment of commercial uses with direct access to abutting roads.  

32. 	
Standard Note-A citation that must accompany all site plans brought before the Planning Board.  See Section 3.C.f (“Standard Note”) for example.  

33. 	
Temporary Sign-A commercial sign which is installed for a limited time and is not constructed or intended for long-term use.  


SECTION 3.  SITE PLANNING 
A. Background 
Each property within Buxton’s commercial district is unique. Development site plans should be 
based upon a careful understanding of the site in order to meet the needs of the business while improving the functionality, safety, and visual character of Buxton’s commercial community.  
B.  Site Planning Goals 
Development site plans should contribute to: . Creating distinctive, attractive commercial districts that welcome people to Buxton. . Creating and maintaining public open space throughout the commercial area to enhance its 
appearance and encourage pedestrian use. . Creating an attractive, functional, and safe environment that is conducive to commerce and 
other permitted activities. . Creating quality redevelopment of transitional or substandard properties. . Protecting abutting residential property values through sensitive site planning, buffering, 
and architectural design. . Upgrading the visual character and human scale of commercial districts through particular attention to architecture, site planning, signage, and lighting. . Increased walking and cycling activity within commercial districts by providing safe, attractive, interconnected facilities.  . Universal accessibility for all, in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). . Access management throughout the commercial district so as to maintain efficient traffic flow and high levels of traffic and pedestrian safety. 
C. General Site Planning Standards 
1. Objectives 
Development site planning should result in an attractive, safe, and economically viable relationship between buildings, parking, signage, lighting, landscaping, and the surrounding environment. Site plans should minimize the visual effects of parking, feature high quality landscaping, accommodate pedestrian movement where possible, and encourage connections to nearby properties.  
2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	
Proximity of Buildings to Roadways: Buildings shall be located as close to the front property line as practicable. The majority of parking shall be located at the rear or side of buildings where practicable.  

b. 	
Relationships to Residential Properties:  The façades of buildings which abut or are visible from residential neighborhoods shall use forms, materials, and details which are residential in nature and appearance. Service areas, parking lots, outdoor storage yards, and other similar features shall not be visible from residential neighborhoods.  

c. 	
Licensed Professionals: All plans for development/redevelopment shall be designed by licensed professionals (e.g., architects, landscape architects, civil engineers, traffic engineers). The Planning Board, at its discretion, may require a peer review, at the 


applicant’s expense, of any plans submitted.  
d. 	
Access Management: Site plans involving curb cuts onto major roadways shall promote efficient traffic flow and provide for the safety of pedestrians and motorists.  

e. 	
Landscaping: Any space between a roadway and the front of a building which is not used for parking shall be landscaped with trees, flowering shrubs, fencing, stone walls, and similar aesthetic elements.  Existing healthy trees and shrubs shall be preserved or transplanted to another area of the site whenever practicable.  

f. 	
Standard Note: All plans submitted for Planning Board approval shall contain the following standard note: 


The property shown on this plan may be developed and used only as depicted on this approved plan. All elements and features of the plan and all representations made by the applicant concerning the development and use of the property which appear in the record of the Planning Board proceedings are conditions of approval. No change from the conditions of approval is permitted unless an amended plan is first submitted to and approved by the Planning Board.  
D. 	Circulation Planning 
1. 	Objectives 
All development activities should be characterized by safe, user-friendly, and efficient traffic flow. Access management principles should be followed to reduce the number of curb cuts, provide a safe vehicular and pedestrian environment, encourage intra-parcel travel, and minimize the number of trips on roadways.  
2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	
Curb Cuts on Major Roads:  Site plans shall be designed to minimize the number of curb cuts on major roadways so as to increase vehicular and pedestrian safety. 

b. 	
Shared Access: Entrances to abutting commercial properties shall be shared to the extent practicable. 

c. 	
Internal Traffic Flow: To ensure the safety of motorists, delivery trucks, and pedestrians, the site plan shall clearly delineate internal traffic patterns. Parking space, directional arrows, crosswalks, and other markings on the ground shall be delineated with pavement paint or other similar materials.  

d. 	
Internal Connections: Where practicable, connections between parking lots and driveways on adjacent parcels shall be provided to facilitate deliveries and minimize turning movements onto major roadways. Any such internal connections shall provide safe, direct access between adjacent lots in a manner that prevents such connections from becoming vehicular shortcuts. Cross easements shall be provided for any internal connections.  The site plan shall be designed to accommodate future vehicular internal connections to abutting undeveloped property.  

e. 	
Internal Pedestrian Connections: Safe pedestrian connections between abutting land uses shall be provided where practicable to encourage foot traffic and minimize vehicular movement.  

f. 	
Traffic Calming: Traffic calming measures shall be utilized as necessary to discourage motorist speeding within the site and between abutting properties.   Measures may include speed tables, on-street parking, raised crosswalks, vertical curbing, curvilinear road alignment, roadside plantings, neck downs, curbed islands, and signage.  

g. 	
Drive-Throughs: Access routes leading to or from takeout windows or other drive­throughs shall be designed to avoid conflicts with pedestrian circulation routes.  Signage, lighting, raised crosswalks, changes in paving, or other devices shall be used as necessary to make motorists aware of pedestrians. The site plan shall be designed to prevent motorist queuing in parking lots or other areas which would cause congestion or unsafe conditions.   

h. 	
Pedestrian and Bicycle Movement: The site plan shall be designed to provide safe pedestrian and bicycle movement within the site and, where practicable, shall provide pedestrian and bicycle linkages to adjacent properties, both developed and undeveloped.  Pedestrian and bicycle connections between abutting properties shall be coordinated with vehicular routes to encourage foot traffic and minimize vehicular movement.  

i. 	
Refuge Zones: Pedestrian islands (five feet minimum width) shall be installed in driveways and streets where the crossing distance is greater than 32 feet. 

j. 	
Outparcel Development: Plans for multi-building or multi-parcel developments shall be designed to accommodate future buildings, access roads, sidewalks, esplanades, and signage in a coordinated fashion.  

k. 	
Service Drives: Service drives shall be separated from internal walkways, parking areas, or pedestrian use areas by landscaped islands, grade changes, or other devices to minimize pedestrian contact.  

E.  	
Parking Areas 


1. 	Objectives 
Parking lots should be designed to complement adjacent buildings, the site, and the commercial district without becoming a dominant visual element. The scale of parking lots should be reduced by minimizing the total amount of paved surface visible from the road.  
Parking lots should be designed as inviting, pedestrian-friendly places by utilizing landscaping, lighting, and internal walkways. With proper planning, parking lots can balance the needs of both the vehicle and the pedestrian.  
2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	
Siting: Whenever practicable, the majority of parking areas shall be located at the rear or sides of commercial buildings, except where parking would be located adjacent to a residential neighborhood or when parking is included as part of a multi-building site plan. Where parking areas are located adjacent to a residential neighborhood, the parking area shall be screened from view from the residential neighborhood using evergreen trees, earth berms, fences, or shrubs.  

b. 	
Orientation: Parking lots shall be included on the site plan for the site, and shall take into account the locations and design of building entrances, lighting, and landscaping.  

c. 	
Scale: Parking areas shall be broken up with trees, landscaped islands, grade changes, low walls, or other similar features to reduce their scale in relation to their 


surroundings. See Section 5 (“Landscaping”) for specificstandards regardingparking 
lots.  
d. 	
Relationship to Buildings: Paved surfaces of parking lots shall be separated from buildings by a minimum of five feet of landscaping and/or a raised sidewalk.    

e. 	
Screening: Where parking is permitted between the building and the road, the parking area shall be screened along the road by berms, fencing, low walls, trees, shrubs, 


perennial masses, or a combination of such elements. The maximum height of the screen shall be 3+/-feet. 
f. 	Landscaping in Parking Lots: A minimum of 10% of the parking lot surface area shall be landscaped. Planting islands shall be a minimum of 9 feet in width. Planting of natural groupings or clusters of trees within or surrounding parking areas is 
encouraged.  See Section 5 (“Landscaping”) for further standards.  
g. 	
Dead End Parking Lots: Parking lots with a single point of access shall not be used to the extent practicable. . Where dead-end parking lots are used, space shall be provided to safely turn a vehicle around without having to back out of the parking lot.  

h. 	
Shared Parking: Shared parking should be utilized, particularly where abutting land uses have differing hours of peak parking demand. Where utilized, cross easements shall be required.  

i. 	
Safety: Crosswalks shall be marked by a change in pavement texture, pattern, or color to maximize pedestrian safety in parking areas and other potentially hazardous areas. Shrubs, ornamental grasses, walls, or other landscape elements used in or around parking areas shall be selected so as to maintain visibility necessary for safe pedestrian and vehicular movement. 

j. 	
Side Lot Parking: Parking on the side of a building shall not extend closer to the street than the front façade of the building. The space between the parking lot and any adjacent roadway shall be landscaped according to an overall plan for the property.  

k. 	
Snow Storage: Provision shall be made for snow storage in the design of all parking areas. Snow storage areas shall be shown on the site plan and shall be designed to avoid conflicts with landscaping, visibility, drainage, or icing during winter months.  Site plans shall indicate locations for snow storage in areas where they will not interfere with pedestrian movement, block visibility, cause dangerous conditions from freezing meltwater, or cause conflicts with landscaping, visibility, drainage, or icing during winter months. Snow storage areas shall not be used in calculating the minimum parking spaces required for the site.   

l. 	
Buildings in Existing Parking Lots: Smaller commercial buildings may be constructed on existing parking lots on out-parcels to break up the scale of large parking areas.  

F.  	
Pedestrian Spaces 


1. 	Objectives 
Entrances to buildings should be designed to provide outdoor spaces for a variety of uses, including seating/resting, dining, displays, and aesthetic enhancement, in order to create a pedestrian-friendly environment.  
2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	
Planning: Outdoor use areas should be located in sunny, highly visible locations and sized to fit the anticipated uses. The design should be a collaborative effort between architect, landscape architect, engineers, artists, and other design professionals.  

b. 	
Materials: Outdoor use areas shall be constructed of durable, easily maintained materials. All elements within the space shall be designed to achieve a unified look with the other architectural and site elements. Decorative paving may be used for sitting areas, pedestrian plazas, building entrances, or other designed open spaces. See 


Section 5 (“Landscaping”) for planting standards. 
c. 	
Entrances: Major entrances to new or renovated buildings shall be visually prominent through the use of canopies, recessed entries, seating areas, decorative plantings and lighting, and other similar elements.  

G. 
Public Sidewalks 


1. 	Objectives 
Public sidewalks should be provided wherever possible throughout Buxton’s commercial 
area. Existing and proposed road corridors, excluding Route 202, should include sidewalks, planted esplanades, crosswalks, and pedestrian amenities to encourage a safe flow of non-motorized traffic.  
2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	
Public Sidewalks: Wherever possible, sidewalks and planted esplanades shall be provided within or near the right-of-way on both sides of all streets to encourage safe pedestrian movement.  Facilities shall be coordinated with abutting land uses to create interconnections throughout the commercial area and linkages to surrounding residential neighborhoods.  Lighting and other amenities should be at a human scale.  

b. 	
Coordination with Site Plan: All new sidewalks shall be coordinated with the Site Plan to avoid conflicts with landscaping, utilities, grading, drainage structures, signs, and other elements. All walks shall be designed to facilitate snow removal and allow year-round use. Sheet flow of storm water across sidewalks shall be avoided.  Underground storm drainage systems are strongly encouraged.  

c. 	
Material Selection: Concrete sidewalks with granite curbing shall be used on sidewalks within the public ROW. 

d. 	
Crosswalks: Where sidewalks intersect with commercial drives or roads, crosswalks shall be installed to alert the motorist and improve visibility. Crosswalks shall offer a noticeable change in texture and color. Materials for crosswalks shall be highly durable and slip resistant.  

e. 	
Lighting: Sidewalks shall be lit to minimum standards recommended by the IES Lightning Handbook, 10th Edition, to promote safe use during evening hours.  

f. 	
Accessibility: All new and renovated facilities shall be located, designed, and detailed in full compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).  

H. 	
Internal Sidewalks and Walkways 


1. 	Objectives 
Commercial properties should provide attractive, safe, and functional walkways between the public right-of-way and the main entrance. Internal walkways should invite pedestrians onto the property and make them feel welcome.  
2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	
Internal Walkways: Continuous internal walkways shall be provided from any public sidewalks to the principal customer entrance of all principal buildings on the site. At a minimum, walkways shall connect focal points of pedestrian activity such as, but not limited to, outdoor seating, street crossings, and building entrances.  

b. 	
Location: Walkways shall be located where motorists can anticipate pedestrians and react accordingly. Walkways shall be designed to give the pedestrian a full view of oncoming vehicles, with minimal interference from trees, shrubs, and parked cars. Walkways shall avoid drive-through lanes, access and service drives, and other high-traffic routes. Traffic control signs, light fixtures, trees, or other potential obstacles shall be located far enough from walkways to prevent interference with pedestrian movement.  

c. 	
Orientation: Walkways in parking lots shall be aligned with the main entry or a focal point on the building to assist in wayfinding.  

d. 	
Curbing: Internal walkways shall be separated from parking bays and/or travel lanes by raised curbing. Granite is preferred for its longevity, low maintenance, and appearance.  

e. 	
Width:  Internal walkways shall be a minimum of five feet wide to allow two people to pass comfortably. Where shopping carts or wheelchairs are anticipated to be used, where heavy pedestrian traffic is anticipated, or where cars are likely to overhang the walkway, additional width may be necessary.  

f. 	
Coordination with Landscaping: Areas adjacent to walkways shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs, benches, flower beds, ground cover, or other such materials.  Walkways in parking lots shall include landscaped islands to provide visual relief and shade, and to break up the scale of parking lots. Shrubs and other landscaping must not cause blind spots. Special features, such as benches, flower beds, and planters, may be used to enhance the walkway. Trees along all walkways shall be trimmed to provide 


adequate sight distance and to remove potential visual obstacles for motorists. Vertical clearances of at least eight feet shall be maintained for all trees along walkways.  
g. 	
Lighting: A minimum level of lighting shall be provided, following the standards of the IES Lightning Handbook, 10th Edition, to safely guide the pedestrian from the front entrance to the parking lot and/or public sidewalk. 

h. 	
Drainage:  All internal walkways shall be designed to avoid sheet flow of stormwater across walkways. Culverts shall be sized to prevent ponding and provide uninterrupted use of the walkway.  

i. 	
Maintenance: All internal walkways shall be designed to facilitate maintenance by the property owner. The site plan shall coordinate the locations of walkways with utilities, plantings, drainage, and other site elements that could affect long-term maintenance.  

j. 	
Snow Removal: All walkways shall be designed for ease of snow removal to encourage year-round use.    

k. 	
Accessibility: Walkways shall be located, designed, and detailed in full compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). 

I. 
Multiple Building Developments 


1. 	Objectives 
Multiple building developments (MBDs) should exhibit a high degree of coordination in site planning, architectural design, site design, and site detailing. All physical components should be designed to complement an overall plan.  
2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	
Master Plan: For MBDs, a conceptual master plan shall be prepared to illustrate the general location of all anticipated buildings, parking lots, roads and driveways, walkways, common open spaces, utilities, service areas, stormwater management features, and other components of site development. The master plan shall show how traffic, stormwater, and utilities will be coordinated with adjacent properties. The plan shall illustrate the measures that will be taken to minimize adverse impacts to significant natural or cultural features, including wetlands, specimen trees, or stone walls.  

b. 	
Phasing Plan: As part of the site plan application, the applicant shall provide a phasing plan that illustrates the sequence of development.  

c. 	
Building Orientation: All buildings in MBDs shall be oriented to create usable, safe, and attractive pedestrian spaces, preserve significant natural or cultural features, and minimize the scale of parking areas.  

d. 	
Outdoor Spaces: MBDs shall include outdoor use common areas, including but not limited to greens, plazas, and courtyards. Buildings may be oriented toward open spaces rather than roadways.  Open space oriented buildings shall have a major access point facing the open space and a secondary access point(s) oriented to parking areas. Outdoor spaces shall be coordinated with the pedestrian circulation plan to encourage pedestrian use, with provisions for seating and outdoor activities. Outdoor spaces shall be designed to separate pedestrian and vehicular traffic with landscaping, grade changes, and other site features.  

e. 	
Drive-Through Facilities: Where drive-through facilities are a component of MBDs, the building and site plan shall accommodate and prioritize pedestrian access.  

f. 	
Signage Plan: Applicants for MBDs shall submit a master signage plan that shows how graphics will complement and unify the proposed development. See Section 6 


(“Signage”).  
g. 	Lighting Plan: Site lighting for MBDs shall be coordinated with all other elements of the site.  A lighting plan shall be prepared and submitted to the Planning Board as part 
of the Site Plan review process.  See Section 7 (“Lighting”).  
h. 	
Landscape Plan: Landscaping for MBDs shall be coordinated with all other elements of the site. As part of the application for Site Plan approval, applicants shall submit a master landscape plan that shows how landscaping will be used to complement proposed buildings, reinforce circulation paths, help define pedestrian use areas, highlight entrances, provide shade and add seasonal interest to the landscape. See Section 5 (“Landscaping”) for additional standards on landscape materials. 

i. 	
Shared Stormwater Management: Where practicable, treatment basins shall be designed to be shared by multiple building sites to minimize the land area devoted to stormwater management. See Section 3.L (“Stormwater Management”) for further details. 

J. 	
Non-Public Service Areas 


1. 	Objectives 
Non-public service areas should be integrated into the overall site plan. Such areas should be designed to meet the functional needs of the facility while minimizing traffic or visual conflicts, audible noise, or smells.  
2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	
Locations: All structures and facilities associated with service areas, including waste collection and storage facilities, off-street loading and unloading areas, loading docks, storage facilities, dumpsters, fueling areas, and vehicle service and maintenance areas, shall be located at the side or rear of the principal building. To the extent practicable, service areas shall avoid facing public roadways or abutting residential properties.  Overhead doors or other vehicle entrances or exits shall not be located on any façade that faces a public street or residential neighborhood.  

b. 	
Design: Service areas shall be sized to fit the specific needs of the building and its 


intended operations. The smallest size needed to meet the building’s requirements 
should be used.  
c. 	
Screening: Service areas shall be screened to minimize their visibility from public and private roadways, main entrances, abutting residential neighborhoods, public open spaces, and public pathways. Service areas shall be screened with architectural elements such as walls or fences. Screening may also include evergreen trees, shrubs, and earth berms.  

d. 	
Screening Design:  Structural screens and fencing shall complement the design of the main structure through repetition of materials, detailing, scale, and color. Where chain link fencing is required for safety, it shall be landscaped and painted black or a similar dark color, or coated with dark vinyl. Plastic slats in chain link fencing shall not be used.  Gates shall be designed to prevent sagging. 

e. 	
Service Access: Service areas shall be sited to accommodate the turning movements of vehicles used for trash pickup, deliveries, and similar functions without conflicting with other vehicles.  

f. 	
Coordination: Prior to submittal of a Site Plan application, the applicant shall contact utility companies, fuel suppliers, trash haulers, the fire department to seek comment on the design and siting of service areas and facilities.  

g. 	
Protection: Where architectural screening or freestanding fencing is used for screening, it shall be protected with granite posts or concrete-filled steel bollards, or reinforced in a manner that will prevent damage from service vehicles.  

h. 	
Recycling Facilities: Recycling bins should be installed and used.. All recycling facilities shall be screened in a manner similar to other service areas. Dumpsters and recycling areas shall be consolidated where practicable. 

K.  	
Buffers & Screening 


1. 	Objectives 
Buffering and screening should be used to minimize incompatibility between land uses, particularly between commercial and residential properties. Plantings, earth berms, stone walls, grading changes, fences, distance, and other means can be used effectively to create visual and psychological separation.  
2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	
Planning: Buffering and screening materials shall be selected based on existing site conditions, distances to property lines, and the intensity of the proposed land use. Consideration should be given to preferences of abutting landowners, if any.  Discussions between the applicant and the Planning Board regarding the need for buffers and appropriate sizes and types shall begin at the sketch plan review.  

b. 	
Design: Buffers and screens are an integral part of the Site Plan. Stone walls, plantings, fencing, landforms, and other buffering and screening materials shall be used to screen from view any incompatible land uses. Any buffering and screening materials shall be compatible in form, texture, scale, and appearance to other landscape elements. Structural buffers and screens (e.g., screening walls) shall be compatible with the buildings and structures, in terms of scale, materials, forms, and surface treatment.  

c. 	
Maintenance: All natural and structural buffers and screens shall be maintained in a condition that assures their continual effectiveness. Where plantings do not survive, or grow to a point where they no longer serve as effective buffers, they shall be replaced to comply with the approved plan.  

L.  	
Stormwater Management 


1. 	Objectives 
Where necessary to comply with Town requirements and MeDEP Stormwater Management law, site plans shall incorporate treatment basins or other measures to maintain the quality of stormwater runoff. All stormwater management areas should be treated as integral and attractive parts of the landscape.  
2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	
Location: Where stormwater treatment basins or other related facilities are required, they shall be located in the least visible portion of the site. Where visible, they shall be graded to conform to natural contours and planted to integrate them into the natural landscape.  

b. 	
Designs: Stormwater treatment basins shall be patterned after naturalistic landforms, avoiding hard geometric shapes. Side slopes shall be landscaped with plantings that 


minimize erosion and screen the basin. Islands can be effective in breaking up the mass of a treatment pond while increasing habitat opportunities.  
c. 	
Grading: Abrupt changes in grading and steep side slopes (>3:1) shall be avoided. Transitional grading shall be used to blend all earthworks into the natural contours of the land where possible.  

d. 	
Structures: Man-made drainage structures (e.g., culverts, manholes, and outfalls) that are visible from roadways or residential neighborhoods shall be screened with vegetation or treated to reduce their visibility and integrate them into the landscape.  

e. 	
Planting Design: Plantings used in stormwater treatment ponds should be designed by a professional familiar with the growing requirements of wetland species.  

f. 	
Shared Basins: Where practicable, treatment basins shall be designed to be shared by abutting properties to minimize the amount of land area devoted to stormwater management.  

g. 	
Rip-Rap: Where ground protection is necessary in highly visible locations (e.g., at spillways and culverts), it shall be constructed of hand-placed rock or geo-grid, rather than course rip-rap. Where practicable, coarse crushed rock in visible roadside ditches shall be avoided.  


SECTION 4.  ARCHITECTURE 


A. 	Background 
These Architecture Standards establish criteria for new or renovated buildings in Buxton’s 
commercial districts. They anticipate a greater sense of continuity and identity by encouraging high quality New England-style architectural design.  

B.  	Architectural Goals 
New or renovated buildings should be designed using architecture that offers a positive experience from three perspectives: by the motorist driving along the road corridor, by the pedestrian viewing 
the buildings up close, and in relation to surrounding buildings that tie into the community’s 
identity.  New or renovated buildings should be designed: 
. 	To neighborhood scale, form, orientation, height, setback, massing, materials, and architectural features.  
. 	To a human scale that addresses the comfort, enjoyment, and safety of the users. 
. 	As permanent, positive additions to the commercial districts, constructed of high quality, long lasting materials. 
. 	To utilize energy conservation measures wherever possible. 
C. 	General Architectural Standards 
1. 	Objectives 
The purpose of these standards is to encourage architecture with Buxton’s commercial 
districts that take its inspiration from traditional New England examples.  Building design should reinforce a human-scaled environment through careful consideration of architectural forms, massing, detailing, the number and use of materials, and color.  
2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	
Design: The architectural design shall utilize traditional New England building forms for rooflines, window trim, entrances, and all other major architectural elements to the extent practicable.  

b. 	
Licensed Architects: Any structure subject to site plan review shall be designed by an architect licensed in the State of Maine.  

c. 	
Freestanding Accessory Structures: Non-habitable structures, such as freestanding ATMs, garages, service stations, canopies, storage units, recycling sheds, trash enclosures, and utility buildings shall meet the same design standards as the principal building(s) on the site. The design of freestanding structures shall be coordinated with 


the principal building through repetition of architectural forms, materials, colors, and detailing.  
d. 	
Energy Conscious Design: Commercial architecture and site planning shall promote energy conservation wherever practicable. Consideration should be given to solar orientation and siting, use of insulating materials, reduced lighting loads, and landscaping for windbreaks and shading.  

D. 	
Renovations and Additions 


1. 	Objectives 
Existing structures within the Commercial Business Zone (BC) may come before the Planning Board for Site Plan approval as they undergo major renovations or additions. This is an opportunity to add visual interest to the building and to strengthen its relationship with the site and nearby structures. High quality architectural and site design should be applied to all renovated structures.  
2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	
Renovations: Where an existing building meets the design standards, proposed renovations must be designed to be compatible with the proportions, fenestration patterns, and details of the existing building. Where the existing building does not meet the design standards, the applicant may update the existing building to meet the design standards.  

b. 	
Design; Master Planning: Applications to the Planning Board that involve renovations and additions shall show all improvements as well as the existing structure.  


A narrative shall accompany the application which explains the designer’s intent to 
relate the old with the new. Where an existing building does not meet the design standards, the applicant shall demonstrate, by submitting a master renovation plan, how the existing building will be upgraded over time to conform to these design standards, taking into consideration the life of the building; anticipated future renovations, additions or reconstructions; and materials to be used in the proposed renovation and in future renovations and improvements to the existing building. The Planning Board may condition its approval on conformance with the master renovation plan.  
c. 	
Materials: Where the existing building meets the design standards, additions or renovations shall complement or match the materials, form, color, and detailing of the existing building.  

d. 	
Architectural Features: Renovations shall retain any distinctive architectural features or examples of skilled craftsmanship.  

E.  	
Façade Design 


1. 	Objectives 
All buildings should present a visually inviting façade to the street, internal drives, parking areas, and surrounding neighborhoods.  Wherever practicable, entrances to buildings shall be clearly visible from the street and reinforced through site and architectural features.  
2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	Façade Treatment: The façade containing the main entrance shall be treated as a front façade and shall be designed in compliance with the design standards. Wherever practicable, building entrances shall be designed to be clearly visible from the street and shall provide unobstructed areas for pedestrians. The front façade shall contain a clearly defined, highly visible customer entrance and three (3) or more of the following elements to add scale to the building: 
. Canopies . Overhanging rooflines to provide shelter for pedestrians . Recesses or projections in keeping with the scale of the building . Arcades . Raised corniced parapets over entrances . Gables and dormers . Pilasters . Peaked roof forms . Outdoor sitting or dining areas . Display windows that are visible from the sidewalk . Architectural details such as moldings which are integrated into the building design . Other features which are designed to add scale and visual interest to the façade. 
For retail structures, the front façade or any other façade that faces a public or private street shall have display windows, entry areas, or other transparent features along 40% or more of its horizontal length. This standard may be waived by the Planning board if other architectural elements are used to provide scale and visual interest to the front façade in keeping with these Design Standards.  
b. 	Offsets: No uninterrupted length of any façade shall exceed 100 horizontal feet. Facades greater than 100 feet in length shall incorporate wall plane projections or recesses having a depth of a least 3% of the length of the façade and extending at least 20% of the length of the façade as a way to break up the offsets. Projections may include: 
. Strong shadow lines 
. Changes in rooflines 
. Pilasters and other architectural details 
. Patterns in the surface material 
. Wall openings. 

c. 	
Rear and Side Facades: Blank walls facing public roads, residential neighborhoods, or abutting properties are prohibited. Where rear or side facades are visible from adjacent properties or roadways, they shall be designed to match or complement the architectural treatment of the primary façade to give it scale and visual interest. 

d. 	
Site Design: Signage, lighting, landscaping, and other exterior elements shall be designed to complement and be in scale with the façade, avoid visual or functional conflicts, and retain visibility.  

e. 	
Trim: Windows, door openings, ventilation openings, and other forms of exterior fenestration in frame construction shall be trimmed.  

f. 	
Window Shapes:  Windows should be vertical in orientation, or square. 

g. 	
Shutters: If shutters are used, they must be sized to fit the openings and provide for all windows on a given wall.  They must also conform to a New England design.  

h. 	
Functional Elements: All vents, downspouts, flashing, electrical conduits, meters, HVAC equipment, service areas, loading docks, service connections, and other functional elements shall be treated as integral parts of the architecture, starting at the conceptual building design phase. When these elements need to be part of the façade (e.g., downspouts, vents) they shall be incorporated into the architecture through detailing or matching colors. Meters, utility banks, HVAC equipment, and other exterior service elements shall be contained in service closets, behind walls, or located out of view from the public.  Building elevations presented for Planning Board review shall show the locations and treatment of all functional elements.  

i. 	
Vending/Self-Service Machines: Where vending or self-service machines are provided, they shall be sited in locations that are either not visible from any public or private road or designed to be compatible with the façade. The site plan and architectural elevations shall show the location of all vending/self-service machines.  

j. 	
Illustrations: Upon request by the Planning Board, the applicant shall submit perspectives of the building to illustrate the three-dimensional relationship between the front and side elevations. Elevations and perspective drawings shall include all landscape elements (trees, shrubs, lighting, street furnishings, etc.) that will be seen in conjunction with the façade.  

F.  	
Building Materials 


1. 	Objectives 
Building materials are significant design elements that define the appearance of the structure and strengthen the sense of identity throughout Buxton. Materials used should give the appearance of New England architecture. 
2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	
Materials Permitted: Traditional, high-quality building materials common to northern New England (e.g., brick, clapboard, shingles or other similar products) or contemporary materials that are similar in appearance to traditional materials shall be used as the primary siding material. Painted MDO plywood may be used only when used in combination with traditional materials. Long-term maintenance needs should be a consideration in the selection of all building materials. Materials shall be selected to withstand conditions of climate, future use, and long-term stability of products.  

b. 	
Materials Prohibited: Highly reflective or processed materials (e.g., metal or plastic panels, brushed aluminum, bronzed glass, concrete block, T-111, untreated plywood, dryvit, etc.) and multicolored brick (incorporating occasional white brick in a random pattern) shall not be used on the primary or front-facing façade.  

c. 	
Colors: Traditional colors commonly found in New England villages should be used for all components of the building.  Façade colors shall be low reflectance.  The use of high intensity, high reflectance, chrome, metallic, or fluorescent colors or black is prohibited as the primary color.  

d. 	
Trim: Where trim is used, it shall be a color that complements the building’s primary 


color. Neon tubing shall not be allowed as an exterior trim or accent material. All door and window trim must reflect the style of trim of the entire building and complement the front façade design. Metal Trim (Pre-Bent or Coil Stock) is only permitted for rake 
and horizontal roof trim.  Metal Trim shall be pointed and a minimum of .024” thick. 
G.  	Awnings and Canopies 
1. 	Objectives 
Awnings and canopies can enhance the appearance and function of a building by providing shade, shelter, shadow patterns, and visual interest. Where awnings and canopies are used, they should complement the design, materials, color, and appearance of the building.  
2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	
Location: Where awnings and canopies are used, both fixed and retractable, they shall be located directly over windows or doors to provide protection from the elements.  

b. 	
Materials: Awnings and canopies shall not be made of reflective materials. Their color shall match or complement the façade of the building and they shall be made of materials that will be able to withstand wind, snow, ice load, and the elements.  

c. 	
Design Elements: Graphics used on awnings and canopies for identification or advertising shall be designed as an integral part of the signage program for the property, and shall be coordinated with other sign elements in terms of typeface, color, and spacing. Awnings and canopies shall not be used as advertising features or light sources. Backlit awnings and canopies are prohibited. Graphics on awnings and canopies are counted toward the total signage area.  

H. 	
Rooflines 


1. 	Objectives 
Rooflines should be designed to provide diversity in the form of the building and add visual interest to the streetscape. When used properly, rooflines can reduce the mass of large buildings, emphasize entrances, and provide shelter and shade for the pedestrian.  
2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	
Pitched Roofs: Buildings should be designed with pitched roofs. Where pitched roofs are used, the minimal pitch shall be at least 5/12. Projecting rooflines shall be designed to create strong shade/shadow patterns. Where pitched roofs are used, the design shall create no horizontal line greater than 100-feet, without an architectural break using features founds on traditional New England buildings. 

b. 	
Prohibited Shapes: False mansard, A-frames, and other similar non-traditional roof forms shall not be used as the primary roofline. 

c. 	
Flat Roofs: To the extent practicable, flat roofs, especially on single-story isolated buildings, shall not be used. Where flat roofs are used, the design shall create no horizontal line greater than the frontage of the building, not to exceed 100 feet, without an architectural break using features found on traditional New England buildings.  For buildings with a facade less than 100feet, flat roofs shall incorporate parapets or an architectural break featuring New England style with a height difference greater than 5% and a width greater than 33% of the overall length of the building façade. See 


Section 4.K “Large Scale Buildings”) for additional design standards. Flat roofs on 
multi-story office buildings may be used only when designed in conformance with the 
design standards in Section 4.N (“Office Buildings”).  
d. 	
Parapets: Where parapets are used to break up a flat roofline, the height of the parapet shall be at least 5% of the total length of the wall. 

e. 	
Permitted Materials for Pitched Roofs: Composite asphalt shingles and standing-seam non-glare metal should be used for visible roofing.  High gloss roofing materials shall not be used. Roofing materials shall complement the color and texture of the building’s façade.  Roof colors shall be muted earth tones of a color that is darker than the façade.  Stripes and patterns on the roof should not be used.  

f. 	
Roof-Mounted Equipment: Mechanical and other equipment mounted on rooftops must be screened from public view or grouped in a location where visibility is minimized. Where used, screening for roof-mounted equipment shall be designed to 


complement the building’s mass and appearance.  
I. Street Corner Buildings 
1. 	Objectives 
Buildings located on corners are particularly important because they help define the character of two streets. These high-visibility locations should be emphasized by quality architecture and site development.  
2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	
Siting on Corner Lots: A building on the corner of two public streets shall be located close to the intersection and should exhibit strong relationship to both streets that it fronts. Where zoning allows, a limited amount of parking and vehicular travel ways may be located between the building and the property lines along one or more of the streets; however, the majority of the parking shall be located to the side or rear of the building.      

b. 	
Corner Buildings: Buildings on corners shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20’) in height to add mass and visual prominence to the street.  

c. 	
Façade Treatment: Both façades of corner buildings shall be designed according to the standards in Architecture: Façade Design section. Blank or unadorned façades facing streets on corner buildings are prohibited. The façade of any upper floor(s) shall be visually related to the ground floor through repetition of design elements (e.g., color, materials, window treatment, and detailing) so as to unify the structure and help frame the ground floor.  

d. 	
Corner Treatment: The architectural treatment of the street corner of the building shall emphasize its prominent position through the use of enhanced massing and height, unique detailing, lighting, and other façade treatment. This corner treatment shall be designed to be visible from both streets. Where practicable, an entrance to the building shall be located at the corner.  

J. 	
Design Standards for National Franchises 


1. 	Objectives 
National franchises (e.g., restaurants, service stations, retail stores) are a welcome and 
permitted usewithin Buxton’s commercial business districts. Buildings forthesetypes ofuses 
shall reflect an New England architectural traditions in their form, detailing, and materials.  
2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	
Franchise Styles: Architectural forms primarily derived from building styles from other regions of the country are prohibited. New England regional prototypes from national franchises are permitted, provided they meet the Design Standards.  

b. 	
Coordination of Site Features: Applicants shall provide the Planning Board with illustrations that demonstrate how the architectural design of site features and accessory structures (including dumpster screens, storage buildings, refrigeration lockers, playgrounds, signage, and lighting) will be coordinated with the architecture of the principal building.    

K.  	
Large Scale Buildings 


1. 	Objectives 
Due to their visibility and mass, large scale buildings (20,000 square feet or greater), such as large retail or grocery stores, can greatly enhance or detract from the visual character of the commercial districts. These buildings should be designed as attractive pieces of commercial architecture that are consistent with the scale and form found in traditional New England architecture.   
2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	Design and Massing: Large structures shall be designed to break up their mass into smaller visual components through the use of projections, recesses, and varied façade 
treatments.  See Section 4.E (“Architecture: Façade Design”).  
b. 	
Site Design: Scale reductions of large buildings shall be reinforced by site features such as pedestrian shelters, large trees, clearly-defined entrances, and site furnishings.  

c. 	
Architectural Details: Architectural details shall be used to reduce the scale and uniformity of large buildings. Elements such as colonnades, pilasters, gable ends, canopies, display windows, and light fixtures should be used to add human scale.  

d. 	
Façades and Exterior Walls: Horizontal façades greater than 100 feet in length shall incorporate wall plan projections or recesses having a depth of at least 3% of the length of the façade and extending at least 20% of the length of the façade. No uninterrupted length of any façade shall exceed 100 horizontal feet. 


Other devices to add interest to long walls may be used, including strong shadow lines, changes in rooflines, pilasters and architectural details, patterns in the surface material, and wall openings. All façade elements shall be coordinated with the landscape plan to ensure balance, proportion, and compatibility.  
Ground floor façades that face public streets shall have display windows, entry areas, or other such transparent features along 40% or more of their horizontal length.  
e. 	Façades and Exterior Walls for Small Retail Stores within Large Scale Buildings: Where principal buildings contain separate retail stores which in total occupy less than 20,000 square feet of gross floor area and which each have separate, exterior customer entrances, the following standards shall apply: 
. 	The street level façade of such stores shall be transparent between the height of three 
(3) feet and eight (8) feet above the walkway grade for no less than 40% of the horizontal length of the building façade of such additional stores.  
. 	Windows shall be trimmed and include visually prominent sills, shutters, or other similar forms of framing. 
f. 	Entryways: Each principal building shall have a clearly defined, highly visible customer entrance featuring three (3) or more of the following: 
. Canopies . Overhangs or recesses to provide shelter . Arcades that lead to entrances . Raised corniced parapets over the door . Peaked roof forms . Outdoor patios . Architectural details such as tile work and moldings which are integrated into the 
building structure and design, or . Other features which are designed to add scale and visual interest to the buildings. 
Where separate retail stores are located in the principal building, and customer entrances to such stores are outdoors, each separate retail store shall conform to the above entryways requirements. All components used to enhance entranceways or provide a distinctive look shall be designed or detailed as integral parts of the whole building.  
g. 	
Multiple Entrances: All sides of a large-scale building that face an abutting public or private street shall feature at least one customer entrance to facilitate pedestrian access, minimize walking distances from cars, and reduce the scale of façades. Where a building abuts more than two street, this requirement shall apply to only two sides of the building, including the side facing the primary public street and another side facing a second street.  

h. 	
Outdoor Sales and Storage: Where permitted, areas for outdoor sales, storage, or service shall be designed as an integral part of the site and architectural plan, and shall 


meet the ServiceAreas Standards. SeeSection 3.J(“Site Planning: Non-Public Service 
Areas”). 
i. 	
Cart Storage: Shopping carts must be stored inside the building, or in ‘cart corrals’, out of the way of pedestrian circulation.  

L.  	
Linear Commercial Buildings (Strip Shopping Centers, Multi-tenant Offices, Commercial Buildings) 


1. 	Objectives 
Linear commercial structures (e.g., strip shopping centers, multi-tenant offices, or commercial buildings) shall be designed with façade and roofline elements that reduce their scale and add architectural interest.  
2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	
Design: Buildings with multiple storefronts (e.g., strip shopping centers, one-story office buildings) shall be visually unified through the use of complementary architectural forms, similar materials and colors, consistent details, and coordinated signage. Variations in the front setbacks should be used to add visual interest, create spaces for common entries, outdoor eating/social spaces, and landscaped spaces.  

b. 	
Scale: Linear structures shall include architectural elements (including covered walkways, open colonnades, arcades, and similar features) designed to provide shelter, encourage pedestrian movement, and visually unite the building.  

c. 	
Entrances: Pedestrian entrances to each building shall be clearly delineated using architectural detailing, roofline breaks, landscaping, lighting or a combination of these elements. Where covered walkways are used, they should extend the full length of the façade.  

d. 	
Rooflines: Variations in rooflines, detailing, and building heights shall be included to break up the scale of connected linear buildings.  

M.  	
Linear Commercial Buildings (Service Stations, Car Washes, and Convenience Stores) 


1. 	Objectives 
Service stations, car washes, and convenience stores shall be designed with façade and roofline elements that reduce their scale and add architectural interest.  
2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	Architecture: Windows or other forms of fenestration shall be included on the façade facing the street which shall be treated as a front façade. See Section 4.E 
(“Architecture: Façade Design”). The front façadeshallinclude apedestrian entrance 
from the street.  
b. 	
Canopies: Service station canopies shall be visually compatible with the main structure through consistency in roof pitch, architectural detailing, materials, and color. Pitched roofs or pitched-faced parapets are required for canopies. Bands of bold color on the canopy and backlightinginsidethe canopy are prohibited. See Section 7 (“Lighting”) for more details. 

c. 	
Large Openings: Openings for car washes or building with four (4) or more service bays must be integrated with the design of the building and sited so they are not directly visible from public roadways or adjacent residential areas.  

d. 	
Site Design: The site design must minimize off-site noise exposure, and must provide for underground drainage systems to keep water off public streets (in the case of car washes), snow storage, safe traffic circulation patterns, and room for vehicle stacking,. Pump location design must provide for traffic flow and safety.  

e. 	
Pedestrian Circulation: Connections to the public sidewalk shall be included in the site plan to encourage pedestrian use. Access routes leading to or from service stations and convenience stores shall minimize conflicts with pedestrian circulation.  

N. 	
Office Buildings 


1. 	Objectives 
Large-scale, multi-story office, research and hi-tech buildings (40,000 square feet or greater) are allowed and encouraged in our commercial districts. These buildings should be designed as attractive pieces of commercial architecture. The Planning Board may apply alternative design standards to large-scale office, research and hi-tech building which vary from a few specific sections of the Design Standards. These alternative standards are outlined below. The Planning Board can allow alternative design standards with a 2/3 affirmative vote by its members. Other than these alternatives, the remainder of the 
Design Standards for Buxton’s Commercial Districts shall apply.  
2. 	Alternative Design Standards 
a. 	
Permitted Materials: Subject to the waiver provision, the Planning Board may allow materials including but not limited to non-reflective metal panels and brushed aluminum to be incorporated into the façade design of these structures. These materials shall be supplemented with the traditional, high quality building materials common to New England.  

b. 	
Roof Treatment: Under the Flat Roofs Standard in the Architecture: Rooflines section, flat roofs are discouraged in most applications. However, flat roofs are anticipated and acceptable on office, research and hi-tech buildings which are three or more stories in height. In these instances, changes in the roofline, pilasters, trim and other architectural detailing shall be used to vary and break up a flat roofline. Further, roof-mounted equipment must be screened from public view in accordance with the Architecture: Rooflines section.  

c. 	
Waiver. The Planning Board may waive the provisions of Section 4.F (“Building Materials”) and Section 4.H (“Rooflines”) for office buildings when it determines that 


granting a waiver will not adversely affect abutting landowners and the general health, safety and welfare of the Town and when it determines that at least one of the factors justifies the waiver: (i) special circumstances of the site, building, or building placement exist; and/or (ii) special circumstances of the surrounding buildings and uses exist. 
O. Drive-Throughs 
1. 	Objectives 
Architectural design and circulation planning for buildings with drive-throughs require careful consideration to integrate them into the Buxton environment. Drive-through operations and other automobile-oriented facilities should be designed with façade and roofline elements that reduce their scale, add architectural interest, and maintain the pedestrian-orientation of the structure.  
2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	
Drive-Throughs: Where drive-through windows are allowed, they shall be incorporated into the design of the building by matching or complementing their scale, color, detailing, massing, and other architectural treatments to that of the main structure.  

b. 	
Location: Drive-throughs shall not face public or private roads, and should generally be located at the side or rear of the building. Where drive-throughs are located at the rear, the drive-throughs shall be designed to maintain the safety of the employees and patrons.  

c. 	
Canopies: Drive-through canopies shall be subordinate to and visually compatible with the design of the main structure. This may be accomplished through consistency in roof pitch, architectural detailing, materials, and color. Bands of bold color on the canopy and backlighting inside the canopy are prohibited.  

d. 	
Pedestrian Circulation: Access routes leading to or from drive-through facilities shall minimize conflicts with pedestrian circulation. Where walkways must cross driveways, motorists shall be made aware of pedestrians through signage, lights, raised crosswalks, changes in paving, or other similarly effective devices.  


SECTION 5.  LANDSCAPING 


A. 	Background 
Landscaping is an integral part of all site plan developments. Trees, shrubs, and other landscape elements can be used to accentuate buildings, create a sense of identity, and provide human scale.  The applicant should carefully evaluate the physical characteristics of each site and each plant when making the final selection to ensure that the plantings will survive and thrive in their selected location.  

B.  	Landscape Goals 
The landscaping elements of the site plan should: 
. 	Reinforce the identity of the commercial districts through the use of plant materials in scale with their surroundings. 
. 	Enhance the attractiveness and scale of commercial development through the use of colorful plant materials with interesting forms and massing. 
. 	Help define areas where pedestrians are safely separated from the road. 
. 	Reinforce wayfinding by emphasizing entrances and circulation patterns. 
. 	Increase the attractiveness of parking lots by reducing their scale, providing shade, and adding seasonal interest. 
. 	Provide screening for less attractive parts of a site or incompatible land uses. 
C. 	General Standards 
1. 	Objectives 
Landscaping shall be used to complement the architecture, enhance human scale, reinforce circulation paths, highlight entrances, provide shade, add seasonal interest, and provide screening for less attractive parts of a site.  
2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	
Preparation: As part of the Site Plan application for site improvements involving parking lots with more than ten (10) cars and/or more than 2,000 square feet of building, a landscape plan shall be prepared by a landscape architect registered in Maine, or other qualified professional familiar with local growing conditions. All other Site Plan applicants shall submit a detailed landscape plan in compliance with these design standards.  

b. 	
Selection: Plant materials and landscape elements that require a low degree of maintenance should be utilized. All plantings shall be resistant to insect infestation, drought, disease, roadside salt, and auto emissions, and hardy to Maine winters.  

c. 	
Safety: Plant materials should be selected with consideration to public health and safety. Plants with poisonous or messy fruits, large thorns, invasive growth patterns, or shrubs that could provide hiding places along pathways or block the view of moving vehicles shall not be used. The form and height of plantings as they mature shall not create unsafe conditions or block sight lines for pedestrians, bicyclists, or motorists.  

d. 	
Coordination with Utilities: The planting plan shall illustrate how plantings are coordinated with the location of underground and overhead utilities and lighting. The planting plan shall show screening for transformers, propane tanks, and similar utilitarian elements.  

e. 	
Variety: A variety of plant materials that exhibit seasonal color and interesting textures should be used to create a distinctive, yet low maintenance environment. Planting plans should strike a balance between the over-use of a single species and too much variety.  

f. 	
Integration: Plantings shall be massed to soften edges, corners, and pavement areas, and to integrate the building into the landscape.  Planting design shall stress simplicity in form and limit the number of species. Shrubs, perennials, annuals, ornamental grasses, and other similar plantings used along the roadways should be planted in masses or ‘drifts’ that emphasize colors and textures, rather than used as single specimens.  

g. 	
Irrigation: Underground irrigation should be installed in front setbacks, public spaces, and other highly visible areas. Any underground irrigation shall be coordinated so it does not cause overflow or flooding in pedestrian use areas, such as walkways, sidewalks, or parking lots.  

h. 	
Existing Trees/Plants: Wherever practicable, existing trees or other significant plantings shall be preserved by means of transplanting and reuse. The landscape plan shall illustrate which vegetation will be preserved and what protective measures will be taken during construction.    

i. 	
Rocks: Large rocks shall be used as landscape elements sparingly and only as accents in mass plantings.  Where used, they shall be buried to at least 25% of their mass.  

j. 	
Ground Cover: Extensive areas of bark mulch shall not be used as a substitute for live ground cover. Where mulch is used, it shall consist of dark decomposed shredded bark, with pieces less than 1” in any one dimension. Consideration should be given to regular maintenance of any mulch application. Clean edges shall be maintained between various features.  The landscape plan shall cover any exposed soils.  

k. 	
Buffers & Screening: Plant materials and other landscape elements shall be used to create buffers as necessary between residential and commercial properties. The design of buffers should consider the appearance from both commercial and residential viewpoints.  Evergreen plantings are particularly effective year-round buffering.  

l. 	
Minimum Plant Sizes: Unless otherwise required by site conditions, plant materials shall meet the following minimum sizes: 


Canopy Trees  2 ½” caliper Evergreen Shrubs 18” ht./spread Flowering Trees 2” caliper Perennials 2 year clumps Evergreen Trees 5-7’ height Ornamental Grasses 2 year clumps Deciduous Shrubs 24” height Ground Covers 3” pots 
m. 	
Guarantee Period: All newly installed lawns and planting materials shall be guaranteed for a period of not less than 2 years. The developer shall submit a copy of a guarantee and a contract with a landscape contractor, indicating the terms of the guarantee period, which shall include a time frame for replacing damaged or destroyed plantings including grass.  

D. 	
Parking Lots 


1. 	Objectives 
Landscaping is necessary in parking lots to improve the visual appearance, reduce the scale of paved areas, define edges, provide shade, and add seasonal interest. Trees, shrubs, and ornamentals shall be planted in large groups, or drifts, appropriate to the scale of the space.  
2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	
Total Landscape Area: A minimum of 10% of the total area of a parking lot shall be landscaped. Larger and more visible parking lots should have more intensive landscape treatments. Driveways leading into and around parking lots are not calculated in determining the area of a lot.  

b. 	
Location of Trees: Trees shall be planted a minimum of five (5) feet from the end of parking lot islands.  

c. 	
Screening: Parking lots shall be separated from the street by plantings, low earth berms, walls, and/or other landscape elements to minimize the view of vehicles, while still allowing the public to see the building.  

d. 	
Safety: Where trees abut pedestrian walkways or places where people will be walking in parking lots, their lower branches shall be pruned to at least eight (8) feet above the paved surface to avoid becoming an obstacle. Shrubs in parking lot islands shall not exceed three (3) feet in height to avoid blocking visibility.  

e. 	
Parking Stall Separation: Landscaped areas used for separation between banks of parking stalls shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet in width.  

f. 	
Snow Tolerance: Landscape materials surrounding parking lots and in islands must tolerate large quantities of snow stored during winter months. Delicate plant materials shall not be used in areas where they are likely to be buried under snow.    

E.  	
Tree Selection & Plantings 


1. 	Objectives 
Trees should be used throughout Buxton’s commercial districts, planted within the right of 
way, near buildings, and throughout parking lots. Trees should be sited to achieve full maturity and display their natural form. Planting plans should emphasize large shade trees within or near right-of-ways in order to create a more unified streetscape.  
2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	Suitability: Newly planted trees shall be resistant to insect infestation, drought, disease, roadside salt, and auto emissions. All plant material shall be suitable to 
Buxton’s growing conditions. 
b. 	
Coordination with Architecture: Trees shall be selected and located to complement the building elevation without blocking storefronts, signs, or lighting.  

c. 	
Roadside Plantings: Trees shall be planted a minimum of five (5) feet from the edge of the roadway. Trees and other landscaping planted at intersections shall preserve an adequate sight triangle.  

d. 	
Pedestrian Movement: The lower branches of trees planted near pathways and sidewalks shall be at least eight (8) feet above the pavement to minimize interference with pedestrian movement throughout the year.  

e. 	
Root Zones: Trees shall be planted in locations where their root development and branching patterns will not interfere with window displays, signage, underground or overhead utilities, streets, and sidewalks.  

F.  	
Shrubs & Ornamental Plantings 


1. 	Objectives 
A variety of shrubs and ornamental plantings should be used throughout the commercial districts to add seasonal color, provide visual interest, help define spaces, screen undesirable elements, and emphasize circulation routes.  
2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	
Variety in Plantings: The landscaping plan should use flowering shrubs, evergreen shrubs, perennials, annuals, vines, ornamental grasses, and other plant materials, as well as street trees, evergreen trees, and ornamental trees.  

b. 	
Selection: The selection of plantings should consider height and spread at maturity, maintenance, pest and disease tolerance.  Invasive species shall not be used.  

c. 	
Foundation & Wall Plantings: Planting beds should be used along exposed building edges, foundations, and uninterrupted walls. any foundation and wall plantings shall create either a formal pattern or a naturalistic blend of heights, colors, and textures for visual relief.  

d. 	
Mass Plantings: Shrubs and perennials should be planted in large masses or ‘drifts’, 


rather than as individual specimens.  
e. 	
Safety: Plant material shall be selected with consideration to public health and safety. Plants with poisonous or messy fruits or leaves, large thorns, invasive growth patterns, or shrubs that could provide hiding places along pathways or block the view of moving vehicles shall not be used 

G.  	
Landscape Maintenance 


1. 	Objectives 
The planting plans presented to the Planning Board should anticipate an eight (8) year growing cycle to achieve maturity for shrubs, and twenty (20) years for trees. Provision for long-term maintenance of landscape elements is required so the site continues to improve as the landscaping achieves maturity.    
2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	
Maintenance Plans: As part of the Site Plan application, a written maintenance plan shall be provided for all landscape elements to be installed on the property. The maintenance plan shall include (but not be limited to) details regarding initial installation, guarantee period, replacement policy, periodic and seasonal maintenance, special considerations, use of pesticides and fertilizers, irrigation, and seasonal displays.  

b. 	
Low Maintenance Materials: Plant materials and landscape elements that require a low degree of maintenance should be used. Planting characteristics to be considered include: drought resistance (except where irrigated), tolerance to auto emissions, disease and insect resistance, lack of thorns that could trap debris, and relatively light leaf litter for ease of fall cleanups.  

c. 	
Replacement Plantings: Where plant materials specified on the planting plan do not survive or are damaged, they shall be replaced and/or reinforced in accordance with the two-year performance guarantee to maintain conformance with the approved planting plan and to provide the necessary landscape effect.  


SECTION 6.  SIGNAGE 


A. 	Background 
Signs play a central role in providing information, wayfinding, and setting the tone for Buxton’s 
commercial districts. They inform motorists and pedestrians, while having a direct effect on the overall appearance of the roadway.  

B.  	Signage Goals 
Permanent commercial signage should: 
. 	Provide basic, legible information about commercial establishments on attractive, signage. 
. 	Be designed to complement the design, size, placement, and graphic format of all signage used in the commercial areas of Buxton. 
. 	Create distinctive commercial corridors where signage is compatible with quality architecture and site design. 
. 	Reduce visual clutter along Buxton’s major roadways. 
. 	Protect the investment of commercial interests throughout Buxton by establishing a quality benchmark for future signage, in keeping with the design standards.  
C. 	Sign Design 
1. 	Objectives 
Commercial uses in Buxton shall be identified by attractive, legible signs that serve the needs of the individual business, complement the site and the architecture, and are legible 
to both the motorist and pedestrian. All new and replacement signs erected within Buxton’s 
commercial districts shall be designed to meet these standards.  
2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	Signage Plan:  A Signage Plan shall be submitted as part of the Site Plan application.  
It shall be developed by design professionals experienced in commercial signage or environmental graphics.  The applicant shall resubmit the plan to the planning staff if 
the building’s tenant is unknown at the time of application.  
b. 	Compatibility: Sign shall be designed to be visually compatible with the building(s) 
and its surroundings through the use of similar detailing, form, color, lighting, and materials.  
c. 	
Design: The shape of the sign shall complement the architectural features on the building. Simple geometric shapes should be used for all signage. Signs shall be trimmed and detailed to complement the building.  

d. 	
Maximum Gross Area of Signs: See Section 6.D (“Signage: Maximum Sign Sizes”) 


for maximum gross area of signs. 
e. 	
Maintenance and Replacement: Damaged or non-operable portions of the sign shall be replaced or repaired in a timely manner.  

f. 	
Lettering Size: The minimum lettering size for identification signs shall be six inches in height.    

g. 	
Location: Signs shall bemounted in locations that do not block motorists’ lineof sight or create a hazard for pedestrians or bicyclists.  Roof-mounted signs are prohibited.  

h. 	
Street Numbers: The principal site identification sign shall contain the street address shown in a prominent location to facilitate wayfinding and 911 emergency response.  

i. 	
Advertising Features: Except for permanent commercial signs, advertising features designed primarily to attract public attention are prohibited in the business commercial zone. Examples of prohibited advertising features include greater-than-life size models of food or other products, replicas of spokes-people associated with commercial products, flags or banners, sandwich board signs, and internally-lit bands of color.  

j. 	
Standard Note: Any modifications to signage must be submitted to and approved by the Planning Board, in compliance with the Standard Note. No changes from the conditions of approval is permitted unless an amended plan is first submitted to and approved by the Planning Board. 

k. 	
Readerboards: To the extent practicable, readerboards using stationary or electronic 


text shall not be used within Buxton’s business commercial districts. Where 
readerboards are permitted, they shall contain no more than 3 lines of text. Lettering height shall be a minimum of 6”. The readerboard shall be fully integrated into the overall sign design by virtue of its form, scale, color, and detailing. Readerboards will be considered part of the total signage area.  



D. Maximum Sign Sizes 
1. Sign Dimensional Chart 
The following chart summarizes the maximum gross area (in square footage) that 
is permitted for signage by type of sign design. 
MAXIMUM SIGN SIZES – Freestanding (FS) / Wall-Mounted (W) 
TYPE OF SIGN DESIGN TEMPORARY SIGNS:  REF  MAX. DIM. (FS) (W)  
Temp. Sandwich Board  Gross Area  8 sf  
Advertising retail  Gross Area  32 sf  
Advertising retail in the Village Zone  Gross Area  8 sf  
CAMPUS SIGNS:  
Campus directory  Gross Area Height  75 sf 10’  75 sf 10’  
Campus primary  Gross Area  45 sf  45 sf  
Directional  Height  9’  9’  
Campus secondary  Gross Area  16 sf  16 sf  
Directional  Height  8’  8’  
Campus pedestrian  Gross Area  8 sf  8 sf  
Directional  Height  8’  8’  
ADVERTISING/RETAIL SIGNS:  
Advertising Freestanding Signs  Gross Area FLength FS Heights FS  S 16’ 16’  100 sf  

Advertising Freestanding Signs in the Village Zone Gross Area FS 24 sf Length FS 8’ Heights FS 8’ 
Advertising Wall Signs Gross Ares/bldg. 100 sf Face: wall 
(see note 5) Combined Gross 150 sf Area Corner Lot 
(see note 4) 
Advertising Wall Signs in the Village Zone Gross Area/Bldg. 3 sf 
Business Directory Signs Gross Area 150 sf 

MAXIMUM SIGN SIZES – Freestanding (FS) / Wall-Mounted (W) TYPE OF SIGN DESIGN REF MAX. DIM. (FS) (W) 
Home Occupation Gross Area 6 sf Readerboards Gross Area 25 sf 25 sf Retail banner Gross Area 24 sf 
(see note 2) 
IDENTIFICATION, BULLETIN AND DIRECTIONAL SIGNS: 
Bulletin board Gross Area 24 sf 
Directional Signs Gross Area 3 sf 

at driveways Heights 7’ Doorway Identification Gross Area 10% of doorway or opening 

2. 	Sign Dimensional Chart Notes and Standards 
a. 	
Identification signs do not count toward maximum number of signs on a lot, or for applying requirements for separation of signs. 

b. 	
Banners allowed under Section XII (B)21 do not count toward maximum number of signs on the lot. 

c. 	
Area of readerboard included in the maximum sign area of the freestanding sign of which it is a part of. 

d. 	
Gross sign area may be divided between the principal and secondary sign and under this section the principal sign shall not exceed 100 sf. 

e. 
Unless otherwise provided, wall and window signs shall conform to the following: 


(i) 	
Total gross display area of all wall and window signs shall not exceed 10% of the area of the wall on which they are located. Where separate units of occupancy exist in a building, the gross display area under this paragraph shall be calculated separately for each unit of occupancy, based on the wall areas which enclose each unit, provided that the total gross display area for the building does not exceed the limits of this paragraph. 

(ii) 
Except in the cause of an awning, no wall sign shall project more than 12” inches beyond the surface of the wall to which it is attached, or extend above the drip edge of the roof above it or extend laterally beyond the ends of the wall to which it is attached. Where separate units of occupancy exist in a building, the limitations of this paragraph shall apply separately to the wall surface which encloses each unit. 

E.  	
Façade-Mounted Signs 


1. 	Objectives 
Façade-mounted signs should not dominate the façade of the building. 
2. Design Standards 
a. 	Design:  Façade mounted signs shall be designed as an integral element of the 
architecture.  	The shape and materials of the sign shall complement the architectural features on the building.  
b. 	Location: Signs shall not be mounted in locations that obscure architectural details on the building.  Signage shall be mounted on vertical surfaces without projecting above the fascia trim.  In general, signs shall be located a minimum of 18” from the corner of the building.  No sign shall extend out more than 12” from the wall on which it is 
mounted.  
c. 	Hardware:  Signage shall be mounted with concealed hardware.  Metal hardware shall be stainless steel or galvanized to prevent rust and corrosion that could stain or 
discolor the building.  	Where hardware will be painted to blend with the sign, rust inhibiting paint shall be used to prevent rust streaks.  
F.  	Multi-tenant Properties 
1. 	Objectives 
Multi-tenant commercial properties should provide legible, attractive signs that help people identify the property without contributing visual clutter in the commercial district.  

2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	
Identification Signs: Multi-tenant buildings of multi-building sites shall have one identification sign. The identification sign shall be located near the main entrance to reinforce circulation patterns and minimize visual clutter.  

b. 	
Street Numbers: The identification sign for multi-tenant properties shall incorporate the street address into the sign to facilitate wayfinding and 911 emergency response. 

c. 	
Compatibility: The design of multi-tenant signs shall be coordinated with the design of the principal building(s) in terms of color, materials, detailing, and style. 

d. 	
Color Consistency: Multi-tenant signs shall conform to a simple color and graphic palette in order to minimize the confusion and clutter of the sign. Multi-tenant signs shall have no more than three (3) colors. 

e. 	
Landscaping: Landscaping surrounding signs for multi-tenant buildings shall be consistent with the landscape treatment for the entire property.  

G.  	
Externally-Lit Signs 


1. 	Objectives 
Externally-lit signs are permitted but not required. Lighting for externally-lit signs should be designed as an integral part of the sign design. Lighting shall not create glare that would distract motorists or pedestrians, nor shall the degree of illumination disturb the surrounding residential areas of contribute to light pollution. See Section 7 (“Lighting”) for additional information. 

2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	
Light Level: The illumination level on the vertical surface of the sign shall be bright enough to provide a noticeable contrast with the surrounding building or landscape without causing undue glare or reflection. Signs shall be illuminated up to one hour before and one hour after posted hours of operation.  

b. 	
Lighting: Lighting fixtures shall be located, aimed, and shielded so that light is directed only onto the sign façade. Lights shall not be aimed toward adjacent streets, sidewalks, or abutting properties. Ground-mounted lighting shall be screened or partially buried to minimize the view of the light source.  

c. 	
Light Sources: Top-mounted lighting fixtures may be used only if they are directed downward in a manner that hides the light source. Uplighting may be used if the fixture can be aimed to prevent spillage beyond the sign.  

d. 	
Design: Light fixtures and mounting devices shall complement the color and design of the sign and the architecture.  Concealed light sources should be utilized.  

H. 
Internally-Lit Signs 


1. Objectives 
Internally-lit signs are not permitted in the Village Zone. 

2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	
Design:  Internally-lit signs shall consist of light lettering and/or symbols set against a dark background to minimize the amount of light emanating from the sign. Where practicable, internally-lit letters and symbols shall be used, rather than whole panels that are internally lit. Letters and/or symbols on panels shall constitute no more than 40% of the sign’s surface area.  

b. 	
Mounting Systems: Signs shall be mounted in a manner that provides adequate support for the weight of the sign. Mounting systems shall be designed to be compatible with the architecture in terms of color, forms, and style. Electrical connections, wiring, junction boxes, and other similar devices shall not be visible from pedestrian pathways or roadways.  

c. 	
Intensity: Internally-lit signs shall not act as light fixtures or cause glare on nearby pathways or roadways. Lighting levels shall not exceed 1 footcandle of illumination measured ten (10) feet from the base. Signs shall be illuminated up to one hour before and one hour after posted hours of operation.  

d. 	
Maintenance: Signs shall be located where they can be easily maintained. Non-functioning bulbs shall be replaced immediately upon notice.  

I. 
Temporary Signs 


1. 	Objectives 
Most commercial uses in Buxton’s commercial district rely upon temporary signs on 
occasion to convey special information, alert the public to special events, or announce new businesses.  The design and placement of temporary signs shall be closely related to existing sign systems, landscape improvements, and the building design to avoid visual clutter. Nothing herein is intended to apply to temporary signs bearing a noncommercial message that have been placed within the public right-of-way, which are regulated pursuant to 23 M.R.S. § 1913-A. 

2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	
Content and Design: Plastic, fabric, cardboard, wooden, paper or similar signs that are not part of the permanent signage of the premises are considered temporary signs.  These signs are intended to advertise products and services available on the premises. The same standards established for permanent signs shall be applied to temporary signs.  

b. 	
Location: Temporary signs shall be installed in locations that do not create a hazard for pedestrians or vehicles. They shall be installed and properly secured to remain in place in high winds. 

c. 	
Size: The total size of temporary signs, regardless of function shall not exceed 20% of the total signage area on the premises.  

d. 	
Lighting: Temporary signs shall not include any additional sources of illumination, either internal or external.  

e. 	
Length of Time Allowed: Up to two (2) temporary signs are allowed not more than two (2) times per calendar year for no more than thirty (30) consecutive days, provided such periods of use are separated by at least thirty (30) days.  

f. 	
Permits: Temporary signs are allowed only with a sign permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer. A permit must be obtained for each sign and for each of the individual periods of use. 


SECTION 7.  LIGHTING 

A. 	Background 
Outdoor lighting directly impacts the visual appearance of Buxton, as well as the town’s safety 
and security. The lighting standards are designed to help balance the need for visibility and safety and enhance the visual quality of Buxton, while respecting the privacy of abutting residential properties. Lighting plans should consider illumination levels and fixtures that accommodate safety and visibility needs, but are also respectful of neighbors.  

B.  	Lighting Goals 
Site plans should: 
. 	Provide lighting that offers a high level of visibility and safety throughout Buxton’s commercial districts. 
. 	Unify the quality of the visual environment through the selection of attractive, appropriately scaled fixtures which: 
o 	Minimize distractions or hazards to motorists or pedestrians. 

o 	Minimize reflected light from parking lots and large commercial users that contributes to sky glow. 

o 	Avoid intrusions onto abutting property owners, especially residential uses. 

o 	Enhance noteworthy features such as monuments, sculptures, or architectural elements. 

o 	Promote wise energy consumption. 

C. 	
General Standards 


1. 	Objectives 
Lighting for commercial facilities shall be designed to provide the minimum level of illumination necessary for security, safety, and visual appeal for both pedestrians and vehicles. Lighting should encourage activity after sunset without adding to unnecessary sky glow.  Fixtures should be designed as integral site elements. 
2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	Site Plan: A Lighting Plan shall be submitted as part of the site plan application, and shall contain, at minimum: 
. 	A plan showing the location of lighting fixtures proposed to illuminate all buildings, roadways, service areas, landscaping, parking areas, and pedestrian areas. 
. 	A narrative that describes the hierarchy of site lighting, how lighting will be used to provide safety and security, and aesthetic effects. 
. 	A maintenance and replacement plan discussing lighting maintenance.  
. 	A photometric diagram that shows illumination levels from all externally and internally visible lighting sources, including existing sources, to show how the minimum amount of illumination will be provided and the maximum amounts will not be exceeded. 
. 	Specifications and illustrations of all proposed lighting fixtures including mounting heights, photometric data, Color Rendering Index (CRI) of all lamps (bulbs), and other descriptive information. 
b. 	
Safety and Energy Conservation: Illumination levels shall not exceed the minimums to provide safe conditions as defined by IES, Lightning Handbook, 10th Edition. 

c. 	
Coordinated Design: The location and design of lighting systems shall complement adjacent buildings, pedestrian amenities, and site elements. Poles and fixtures shall be proportionate to the buildings and spaces they are illuminating. 

d. 	
Safety: Buffers, screen walls, fencing, and other landscape elements shall be coordinated with the lighting plan to eliminate dark spots and potential hiding places.  

e. 	
Feature Lighting: Unique building or landscape features may be highlighted if the lighting does not create glare or distraction. Neon tubes may not be used as lighting features on the exterior of buildings.  

f. 	
Light Pollution: Lighting shall not cause spillover onto neighboring residential properties or create dangerous conditions due to glare on adjacent roadways. Bare bulbs are not allowed.  

g. 	
Replacement and Modifications: Any modifications, expansions, or replacements to the lighting system must be submitted to and approved by the Planning Board, in compliance with the Standard Note.  

h. 	
Energy Saving Devices: Wherever practicable, lighting design shall include the installation of timers, photo sensors, and other energy savings devices to reduce the overall energy required for the development and eliminate unnecessary lighting.  

i. 	
Lighting Reductions: Where commercial properties abut residential areas, lighting in parking lots shall be reduced to an average of 0.2 footcandles within one (1) hour after closing hours.  

D. 	
Driveway Lighting 


1. 	Objectives 
Driveway lighting should be designed to provide the minimum lighting necessary for traffic and pedestrian safety, using the minimum number of poles. Lighting shall not cause glare or avoidable spillover onto adjacent properties. Poles and fixtures shall be proportional in size to the roadways they are illuminating.  
2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	
Illumination: Driveway lighting shall be designed to illuminate the roadway and sidewalk, with a concentration on roadways. Light fixtures shall be selected and aimed to prevent glare.  

b. 	
Illumination Levels: Illumination levels shall comply with the IES recommendation 


“ANSI Standard Practice for RoadwayLighting” (2014).  Levels shall be designed for 
specific locations.  
c. 	
Luminaries: Lamps shall be housed in a luminaire that is classified by IES as a cutoff distribution (see IES Lightning Handbook, 10th Edition). Decorative fixtures may be used, provided they meet the cutoff criteria. 

d. 	
Design: The design and color of fixtures (poles and luminaries) used along driveways shall complement the architecture, landscaping, and street furnishing of the site to be developed or redeveloped in terms of color, form, and style.  

e. 	
Layout: The alignment and spacing of fixtures shall follow a regular pattern that is coordinated with the layout of buildings, parking lots, and other site elements, while using the minimum lighting necessary for traffic and pedestrian safety.  

f. 	
Coordination with Planting Plan: The layout of light fixtures should complement the spacing and rhythm of surrounding plantings, especially large shade trees. The lighting plan should take into consideration growth patterns of trees to avoid the need for excessive pruning as trees mature.  

g. 	
Mounting Height: Light fixtures used in driveways and parking lots shall be in scale with adjacent buildings. To the extent practicable, the maximum mounting height along driveways shall not exceed 25 feet. Mounting heights shall be a maximum height of 12-16 feet where sidewalks are present.  

E.  	
Parking Lot Lighting 


1. 	Objectives 
Parking lot lighting should be designed to provide the minimum lighting necessary for safety, visibility, and comfort, without causing glare or avoidable spillover onto adjacent properties or roadways, or an increase in sky glow. In general, parking areas should have less illumination than their surrounding commercial uses.  
2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	
Layout: The alignment and spacing of fixtures in parking lots shall follow a regular pattern that is coordinated with the orientation of buildings and other site elements. 

b. 	
Location: Light poles shall be incorporated within raised planting areas wherever practicable to avoid damage from vehicles and plows. 

c. 	
Bases: Bases raised above the level of plantings (when installed in islands or plant beds) or higher than one foot above the level of the pavement (when installed in walkways) should not be used. 

d. 	
Coordination with Planting Plans: The lighting plan shall be coordinated with the landscape plan to avoid obstructions from large trees, dark spots from shadows, or other conflicts as plantings mature.  

e. 	
Illumination Levels: Illumination levels shall be defined by IES recommendation 


“Lighting for Parking Facilities” (2014). Illumination levels for general parking and 
pedestrian areas shall maintain a minimum of 0.6 horizontal footcandles with a uniformity ratio of 4:1 average to minimum. This standard shall be met both on the ground and six feet above the ground.  
f. 	
Luminaries: Lamps shall be housed in a luminaire that is classified by IES as a cutoff distribution (see IES Lightning Handbook, 10th Edition). Decorative fixtures may be used, provided they meet the cutoff criteria. 

g. 	
Mounting Heights: The maximum light fixture height for pole-mounted or mast-mounted light fixtures shall be twenty (20) feet for lots that are less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in area, twenty-five (25) feet for lots that are twenty thousand (20,000) to eighty thousand (80,000) square feet in area, and thirty (30) feet for lots larger than eighty thousand (80,000) square feet in area. The maximum light fixture height for building-mounted light fixtures shall be the upper limit of vertical building face.  

h. 	
Period or Historical Fixtures: Period or historical fixtures that do not meet the requirements of this section may be used as an alternative to conventional lighting provided that, if the fixtures are not cutoff fixtures, the maximum initial lumens generated by each fixture shall not exceed 2,000 for incandescent lamps, and 8,500 for 


metal halide lamps if the lamp is internally recessed within the fixture or is shielded by internal louvers or refractors. The mounting height of period or historical fixtures shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet above the adjacent ground.  
i. 	
Adjacencies: Cutoff fixtures shall be designed to limit spillover onto adjacent residential properties to less than 0.1 footcandles.  

j. 	
Design: The design and color of fixtures used in parking lots shall complement the roadway and pedestrian lighting, the architecture, and other street furnishings in terms of color, form, and style. 

F.  	
Pedestrian Spaces Lighting 


1. 	Objectives 
The lighting of pedestrian spaces should consider pedestrian needs and safety. Light standards should illuminate the space occupied by pedestrians and the elements within those spaces, such as stairs, walls, benches, curbs, and landscaping.  
2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	
Heights: Mounting heights for pedestrian lighting shall be compatible with the project and the setting. Bollard fixtures, 3-4 feet in height, and ornamental fixtures, up to 12 feet in height, should be used as pedestrian area lighting. When decorative or special lighting is used, pole height shall be a maximum of 16 feet above the ground.  

b. 	
Luminaries: Lamps shall be housed in a luminaire that is classified by IES as a non-cutoff (see IES Lightning Handbook, 10th Edition). Maximum wattage shall not exceed 100 watts, except that equivalent energy efficient lamps may be used.  

c. 	
Illumination Levels: Illumination levels shall be 1.0 minimum horizontal average footcandle on the ground. At six (6) feet above the ground, the illumination level shall be 2.2 average vertical maintained footcandles.  

d. 	
Decorative: Ornamental and decorative lighting shall be used to highlight significant design elements (e.g., gateways, plazas, major building entrances). 

e. 	
Design: Light poles and fixtures shall complement the roadway and parking lot lighting, as well as the other elements of the streetscape.  

G.  	
Building Façade & Landscape Lighting 


1. 	Objectives 
Façade lighting is a way of highlighting special architectural features and attractively landscaped areas, while adding depth and variety to Buxton at night. Lighting used to illuminate building facades and landscaping should be limited to areas where it enhances particular features in accordance with the overall lighting plan and does not disturb surrounding residential areas. 
2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	
Intent: The lighting plan narrative shall describe how the façades of individual buildings and/or landscaping will be lit (if at all) and the design intent behind such lighting.  

b. 	
Levels: Maximum level of illumination on any vertical surface shall not exceed 5.0 footcandles.  

c. 	
Façade: Lighting fixtures shall be sited, aimed, and shielded so that light is directed only onto the building façade. Lighting fixtures shall not be directed toward adjacent street, sidewalks, or properties.  

d. 	
Landscape Lighting: Landscape lighting shall be sited, aimed, and shielded so that light is directed only onto the selected tree or shrub. Lighting fixtures shall not be directed toward adjacent streets, sidewalks, or properties. The lighting plan shall demonstrate that the installation will not generate excessive light levels, cause glare, or direct light beyond the landscaping toward the night sky. Indirect landscape lighting (uplighting and washes) should be utilized, rather than high branch-mounted floodlights aimed toward the ground.  

e. 	
Bands of Light: Neon tubes as lighting features are prohibited on building exteriors.  The use of internally illuminated bands of color and/or light is prohibited. 

H. 	
Gas Station, Convenience Store & Drive-Through Lighting 


1. 	Objectives 
Lit canopies or architectural features or devices used to illuminate gas stations, convenience stores, and drive-through elements of a building should facilitate the activities taking place in such locations without creating glare onto adjacent properties or roadways. 
2. 	Design Standards 
a. 	
Light Levels under Canopies: Areas around gasoline pumps and under canopies where a higher level of light is necessary for effective use of pumps shall be illuminated so the average horizontal illumination at ground level is 30 footcandles or less, with a uniformity ratio of 1.25 (average to minimum).  

b. 	
Parking Areas:  The maximum average horizontal illumination level shall only apply to the area under and within 20 feet of the canopy. Areas beyond 20 feet from the canopies and gasoline pumps shall comply with the standards for parking lots. If gasoline pumps are not provided under a canopy, the entire apron shall be treated as a parking area.  

c. 	
Canopy Luminaries: Recessed luminaries with flat or regressed lenses shall be used in canopies so the motorist cannot see the source of light. Drop fixtures are prohibited.  A sufficient cutoff angle must be maintained so the light source is invisible to passing motorists.  

d. 	
Fascia: Lights shall not be mounted on the sides (fascia) or top of the canopy. Sides and tops of canopies shall not be illuminated.  

Town of Buxton Zoning Ordinance 12-1 June 17, 2017 Edition
ARTICLE 12 - ROAD ACCEPTANCE REGULATIONS
Before any way is accepted at any future Town Meeting as a public way, it must be laid
out and constructed to the following specifications:
12.1 The right-of-way of any street shall not be less than fifty (50) feet.
12.2 Before grading is started, the entire right-of-way area shall be cleared of stumps,
roots, brush, all other objectionable material, and all trees not intended for preservation.
Loam and clay shall be removed from the full width of the street, which shall not be less
than twenty four (24) feet in width (gutter to gutter) to a depth of at least eighteen (18)
inches or if necessary, in the opinion of the Public Works Director, at least twenty four (24)
inches below the top of the proposed subgrade. The subgrade shall be carefully shaped
and thoroughly compacted before the gravel is placed.
12.3 The stumps and other organic materials shall be removed to a depth of two (2) feet
below the subgrade. Rocks and boulders when encountered, shall be removed to
subgrade.
12.3.A. The roadbed shall be surfaced with a minimum of fifteen (15) inches of sub
base gravel that meets the Maine Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications for Type D sub base material, which shall not contain particles of
rock exceeding four (4) inches in any dimension.
12.3.B. The roadbed shall be surfaced with a minimum of three (3) inches of base
gravel that meets the Maine Department of Transportation Standard Specifications
for Type A base material, which shall not pass the one and one half (1 ½”) inch
square stone.
12.3.C. All material shall be compacted in layers not to exceed eight (8) inches.
Compaction of each layer of base and sub base shall continue until a density of not
less than 95% of the maximum density has been achieved for the full width and
depth of the layer in accordance the Maine Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications.
12.3.D. The filling of utility trenches and other places shall be mechanically tamped,
and all such filling must be approved by the Public Works Director.
12.3.E. The Town may engage, or require the Applicant to engage, the testing
services of a certified, independent materials testing laboratory authorized under a
registered professional engineer satisfactory to the Town to certify that the
specifications of this Ordinance have been met. Any testing will be done at the
Applicant’s expense. All results will be forwarded to the Public Works Director.
Town of Buxton Zoning Ordinance 12-2 June 17, 2017 Edition
12.3.F. No surface pavement will be applied until base has gone through at least
one winter season at which time it will be inspected by the Applicant, Code
Enforcement Officer and Public Works Director.
12.4 The road cover layer shall be permanently finished with a rolled blacktop surface (a
minimum of 2” of rolled base with 1” of rolled surface) twenty (20) feet wide acceptable to
the Public Works Director. The two foot shoulders shall be dressed to blacktop grade with
compacted processed gravel. The crown shall be one-quarter (1/4) inch per foot. The
road centerline shall be the centerline of the right-of-way.
12.5 Ditching and Cross Drainage
 12.5.A. The ditches and cross drainage shall be sufficient to prevent flooding and
erosion. All work shall follow the standards in the Maine Erosion and Sediment
Control Handbook for Construction: Best Management Practices (Cumberland
County SWCD/Department of Environmental Protection). All work shall be
satisfactory to the CEO, Selectmen and the Public Works Director.
12.5.B. The minimum trench width for all culvert installations shall be the
outside diameter of the culvert pipe plus two (2) feet. All culverts shall be
embedded in a granular material with a minimum depth of six (6) inches below
the bottom of the pipe and extending to six (6) inches above the pipe. When water
is present in the trench, the pipe shall be embedded in crushed stone. All drain
outlets shall be riprapped to prevent erosion. The minimum size for all
drainage or driveway culverts shall be fifteen (15) inches.
12.6 Dead end roads shall have not less than 24 feet of unobstructed width, be able to
withstand live loads of fire apparatus, have a minimum of 13' 6" of vertical clearance and
otherwise comply with all construction standards in this article. An approved turnaround
for fire apparatus shall be provided where an access road is a dead end and is in excess of
150 feet in length. The turnaround shall have a minimum centerline radius of 100 feet or a
backing space of 60 feet shall be provided. The grade of the road shall be not more than
10%. Where a bridge is required to be used as access, it shall be constructed and
maintained using live design loading sufficient to carry the imposed loads of fire
apparatus.
12.7 No street grade shall be less than five-tenths of a percent (0.5%) nor more than ten
percent (10%). The grade within fifty (50) feet of intersections shall not be more than three
percent (3%).
12.8 Street jog with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty five (125) feet shall
be avoided.
Town of Buxton Zoning Ordinance 12-3 June 17, 2017 Edition
12.9 Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles and no
street shall intersect any other street at less than sixty (60) degrees. The property line
radius at intersections shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet.
12.10 Curves shall have a minimum centerline radius of one hundred (100) feet and
reverse curves shall have a minimum of one hundred (100) feet of straight road at
centerline between them. Slopes and curves shall be constructed so as to allow a
line of sight-distance at the centerline of at least two hundred (200) feet at five (5)
feet above the pavement.
12.11 All land damages must be waived in writing by the abutting landowners.
12.12 All signs and signposts shall follow the standards in the ‘Town of Buxton Sign and
Post Requirements’ as published by the Public Works Director and available from the
Code Enforcement Office
12.13 This Ordinance cancels and supersedes regulations adopted March 8, 1969.
12.14 Any way in existence prior to April 1, 1990 and referenced in the Buxton Road
Book, published in April 1990, may be accepted at a Town Meeting as a public way,
provided it meets all requirements of this article of the Buxton Zoning Ordinance and is
not part of a subdivision approved after November 2, 1976, with the following exceptions:
12.14.A. The right-of-way width requirements of Section 12.1.
12.14.B. The paving requirements of Section 12.4.
12.14.C. The dead end road length requirements of Section 12.6, providing that the
turn-a-round and backing space requirements of this section are adhered to.
12.14.D No road shall be accepted by the Town of Buxton, until after at least one
winter season.
12.15 The proposal for acceptance must be accompanied by a written certification by a
professional engineer, registered in the State of Maine, certifying that the proposed
Town way meets or exceeds the design and construction standards set forth in this
Ordinance.
12.16 The proposal for acceptance must be accompanied by one mylar and two sets of
blueprints of as-built conditions, the plans conforming to the plan requirements and
standards of Article 12, including the date that street construction was completed,
including the dates that the base course and surface course of pavement was installed. 
Town of Buxton Zoning Ordinance 12-4 June 17, 2017 Edition
12.17 The accepted way must be deeded to the Town of Buxton within 30 days of
acceptance.
12.18 The Applicant shall submit written certification from any utility within the rightof-way that all work has been completed to the satisfaction of the utility prior to
acceptance of any street by the Town.
12.19 Inspections: The Applicant shall work with the Public Works Director and Code
Enforcement Officer to schedule a pre-construction meeting to address the construction
program and schedule inspections. The Public Works Director will be notified before
any testing is done.
12.20 Notwithstanding Title 1, M.R.S. Section 302, this ordinance amendment shall apply
retroactively to any permit or approval that had not been finally approved and issued as of
November 10, 2014.

ARTICLE 13 -LAND DEVELOPMENT AND SUBDIVISION STANDARDS 
13.1 General. 
13.1.A Purpose 
The Buxton Planning Board has the responsibility of planning for sound land use developments that will protect the public health and will enhance the environmental quality of our community and the land and water resources. At the same time the Planning Board has the responsibility to plan so that individuals, landowners, prospective lot owners, taxpayers and the Town are protected from ill-advised development that will add to the tax burden of the people of the Town. The Town strongly favors sound, planned developments that show reasonable promise of providing benefits to the people of our Town without unreasonable expense. Under state law, municipal planning boards are the delegated authority to approve subdivisions. 
13.1.B Authority 
13.1.B.1 The following standards have been adopted under the authority of Maine Subdivision Law (Title 30-A MRSA, S4401 et seq.), and the Town's home rule authority. 
13.1.B.2. These standards shall be cited as “Land Development and Subdivision Standards of the Town of Buxton, Maine” and will be referred to herein as “Land Development and Subdivision Standards”. 
13.1.C. Administration 
13.1.C.1. The Town of Buxton Planning Board, hereinafter called the “Planning Board” or “Board”, shall administer the standards of this article. All 
submission to the Board shall be made through the Code Enforcement Office. 
13.1.C.2. The provisions of these standards shall pertain to all the land and buildings proposed for subdivision, as defined under Article 2, within the boundaries of the Town of Buxton. 
13.1.D. Planning Board Administrative Procedure 
13.1.D.1 The Code Enforcement Office shall prepare an agenda for each regularly scheduled meeting and has the right to limit the number of agenda items to be heard per meeting. 
13.1.D.2. Applicants shall be placed on the agenda according to the date of receipt in the Code Enforcement Office of a complete submission, which meets the requirements of the applicable stage of subdivision review. 
13.1.D.3. Applicants who are not on the agenda and wish to be heard, may be heard only after all agenda items have been completed and only if a majority of the Board so votes. No substantive review may take place with respect to such matters, which are not on the agenda. 
13.1.D.4. The Planning Board shall follow the procedures listed below for each stage of the review process. 
13.2 Stages of Subdivision Review. 
13.2.A Pre-Application Review of Sketch Plan: 
13.2.A.1 An applicant shall present a sketch plan to the Planning Board at least seven (7) days prior to submission of an application. At the meeting, the applicant shall appear with information sufficient to: 
13.2.A.1.a. Locate the site and identify the zoning classification; 
13.2.A.1.b. Describe the site: its area, shape, and existing features, both natural and man-made; and 
13.2.A.1.c. Describe the general intent of development. 
13.2.A.2. The Planning Board may have questions and comments. 
13.2.A.3. The Planning Board may schedule an on-site inspection. 
13.2.A.4. Within thirty (30) days of on-site inspection the Planning Board may make design suggestions which the applicant should investigate as part of the development plan. 
13.2.B Preliminary Plan Review: 
13.2.B.1: Twelve (12) Copies of the preliminary plan together with an application for subdivision review is submitted to the Planning Board. These documents must be received in the Planning Office at least seven (7) days prior to the meeting at which they are scheduled for preliminary review. If an application and a preliminary plan are not submitted to the Planning Board within six (6) months following the pre-application meeting, another pre­application meeting must be scheduled.  Preliminary plan review includes: 
13.2.B.1.a. applicant’s presentation of preliminary plan to Planning Board; 
13.2.B.1.b. Planning Board questions; 
13.2.B.1.c. Review comments from Code Enforcement Officer and other technical consultants to the Planning Board; 
13.2.B.1.d. Determination by Planning Board of completeness of application plans; 
13.2.B.1.e. If application is incomplete, the Planning Board provides a list of items, which need to be addressed and submitted by the applicant prior to complete application. The applicant must have a completed plan (all required submissions) before any further board action is taken; 
13.2.B.1.f. When the application is determined complete, the Planning Board schedules a public hearing within thirty (30) days. The Code Office notifies abutters by certified mail at least seven (7) days before the hearing, and files certified mail receipts; and 
13.2.B.1.g. Within thirty (30) days of the public hearing, the Planning Board shall act on the plan and shall notify the applicant in writing, of its decisions and reasons therefore. 
13.2.C. Final Plan Review 
Final plan review includes: 
13.2.C.1. Applicant’s presentation to the Board; 
13.2.C.2. Planning Board review and comments; 
13.2.C.3. Final review comments from Code Enforcement Officer and other technical consultants to the Planning Board; 
13.2.C.4. Planning Board determination of completeness of application; and 
13.2.C.5. Within sixty (60) days of complete application or within thirty 
(30) days of public hearing, the Planning Board shall act to approve, approve with conditions or deny the final plan application and shall notify the applicant in writing of its decision and reasons therefore. 
13.3. Submission Requirements and Procedures 
13.3.A. Sketch Plan Review 
13.3.A.1. The applicant shall make a complete sketch plan submission to Code Enforcement Office in order to be scheduled on an upcoming agenda. When an application is received, the Code Enforcement Officer shall give the applicant a dated receipt and shall notify by mail all abutting property owners of the proposed subdivision and comply with any other applicable provisions of current state laws regarding the review process (30-A M.R.S.A. §4403). A copy 
of the application shall also be forwarded to the Town’s Department Heads or 
their assigned designees, Buxton Hollis Historical Society and the Saco River Commission. 
13.3.A.2. Submissions 
13.3.A.2.a. Twelve (12) complete copies of the plan and application are required for the Board to proceed with its review. 
13.3.A.2.b. The sketch plan shall consist of the following: 
(i) 
The approximate location, dimensions and areas of all existing and proposed lots and buildings; 

(ii)
  The approximate location and widths of existing and proposed Streets (intersections within 250 feet of proposed subdivision road should be shown); 


(iii) Approximate topography (USGS) shown at same scale and site layout; 
(iv) 
Location of significant site features such as streams, wetlands, ledge, tree lines etc.; 

(v) 
The approximate location, dimensions and area of all parcels of land proposed to be set aside as open space; 

(vi) 
Perimeter boundaries from deed description or tax map conforming to legal description; and 


(vii) A location map showing the proximity to “certain” areas i.e. 
historical, deer wintering, open space etc. 
13.3.A.2.c. Vicinity map showing streets and existing land uses surrounding area; 
13.3.A.2.d. List of the names and mailing addresses of all property owners abutting the proposed site (listed by tax map, lot number); 
13.3.A.2.e. If the plan is for a “cluster” subdivision, the submission of 
twelve (12) copies of the subdivision layout that meets conventional zoning standards is required in addition to the other submission items; and 
13.3.A.2.f. Evidence that the sketch plan has been submitted to each of the department heads or their assigned designees, applicable Town Committees/ Boards/ Commissions, and utility companies serving the site. 
13.3.A.3. The applicant shall make a presentation to Planning Board. The sketch plan meeting is an informal workshop between the Planning Board and the applicant which is intended to provide guidance to the applicant in order to achieve a more acceptable subdivision proposal. The Planning Board may make design or other suggestions to be addressed by the applicant in subsequent submissions. 
13.3.A.4. Site Inspection: The Planning Board shall schedule an on-site inspection with applicant. The applicant shall have the following areas flagged on-site: 
13.3.A.4.a. Property corners; 
13.3.A.4.b. Edge of wetlands (different color than property corner flags); 
13.3.A.4.c. Approximate centerline of proposed street(s); and 
13.3.A.4.d. Approximate lot and/or building locations. 
Within thirty (30) days of the on-site inspection, the Planning Board shall set the required contour level to be shown on future plan submissions should they determine it necessary and require such other information as deemed necessary at sketch plan meeting. If required, a copy of this determination will be sent to the applicant by the Code Office. 
13.3.A.5. If the sketch plan submitted is significantly different from what the zoning would permit or what exists at the development site, then the Planning Board may require the applicant to submit a revised sketch plan, which more accurately represents the site conditions and/or zoning standards. 
13.3.B. Preliminary Plan Review 
13.3.B.1. Procedure and Fees. Within thirty (30) days of determination of a complete preliminary plan application, the Board shall hold a public hearing. Notice of the date, time and place of the Public Hearing will be given to the applicant and will be published at least twice in a local newspaper. The date of first publication must be at least seven (7) days before the hearing. In addition, abutting landowners will be notified by Certified Mail at least seven (7) days in advance of the Public Hearing. Notice of the hearing also will be posted at the Buxton Municipal Office. The developer will be responsible for all costs of notification required for the Public Hearing. 
In its evaluation of the proposed subdivision, the Board must determine if the plan provides for compliance with all applicable review standards contained in the Buxton Zoning Ordinance and the relevant state statutes. In addition to the application documents originally submitted, the Board may request in its review other studies deemed necessary or desirable to protect the public convenience, health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Town including the occupants of the proposed subdivision. The Board may also request independent review of some or all of the application and its supporting documentation. The developer shall be responsible for all costs associated with the review. 
An application fee must be paid to the Town in the amount of $300.00 per 
proposed lot or dwelling unit, together with a fee of $50.00 to cover the Town’s 
cost of notification and advertisements, upon preliminary plan approval and prior to final plan review. Prior to the Public Hearing the applicant shall pay any additional costs over the $50.00 notification and advertising fee. 
13.3.B.2. Preparation of the Preliminary Plan. 
The preliminary plan must contain all of the following information: 

13.3.B.2.a. Names of record owner(s), subdivider(s), engineer(s) or surveyor(s); 
13.3.B.2.b. Deed reference to the land to be subdivided; 
13.3.B.2.c. Graphic scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch, date and north point; 
13.3.B.2.d. Boundaries of the tract and zoning district; 
13.3.B.2.e. Ownership and location of abutting properties; 13.3.B.2.f. Name, location and width of all streets. All street names shown for proposed streets located in a subdivision must be submitted for approval by the Board of Selectmen to assure that none are duplicates of existing street names or so similar as to cause confusion; 
13.3.B.2.g. Type, location, profile and cross-section of all existing surface water drainage; 
13.3.B.2.h. Location of all existing or proposed utilities--water, gas, electricity or other; 
13.3.B.2.i. The developer must supply a copy of the medium intensity soil survey covering the site. If on-site inspection or test pit los indicate the likelihood of poorly or very poorly drained soils on the site, the Planning Board may request that a high intensity soil survey be completed for the project site; 
13.3.B.2.j. Location of all existing sanitary sewers showing size, profile and cross-section; or description, plan and location of other means of sewage disposal. When disposal is proposed by use of individual subsurface disposal areas, a complete site evaluation must be submitted for each lot. The location of all test pits must be shown on the plan; 
13.3.B.2.k. The general slope of the land must be indicated in five-foot intervals; 
13.3.B.2.l. Lot lines and dimensions must be shown; 
13.3.B.2.m. Proposed uses of all land, buildings, easements, and rights-of­way including parking, loading and storage must be indicated. 
13.3.B.2.n. Proposed public areas, if any; 
13.3.B.2.o. Determination whether project plan is subject to Department of Environmental Protection approval; 
13.3.B.2.p. Drawings, prepared by a registered professional engineer indicating the plan, profile and cross-section of all proposed streets, sidewalks and parking areas; 
13.3.B.2.q. A copy of any deed restrictions, easements, rights-of-way or other encumbrances currently affecting the property; 
13.3.B.2.r. Identification of all wetland areas on the property; 
13.3.B.2.s. The location of any open space to be preserved and a description of proposed ownership and management; 
13.3.B.2.t. Delineation of the boundaries of any flood prone areas which exist on the parcel. All proposals shall include base flood elevations, flood boundaries, and in a riverine floodplains, the floodway data. These determinations shall be based on engineering practices recognized by the Federal Emergency Management Agency; 
13.3.B.2.u. A hydrogeologic assessment prepared by a Certified Geologist or Registered Professional Engineer experienced in hydrogeology when the subdivision: 
(i) 
is located over a sand and gravel aquifer as shown on a map entitled "Hydrogeologic Data for Significant Sand and Gravel Aquifers" by the Maine Geological Survey, 1985, Map No. 4; or 

(ii) 
has an average density of more than one dwelling unit per 100,000 square feet. 


The Board may require a hydrogeologic assessment in other cases where site considerations or development design indicate a potential of adverse impacts on ground water quality. These cases include extensive areas of shallow to bedrock soils; or cluster developments in which the average density is less than one dwelling unit per 100,000 square feet but the density of the developed portion is in excess of one dwelling per 80,000 square feet; and the proposed use of shared or common subsurface waste water disposal systems. 
The hydrogeologic assessment shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of Section 13.5.O.1.a below. 
13.3.B.2.v. Identification of any areas of significant wildlife habitat as determined by the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife or the Buxton Comprehensive Plan. 
13.3.B.2.w. Location of all existing and proposed permanent monuments. 
13.3.B.2.x.  Lot numbers in accordance with approved Town numbering 
policy. 

13.3.B.2.y. An erosion and sedimentation control plan that has been prepared by a qualified professional. 
13.3.B.2.z. A storm water management plan that has been prepared by a registered professional engineer. 
13.3.C. Final Plan Review 
13.3.C.1 Procedure Within thirty (30) days after approval of the preliminary plan or within any other time limit which is mutually agreed to, the applicant must submit a final plan to the Board for inspection to verify that the plan has all the information requested by the Board and required by applicable state laws. 
Within sixty (60) days of complete application or within thirty (30) days of public hearing, the Planning Board shall act: (1) to approve the final plan or to approve the final plan with conditions to (a) Satisfy the criteria contained in the Buxton Zoning Ordinance and relevant state laws and (b) protect and preserve the public's health, safety and general welfare; or (2) to deny the final plan application. The Planning Board shall notify the applicant in writing of its decision and reasons therefore. 
13.3.C.2. Submissions 
13.3.C.2.a. All information required for the preliminary plan; 
13.3.C.2.b. Completed application form and fee; 
13.3.C.2.c. One (1) complete set of one (1) or more maps or drawings and one (1) original mylar of the filing plan, plus two (2) paper copies; of any changed plans; all to be drawn at a scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch. Plans shall be no larger than 24x36 inches in size and shall have a Planning Board signature box; 
13.3.C.2.d. The name, registration, seal and signature of the land surveyor, architect, engineer and/or consultant who prepared the plans; 
13.3.C.2.e. The final calculations on the total and net residential acreage of the site of each proposed lot, as well as deductions made for each of the following: wetlands, steep slopes, easements, and rights-of-way; 
13.3.C.2.f. Landscape and buffer plan if applicable showing what vegetation will remain and what will be planted including botanical name and common names of plants and trees, dimensions, approximate planting time and maintenance schedule; 
13.3.C.2.g. Types of existing and proposed monumentation shall be identified and located; 
13.3.C.2.h. A Performance bond or letter of credit meeting the standards of 13.5; 
13.3.C.2.i. Written evidence of all state and federal approvals; 
13.3.C.2.j. Any legal documents which are required to be submitted and reviewed as part of the subdivision review; 
13.3.C.2.k. Longitudinal profiles, radii of curves, and angles of intersections for all proposed streets; 
13.3.C.2.l. Offers of cession in a form certified as satisfactory by the Town Attorney of all land included in streets, highways, parks or other open space ultimately to be dedicated for public use, or not specifically reserved by the developer; and 
13.3.C.2.m. A note on the plan shall state “all plans and documents used to 
approve this subdivision are made part of and are a condition of plan approval. 
13.3.D.  Final Approval; Recording; Lapse of Approval: 
13.3.D.1. The final approval is dependent upon, and limited to, the proposals and plans contained in the application and supporting documents submitted and affirmed by the applicant. Any variation from the plans, proposals and supporting documents, is subject to review and approval by the Planning Board. 
13.3.D.2. After completing a findings-of-fact and determining all standards in 30-A M.R.S.A §4404 and these regulations have been met, and upon voting to approve the subdivision, the Board shall sign the final plan. The Board shall specify in writing its findings-of-fact and reasons for any conditions or denial. One copy of the signed plan shall be retained by the Code Enforcement Officer. 
13.3.D.3. The applicant shall record the approved plan at the York County Registry of Deeds and a copy of the plan as recorded and stamped by the Registry shall be brought back and filed with the Code Enforcement Office. Any subdivision not recorded in the Registry of Deeds within ninety (90) days of the date upon which the plan is approved and signed by the Planning Board shall become null and void. 
13.3.D.4. No changes, erasures, modifications, or revisions shall be made in any final plan after Planning Board approval unless the revised final plan is first submitted and the Board approves the modifications. The Board shall make finding that the revised plan meets the standards of 30-A M.R.S.A. §4404, and these regulations. In the event that that a plan is recorded without complying with this requirement, it shall be considered null and void, and the Board shall record a notice to that effect at the Registry of Deeds. [SEE SECTION 13.4] 
13.3.D.5. Failure to substantially complete construction of the required improvements of the subdivision within five (5) years of the date of approval and signing of plan shall render the plan null and void; unless an alternative phasing schedule was made part of the final plan approval, in which case the time limit shall be five (5) years from the starting date of the last scheduled development phase. The determination of whether or not substantial completion has taken place shall be made by the Planning Board based on evidence presented by the applicant and the town’s Code Enforcement Officer concerning the status of such improvements. Upon determining that a 
subdivision’s approval has expired under this paragraph, the Board shall have 
a notice recorded in the Registry of Deeds to that effect. This section only to those projects which receive final approval after the effective date of this amendment, June 18, 2011. 
13.4 Enforcement. 
Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity who violates the provisions of this Article pertaining to Land Development and Subdivision Standards shall be punished in accordance with Title 30-A M.R.S.A. S4452. After notification from the Code Enforcement Officer in writing of the nature of the violation, the violator has thirty (30) days from that time as a corrective period to ease the violation. Each day the violation exists after the thirty (30) day period shall constitute a separate offense and the violator shall be punished by a fine of $100 each day the violation exists. All fines collected shall be payable to the Town of Buxton. 
The Code Enforcement Officer or the appropriate municipal officers may institute proceedings to enjoin the violations of this Ordinance. 
Any person, who after receiving approval from the Planning Board and recording the plan at the registry of deeds, constructs or develops the subdivision or transfers any lot in a manner other than depicted on the approved plans or amendments or in violation of any condition imposed by the Planning Board shall be penalized in accordance with Section 4452. 
13.5 General Standards for All Subdivisions. 
The standards in this section are intended to clarify and expand upon the criteria for approval found within the Subdivision Statute (30-A MRSA, S4404). In reviewing a proposed subdivision, the Board must review the application for conformance with the following standards and make findings that each has been met prior to the approval of a Final Plan. In all instances the burden of proof is upon the applicant to present adequate information to indicate all standards and statutory criteria for approval have been or will be met. 
13.5.A. Based on the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and Flood Insurance Rate Maps, and information presented by the applicant whether the subdivision is in a flood-prone area. If the subdivision, or any part of it, is in such an area, the subdivider shall determine the 100-year flood elevation and flood hazard boundaries within the subdivision. The proposed subdivision plan must include a condition of plan approval requiring that the principal structures in the subdivision will not be constructed within the 100-year floodplain. 
13.5.B. Each lot that is offered for sale must be such that any buyer, with or without, a knowledge of the physical characteristics, will be able to build thereon a reasonable abode with adequate access, water supply, sewage disposal system and reserve sites for disposal areas in compliance with the Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules. 
13.5.C. Soil Erosion. 
13.5.C.1. 	The proposed subdivision must prevent soil erosion from entering water bodies, wetlands and adjacent properties. 
13.5.C.2. 	The procedures outlined in the erosion and sedimentation control plan must be implemented during the site preparation, construction and clean-up stages. 
13..C.3. Topsoil is considered part of the subdivision and is not to be removed from the site except for surplus topsoil from roads, parking areas and building excavations. 
13.5.D. Traffic Conditions. 
13.5.D.1. In general, provision must be made for vehicular access to the subdivision and circulation within the subdivision in such a manner as to: 
13.5.D.1.a. Safeguard against hazards to traffic and pedestrians in existing streets and within the subdivision; 
13.5.D.1.b. Avoid traffic congestion on any street; and 
13.5.D.1.c. Provide safe and convenient circulation on public streets and within the subdivision. 
13.5.D.2.  More specifically, access and circulation must also conform to the following standards: 
13.5.D.2.a. The vehicular access to the subdivision must be arranged to avoid traffic use of existing streets, which the Comprehensive Plan has classified as residential access streets. 
13.5.D.2.b.  Where necessary to safeguard against hazards to traffic and pedestrians and/or to avoid traffic congestion, provision must be made for turning lanes, traffic directional islands, frontage roads, sidewalks, bicycle ways and traffic controls within existing public streets. 
13.5.D.2.c. Access ways to non-residential subdivisions or to multifamily developments must be designed to avoid queuing of entering vehicles on any street. 
13.5.D.2.d. Where topographic and other site conditions allow, provision must be made for street connections to adjoining lots of similar existing or potential use within areas of the Town designated as growth areas in the Comprehensive Plan; or in non-residential subdivisions when such access will 
(.i.)  Facilitate fire protection services as approved by the Fire Chief; or 
(.ii.) Enable the public to travel between two existing or potential uses, generally open to the public without need to travel upon a public street. 
13.5.E. Impact on the Town's ability to dispose of solid waste. If the additional solid waste from the proposed subdivision exceeds the capacity of the Town's solid waste facility, causes the facility to no longer be in compliance with its license from the Department of Environmental Protection or causes the Town to exceed its contract with a non-municipal facility, the applicant must make alternative arrangements for the disposal of solid waste. The alternative arrangements must be at a disposal facility, which is in compliance with its license. The Board may not require the alternative arrangement to exceed a period of five (5) years. 
13.5.F. All streets in the plan including private roads must be built by the developer under the supervision of the Public Works Director in conformance with the Road Acceptance Regulations. Section 12.4 of the Road Acceptance Regulations must be adhered to at the time the development is fifty percent (50%) completed. When the Code Enforcement Officer determines that the fifty percent (50%) completion stage has been reached, he shall inform the developer by certified mail that the developer has one (1) year from that date to complete the roads as required under Section 12.4 of the Road Acceptance Regulations and that no additional building permits shall be issued for the development until the roads are completed. The provisions of Article 12 are mandatory for all streets in subdivisions regardless of whether or not they are to remain private. All streets within a new or expanded subdivision shall be either public or private, but not a mix thereof. Where the subdivision streets are to remain private roads, there shall be a maintenance agreement for all lots serviced by the road approved by the Planning Board. This agreement shall specify the rights and responsibilities of each lot owner with respect to the maintenance, repair and plowing of the road, and the following words must appear on the recorded plan: amended June 14, 2003 
"All roads in this subdivision shall remain private roads to be maintained by the developer or the lot owners and shall not be accepted or maintained by the Town. Reference to the status of the roads as private roads shall be included in the deed of each lot. A description of the road, including its status as a private road, must be filed with the Town Clerk as an addendum to the Buxton Road Book" 
13.5.G. All lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of Section 9.6. 
13.5.H. Each lot that is to be offered for sale or sold must contain a minimum of one thousand (1,000) square feet of land so located that it is suitable for septic sewage disposal field absorption area with reasonable assurance of functioning adequately, and to comply with state laws. Where the site evaluation indicates a depth of original mineral soil of less than twenty four (24) inches to the limiting factor, a reserve area of an additional one thousand (1,000) square feet for the eventual expansion or replacement of the disposal area shall be indicated on the plan. This reserve area shall not be built upon. 
13.5.I. The establishment of reserve strips prohibiting access to streets from adjoining lands will not be permitted. 
13.5.J. A permanent marker, meaning a granite monument, a concrete monument, or an iron pin must be established at every corner of each lot. *In addition, an iron pin must be set on both sidelines of each lot at a distance of 150 ft -200 ft from the front of the lot and be shown on the plan. (*6/97) 
13.5.K. Sufficient Water. 
13.5.K.1. Water Supply. 
13.5.K.1.a. Individual wells must be sited and constructed to prevent infiltration of surface water and contamination from subsurface wastewater disposal systems and other sources of potential contamination. 
13.5.K.1.b.  	If a central water supply system is provided by the subdivider, the location and protection of the source, the design, construction and operation of the system must conform to the standards of the Maine Rules Relating to Drinking Water (10-144A C.M.R. 231). 
13.5.K.1.c. When the development of a new or the expansion of an existing subdivision, including any existing lots, contains a total of 5 or more lots, the developer shall be required to install a fire protection water supply within the new or expanded subdivision. The volume and location of the supply(s) shall be determined by the Fire Chief based on the NFPA Codes (rural water supply for fire protection) for the type and use of the buildings. The fire protection water supply shall meet the following standards, along with further standards, located in the Fire Chief's office: amended June 14, 2003 
(.i.) A 10,000 gallon storage tank, or two 5000 gallon tanks interconnected shall be installed in accordance with the guidelines adopted jointly by the Fire Chief and Code Enforcement Officer, which guidelines shall be kept on file at the Municipal Building. Amended June 15, 2002 
(ii.) Fire Ponds may be allowed in lieu of holding tanks if the water source is approved by the Fire Chief and Code Enforcement Officer. A fire pond shall be constructed with a 2:1 sloped (horizontal: vertical) banking and a minimum depth of 10 feet. The fire pond shall have a minimum capacity of 120,000 gallons, as certified by a Maine registered professional engineer, and shall be maintained at or above that volume at all times. An overflow system shall be installed and maintained. Amended June 15, 2002 
(.iii.) All fire protection water supplies shall be equipped with a dry hydrant system that is designed, located and installed in accordance with the guidelines adopted jointly by the Fire Chief and the Code Enforcement Officer, which guidelines shall be kept on file at the Municipal Building. The dry hydrant shall be located so that fire trucks may connect to the hydrant by means of a 10-foot section of hard 
suction hose. The area within 37.5’ each side of the hydrant, parallel to 
the road, and extending to the roadway shall be kept clear of all obstacles and shall be posted “NO PARKING FIRE LANE”. If a private access road is provided, it shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide; be capable of handling fire trucks in all seasons; be posted "NO PARKING FIRE LANE", and be otherwise in compliance with the above referenced guidelines. If the hydrant is located on a public road, the hydrant shall be located a minimum of 20 feet from the paved portion of the road and, where needed, fill material shall be provided to widen the road shoulder so that fire trucks may connect to the hydrant without interfering with passing traffic. 
(iv.)   Prior to release by the Town of the signed subdivision plan for recording, an easement in recordable form shall be conveyed to the Inhabitants of the Town of Buxton, which permits the Town to use and maintain the fire protection water supply and dry hydrant.  The form of the easement shall be subject to approval of the Town Attorney. 
(v.) A detailed plan of the water supply, hydrant, piping overflow and roadway shall be submitted to the Planning Board as part of the preliminary plan submission.  The Fire Chief and the Code Enforcement Officer shall review the plan and make their recommendations in writing to the Planning Board. 
(vi.) The fire protection water supply and dry hydrant shall be installed by the developer in accordance with the above referenced guidelines. No building permit for any dwelling in the subdivision may be issued unless and until the fire protection water supply and hydrant have been tested and approved as being in working order by the Fire Chief or his designee and the Code Enforcement Officer. 
(.vii.) The requirement of compliance with this Section 13.4.K.I.c. shall not apply if the developer, as a written condition of subdivision approval, agrees to install an approved sprinkler system in each and every dwelling in the development. The sprinkler system shall meet the current standards of NFPA 13D as set forth in the 1999 edition and the approval of the Fire Chief. An outside connection shall be required and approved by the Fire Chief.  Amended 6/18/05. 
13.5.K.2. Water Quality. 
Water supplies must meet the primary drinking water standards contained in the Maine Rules Relating to Drinking Water. If existing water quality contains contaminants in excess of the secondary drinking water standards in the Maine Rules Relating to Drinking Water, that fact must be disclosed in a note on the plan to be recorded in the registry of deeds 
13.5.L. 	Impact on natural beauty, aesthetics, historic sites, wildlife habitat, rare natural areas or public access to the shoreline. 
13.5.L.1. Preservation of natural beauty and aesthetics. 
13.5.L.1.a. The Board may require that the application include a landscape plan that will show the preservation of any existing trees larger than 24" inches diameter breast height, the replacement of trees and vegetation and graded contours. 
13.5.L.1.b. When a proposed subdivision street traverses open fields the plans must include the planting of street trees. 
13.5.L.2. Retention of Open Spaces and Natural or Historic Features. 
13.5.L.2.a. If any portion of the subdivision is located within an area designated by the Comprehensive Plan as open space or greenbelt, that portion must be reserved for open space preservation. 
13.5.L.2.b. If any portion of the subdivision is located within an area designated as a critical natural area by the Comprehensive Plan or the Department of Economic and Community Development's Natural Heritage Program, the plan must indicate appropriate measures for the preservation of the values which qualify the site for such designation. 
13.5.L.2.c. If any portion of the subdivision is designated a site of historic or prehistoric importance by the Comprehensive Plan or the Maine Historic Preservation Commission, appropriate measures for the protection of the historic or prehistoric resources must be included in the plan. 
13.5.L.2.d. Section 11.6.C. must be adhered to when the subdivision is a clustered development. 
13.5.L.3. Preservation of Significant Wildlife Habitat. 
If any portion of a proposed subdivision lies within: 
(a.) 250 feet of the following areas identified and mapped by the 
Department Of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife as: 
(i.) 	habitat for species appearing on the official state or federal lists of endangered or threatened species; or 
(ii.) 	high and moderate value waterfowl and wading bird habitats including nesting and feeding areas; 
(b.) 1,320 feet of an area identified and mapped by the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife as a high or moderate value deer wintering area or travel corridor; 
(c.) or other important habitat areas identified in the Comprehensive Plan, the applicant must demonstrate that there shall be no adverse impacts on the habitat and species it supports. A report prepared by wildlife biologist, selected or approved by the Board, must be submitted. This report must assess the potential impact of the subdivision on the significant habitat and adjacent areas that are important to the maintenance of the affected species and must describe appropriate mitigation measures to ensure that the subdivision will have no adverse impacts on the habitat and species it supports. 
13.5.L.4. Any existing public rights of access to the shoreline of a water body must be maintained by means of easements or rights-of-way or should be included in the open space with provisions made for continued public access. 
13.5.M. Financial and Technical Capacity. 
13.5.M.1. Financial Capacity. The applicant must have adequate financial resources to construct the proposed improvements and meet the criteria of the statute and the standards of Section 
13.4. When the applicant proposes to construct the buildings as well as the subdivision improvements, the applicant must have adequate financial resources to construct the total development.  In making the above determinations, the Board must consider the proposed time frame for construction and the effects of inflation. 
13.5.M.2. Technical Ability. 
13.5.M.2.a. The applicant must retain qualified contractors and consultants to supervise, construct and inspect the required improvements in the proposed subdivision. 
13.5.M.2.b. In determining the applicant's technical ability, the Board must consider the applicant's previous experience, the experience and training of the applicant's consultants and contractors and the existence of violations of previous approvals granted to the applicant. 
13.5.N. Impact on water quality or shoreline. Cutting or removal of vegetation along water bodies must not increase water temperature, result in shoreline erosion or sedimentation of water bodies. 
13.5.O. Impact on ground water quality or quantity. 
13.5.O.1. Ground Water Quality. 
13.5.O.1.a. When a hydrogeologic assessment is submitted, the assessment must contain at least the following information: 
(.i.)  	A map showing the basic soil types. 
(ii.) 	The depth of the water table at representative points throughout the subdivision. 
(iii.) 	Drainage conditions throughout the subdivision. 
(iv.) Data on the existing ground water quality either from test wells in the subdivision or from existing wells on neighboring properties. 
(v.)  An analysis and evaluation of the effect of the subdivision on ground water resources. In the case of residential developments, the evaluation must, at a minimum, include a projection of post development nitrate-nitrogen concentration at any wells within the subdivision, at the subdivision boundaries and at a distance of 1,000 feet from potential contamination sources, whichever is a shorter distance. 
(vi.) A map showing the location of any subsurface wastewater disposal systems and drinking water wells within the subdivision and within 200 feet of the subdivision boundaries. 
13.5.O.1.b. Projections of ground water quality must be based on the assumption of drought conditions (assuming 60% of annual average precipitation). 
13.5.O.1.c. A subdivision must not increase any contaminant concentration in the ground water to more than one half of the Primary Drinking Water Standards. (The Primary Drinking Water Standards have been set by the Maine Department of Human Services for those contaminants which pose a health threat, such as bacteria, nitrate and heavy metals) A subdivision must not increase any contaminant concentration in the ground water to more than the Secondary Drinking Water Standards. (The Secondary Drinking Water Standards are for contaminants which pose more of an aesthetic concern than a health concern, such as iron and manganese) 
13.5.O.1.d. If ground water contains contaminants in excess of the primary standards and the subdivision is to be served by on-site ground water supplies, the applicant must demonstrate how water quality will be improved or treated. 
13.5.O.1.e. If ground water contains contaminants in excess of the secondary standards, the subdivision must not cause the concentration of the parameters in question to exceed 150% of the ambient concentration. (It is not uncommon for natural contamination levels to exceed the secondary standards in Maine, particularly for iron and manganese and occasionally sulfur) 
13.5.O.1.f. Subsurface waste water disposal systems and drinking water wells must be constructed as shown on the map submitted with the assessment. If construction standards for drinking water wells or other measures to reduce ground water contamination and protect drinking water supplies are recommended in the assessment, those standards must be included as a note on the Final Plan and as restrictions in the deeds to the affected lots. 
13.5.O.2. Ground Water Quantity. 
13.5.O.2.a. Ground water withdrawals by a proposed subdivision must not lower the water table beyond the boundaries of the subdivision. 
13.5.O.2.b. A proposed subdivision must not result in a lowering of the water table at the subdivision boundary by increasing runoff with a corresponding decrease in infiltration of precipitation. 
13.5.P. Identification of freshwater wetlands. 
Freshwater wetlands must be identified in accordance with the 1987 Corps of 
Engineers Wetland Delineation Manual, published by the United States Army Corps 
of Engineers. 

13.5.Q. Storm water management. 
13.5.Q.1. Adequate provision must be made for disposal of all storm water generated within the subdivision and any drained ground water through a management system of swales, culverts, underdrains and storm drains. The storm water management system must be designed to conduct storm water flows to existing watercourses or storm drains except where retention basins are designed or ground water recharge is desirable. 
13.5.Q.2. Where a subdivision is traversed by a stream, river or surface water drainage way or where the Board feels that surface water runoff to be created by the subdivision should be controlled, there shall be provided easements or drainage rights-of-way with swales, culverts, catch basins or other means of channeling surface water within the subdivision and over other properties.  Wherever the storm drainage system is not within the right-of-way of a public street, perpetual easements shall be provided to the Town allowing maintenance and improvement of the system. 
13.5.Q.3. All components of the storm water management system must be designed to limit peak discharge rates to predevelopment levels for the 2-year, 10-year and the 25-year frequency, 24-hour duration storms, based on rainfall data for Portland, Maine. 
13.5.Q.4. Outlets must be stabilized against soil erosion by stone riprap or other suitable materials which reduce water velocity. 
13.6 Performance Guarantees. 
13.6.A. Types of Guarantees. With submittal of the application for Final Plan approval, the subdivider shall provide one of the following performance guarantees for an amount adequate to cover the total construction costs of all required improvements, taking into account the time span of the construction schedule and the inflation rate for construction costs: 
13.6.A.1. The establishment of an escrow account by means of either a certified check payable to the Town or a savings account or certificate of deposit naming the Town as owner; 
13.6.A.2. A performance bond payable to the Town issued by a surety company approved by the Municipal Officers; 
13.6.A.3. An irrevocable letter of credit from a financial institution establishing funding for the construction of the required improvements from which the Town may draw if construction is inadequate, approved by the Municipal Officers; or 
13.6.A.4. An offer of conditional approval limiting the number of units built or lots sold until all required improvements have been constructed. 
The conditions and amount of the performance guarantee shall be determined by the Board with the advice of the Public Works Director, Municipal Officers and/or Town Attorney. 
13.6.B. Contents of Guarantee. The performance guarantee shall contain a construction schedule, itemized cost estimates for each major phase of construction taking into account inflation, provisions for inspections of each phase of construction, provisions for the release of part or all of the performance guarantee to the developer and a date after which the developer would be in default and the Town shall have access to the funds to finish construction. (amended 6/12/04) 
13.6.C. Escrow Account. A cash contribution to the establishment of an escrow account shall be made by either a certified check made out to the municipality, the direct deposit into a savings account or the purchase of a certificate of deposit. For any account opened by the subdivider, the municipality shall be named as owner and the consent of the municipality shall be required for a withdrawal. Any interest earned on the escrow account shall be returned to the subdivider unless the municipality has found it necessary to draw on the account, in which case the interest earned shall be proportionately divided between the amount returned to the subdivider and the amount withdrawn to complete the required improvements. 
13.6.D. Performance Bond. A performance bond shall detail the conditions of the bond, the method for release of the bond or portions of the bond to the subdivider and the procedures for collection by the municipality. The bond documents shall specifically reference the subdivision for which approval is sought. 
13.6.E. Letter of Credit. An irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or other lending institution shall indicate that funds have been set aside for the construction of the subdivision and may not be used for any other project or loan. 
13.6.F. Conditional Agreement. The Board, at its discretion may provide for the subdivider to enter into a binding agreement with the municipality in lieu of the other financial performance guarantees. Such an agreement shall provide for approval of the Final Plan on the condition that up to one-third of the lots may be sold or built upon until either: 
13.6.F.1. It is certified by the Board, or its agent, that all of the required improvements have been installed in accordance with these regulations and the regulations of the appropriate utilities; or 
13.6.F.2. A performance guarantee, acceptable to the municipality is submitted in an amount necessary to cover the completion of the required improvements at an amount adjusted for inflation and prorated for the portions of the required improvements already installed. 
Notice of the agreement and any conditions shall be on the Final Plan, which is recorded at the Registry of Deeds. Release from the agreement shall follow the procedures for release of the performance guarantees contained in Section 13.5.G. 
13.6.G. Release of guarantee. Prior to the release of any part of the performance guarantee, the Board shall determine to its satisfaction, in part upon the report of the Code Enforcement Officer or whatever other agencies and departments may be involved, that the proposed improvements meet or exceed the design and construction requirements for that portion of the improvements for which the release is requested. 
13.6.H. Default. If, upon inspection, the Code Enforcement Officer finds that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications filed as part of the application, he/she shall so report in writing to the Code Enforcement Officer, the Municipal Officers, the Board and the subdivider or builder. The Municipal Officers shall take any steps necessary to preserve the Town's rights. 
13.7 Revisions to Approved Plans. 
An applicant for a revision to a previously approved plan shall, at least seven days 
prior to a scheduled meeting of the Board, request to be placed on the Board’s agenda.  
If the revision involves the creation of additional lots or dwelling units, the procedures for preliminary plan approval shall be followed.  If the revision involves only modifications of the approved plan, without the creation of additional lots or dwelling units, the procedures for final plan approval shall be followed.  If the revision involves only modifications of conditions or notes to the approved plan, the procedures for final plan approval shall be followed with the exception that a complete plan need not be recreated.  Upon approval, a notarized document of plan revision shall be provided by the Planning Board. The document of plan revision shall be filed in the York County Registry of Deeds.  This filing shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
The applicant shall submit a copy of the approved plan as well as the required copies of the proposed revisions.  The applicant shall also include enough supporting information to allow the board to make a determination that the proposed revisions meet the standards of these regulations and the criteria of the statute.  The revised plan shall indicate that it is the revision of a previously approved and recorded plan and shall show the title of the subdivision and the book and page or cabinet and sheet on which the original plan is recorded at the Registry of Deeds. 
The Board’s scope of review shall be limited to those portions of the plan which are proposed to be changed. 
ARTICLE 14 – FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT 


14.1 Purpose and Establishment 
Certain areas of the Town of Buxton, Maine are subject to periodic flooding, causing serious damages to properties within these areas. Relief is available in the form of flood insurance as authorized by the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968. 
Therefore, the Town of Buxton, Maine has chosen to become a participating community in the National Flood Insurance Program, and agrees to comply with the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended) as delineated in this Floodplain Management Ordinance. 
It is the intent of the Town of Buxton, Maine to require the recognition and evaluation of flood hazards in all official actions relating to land use in the floodplain areas having special flood hazards. 
The Town of Buxton has the legal authority to adopt land use and control measures to reduce future flood losses pursuant to Title 30-A MRSA, Sections 3001-3007, 4352 and 4401-4407. 
The National Flood Insurance Program, established in the aforesaid Act, provides that areas of the Town of Buxton having a special flood hazard be identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and that floodplain management measures be applied in such flood hazard areas. This Ordinance establishes a Flood Hazard Development Permit system and review procedure for development activities in the designated flood hazard areas of the Town of Buxton, Maine. 
The areas of special flood hazard, Zones A and A1-3O, are identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a report entitled "Flood Insurance Study -Town of Buxton, Maine, York County," dated January 5, 1982 with accompanying "Flood Insurance Rate Map" dated July 5, 1982 and "Flood Boundary and Floodway Map" dated July 5, 1982 which are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance. 

14.2 Permit Required 
Before any construction or other development (as defined in Article 2), including the placement of manufactured homes, begins within any areas of special flood hazard established in Section 14.1, a Flood Hazard Development Permit shall be obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer. This permit shall be in addition to any other permits which may be required pursuant to the codes and ordinances of the Town of Buxton, Maine. 

14.3 Application for Permit 
The application for a Flood Hazard Development Permit shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer and shall include: 
14.3.A. 	The name, address and phone number of the applicant, owner, and contractor; 
14.3.B. An address and a map indicating the location of the construction site; 
14.3.C. A site plan showing location of existing and/or proposed development, including but not limited to structures, sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities, areas to be cut and filled, and lot dimensions; 
14.3.D. 	A statement of the intended use of the structure and/or development; 
14.3.E.A statement of the cost of the development including all materials and labor; (a.) A statement as to the type of sewage system proposed; 
14.3.F. 	Specification of dimensions of the proposed structure and/or development; [Items H-K.2 apply only to new construction and substantial improvements.] 
14.3.G. The elevation in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), or to a locally established datum in Zone A only, of the: 
14.3.H.1. base flood at the proposed site of all new or substantially improved structures, which is determined: 
(a.) in Zones A1-30, from data contained in the "Flood Insurance Study ­Town of Buxton, Maine," as described in Section 14.1; or, 
(.b.) in Zone A, to be the elevation of the ground at the intersection of the floodplain boundary and a line perpendicular to the shoreline which passes along the ground through the site of the proposed building; 
14.3.H.2. highest and lowest grades at the site adjacent to the walls of the proposed building; 
14.3.H.3. lowest floor, including basement; and whether or not such structures contain a basement; and, 
14.3.H.4. level, in the case of non-residential structures only, to which the structure will be floodproofed; 
14.3.H. A description of an elevation reference point established on the site of all new or substantially improved structures; 
14.3.I. Either an Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form 81-31, 03/97, as amended) completed by a Professional Land Surveyor, registered professional engineer or architect; or, for non-residential structures to be floodproofed, a Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form 81-65, 05/93, as amended) completed by a registered professional engineer or architect. These Certificates verify that the elevations shown on the application are accurate; 
14.3.J Certifications as required in Section 14.6 by a registered professional engineer or architect that: 
14.3.K A description of the extent to which any water course will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; and, 
14.3.K.1. floodproofing methods for any non-residential structures will meet the floodproofing criteria of Subsection 14.3.H.4.; Section 14.6.G.; and other applicable standards in Section 14.6; 
14.3.K.2. engineered hydraulic openings in foundation walls will meet the standards of Subsection 14.6.L.2.; 
14.3.K.3.  bridges will meet the standards of Section 14.6.M.; 
14.3.K.4.  containment walls will meet the standards of Section 14.6.N.; 
14.3.L A statement of construction plans describing in detail how each applicable development standard in Section 14.6 will be met. 

14.4 Application Fee and Expert's Fee 
A non-refundable application fee of $25.00 shall be paid to the Town Clerk and a copy of a receipt for the same shall accompany the application. 
An additional fee may be charged if the Code Enforcement Officer and/or Board of Appeals needs the assistance of a professional engineer or other expert. The expert's fee shall be paid in full by the applicant within 10 days after the town submits a bill to the applicant. Failure to pay the bill shall constitute a violation of the ordinance and be grounds for the issuance of a stop work order. An expert shall not be hired by the municipality at the expense of an applicant until the applicant has either consented to such hiring in writing or been given an opportunity to be heard on the subject. An applicant who is dissatisfied with a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer may appeal that decision to the Board of Appeals. 

14.5 Review Standards For Flood Hazard Development Permit Applications 
The Code Enforcement Officer shall: 
14.5.A Review all applications for the Flood Hazard Development Permit to assure that proposed developments are reasonably safe from flooding and to determine that all pertinent requirements of Section 14.6 (Development Standards) have, or will be met; 
14.5.B Utilize, in the review of all Flood Hazard Development Permit applications, the base flood data contained in the "Flood Insurance Study -Town of Buxton, Maine," as described in Section 14.1. In special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data are not provided, the Code Enforcement Officer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data from federal, state, or other sources, including information obtained pursuant to Subsection 14.3.H.1.b.; Section 14.6.K.; and Section 14.8.D., in order to administer Section 14.6 of this Ordinance; 
14.5.C Make interpretations of the location of boundaries of special flood hazard areas shown on the maps described in Section 14.1 of this Ordinance; 
14.5.D In the review of Flood Hazard Development Permit applications, determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state, and local government agencies from which prior approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334; 
14.5.E Notify adjacent municipalities, the Department of Environmental Protection, and the Maine Floodplain Management Program in the State Planning Office prior to any alteration or relocation of a water course and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency; 
14.5.F Issue one of the following Flood Hazard Development Permits based on the type of development: 
14.5.F.1 Issue a two part Flood Hazard Development Permit for elevated structures.  Part I shall authorize the applicant to build a structure to and including 
the first horizontal floor only above the base flood level. At that time the applicant shall provide the Code Enforcement Officer with a second Elevation Certificate completed by a Professional Land Surveyor, registered professional engineer or 
architect based on the Part I permit construction , “as built”, for verifying 
compliance with the elevation requirements of Section 14.6, paragraphs F, G, or H. Following review of the Elevation Certificate data, which shall take place within 72 hours of receipt of the application, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue Part II of the Flood Hazard Development Permit. Part II shall authorize the applicant to complete the construction project; or, 
14.5.F.2. Issue a Flood Hazard Development Permit for Floodproofing of Non-Residential Structures that are new construction or substantially improved non­residential structures that are not being elevated but that meet the floodproofing standards of Subsection 14.6.G.1.a.,b., and c. The application for this permit shall include a Floodproofing Certificate signed by a registered professional engineer or architect; or, 
14.5.F.3. Issue a Flood Hazard Development Permit for Minor Development for all development that is not new construction or a substantial improvement, such as repairs, maintenance, renovations, or additions, whose value is less than 50% of the market value of the structure. Minor development also includes, but is not limited to: accessory structures as provided for in Section 14.6.J., mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, deposition or extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities that do not involve structures; and non­structural projects such as bridges, dams, towers, fencing, pipelines, wharves and piers. 
14.5.G Maintain, as a permanent record, copies of all Flood Hazard Development Permit Applications, corresponding Permits issued, and data relevant thereto, including reports of the Board of Appeals on variances granted under the provisions of Section 14.9 of this Ordinance, and copies of Elevation Certificates, Floodproofing Certificates, Certificates of Compliance and certifications of design standards required under the provisions of Sections 14.3, 14.6, and 14.7 of this Ordinance. 

14.6 Development Standards 
All developments in areas of special flood hazard shall meet the following applicable standards: 
14.6.A. All Development -All development shall: 
14.6.A.1. be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation 
(excluding piers and docks), collapse or lateral movement of the development resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
14.6.A.2. use construction materials that are resistant to flood damage; 
14.6.A.3. use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage; and, 
14.6.A.4. use electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during flooding conditions. 
14.6.B. Water Supply -All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems. 
14.6.C. Sanitary Sewage Systems -All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed and located to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharges from the system into flood waters. 
14.6.D. On Site Waste Disposal Systems -On site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during floods. 
14.6.E. Watercourse Carrying Capacity -All development associated with altered or relocated portions of a watercourse shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner that no reduction occurs in the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse. 
14.6.F Residential -No new construction permitted. Reconstruction, Replacement or substantial improvement of any existing residential structure located within: 
14.6.F.1. 	Zones A1-30 shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation. 
14.6.F.2. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Subsection14.3.H.1.b.; Section 14.5.B; or Section 14.8.D. 
14.6.G Non Residential -New construction or substantial improvement of any non­residential structure located within: 
14.6.G.1. Zones A1-30 shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities shall: 
(a.) be floodproofed to at least one foot above the base flood elevation so that below that elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
(b.) 	have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; and, 
(c.) be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this section. Such certification shall be provided with the application for a Flood Hazard Development Permit, as required by Section 14.3.K. and shall include a record of the elevation above mean sea level to which the structure is floodproofed. 
14.6.G.2. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Subsection 14.3.H.1.b.; Section 14.5.B; or Section 14.8.D., or 
(a.) together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities meet the floodproofing standards of Subsection 14.6.G.1. 
14.6.H Manufactured Homes -No new manufactured homes permitted. Reconstruction, Replacement or substantial improvement of any existing manufactured homes located within: 
14.6.H.1. Zones A1-30 shall: 
(.a.) be elevated such that the lowest floor (including basement) of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood elevation; 
(b.) be on a permanent foundation, which may be poured masonry slab or foundation walls, with hydraulic openings, or may be reinforced piers or block supports, any of which support the manufactured home so that no weight is supported by its wheels and axles; and, 
(c.) be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include but are not limited to: 
(i.) over-the-top ties anchored to the ground at the four corners of the manufactured home, plus two additional ties per side at intermediate points (manufactured homes less than 50 feet long require one additional tie per side); or by, (ii.) frame ties at each corner of the home, plus five additional ties along each side at intermediate points (manufactured homes less than 50 feet long require four additional ties per side). 
(iii.) all components of the anchoring system described in Section 14.6, paragraph H.1.c.i. & ii shall be capable of carrying a force of 4800 pounds. 
14.6.H.2. Zone A shall: 
(a.) be elevated on a permanent foundation, as described in Section 14.6.H.1.b., such that the lowest floor (including basement) of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Subsection 14.3.H.1.b.; Section 14.5.B; or Section 14.8.D.; and 
(b.) meet the anchoring requirements of Subsection 14.6.H.1.c. 
14.6.I Recreational Vehicles -Recreational Vehicles located within: 
14.6.I.1 Zones A1-30 shall either: 
14.6.I.1.a. be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, 14.6.I.1.b.   be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or, 
14.6.I.1.c. be permitted in accordance with the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in Section 
14.6.H.1. 
14.6.J Accessory Structures -Accessory Structures, as defined in Article 2, located within Zones A1-30 and A, shall be exempt from the elevation criteria required in Section 14.6.F. & G. above, if all other requirements of Section 14.6 and all the following requirements are met.  Accessory Structures shall: 
14.6.J.1. be 500 square feet or less and have a value less than $3000; 
14.6.J.2.     have unfinished interiors and not be used for human habitation; 
14.6.J.3.    have hydraulic openings, as specified in Subsection 14.6.L.2., in at least two different walls of the accessory structure; 
14.6.J.4. be located outside the floodway; 
14.6.J.5.when possible be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters and be placed further from the source of flooding than is the primary structure; and, 
14.6.J.6.have only ground fault interrupt electrical outlets. The electric service disconnect shall be located above the base flood elevation and when possible outside the Special Flood Hazard Area. 

14.6.K Floodways 
14.6.K.1. In Zones A1-30, encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and other development shall not be permitted in riverine areas, for which a regulatory floodway is designated on the community's Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, unless a technical evaluation certified by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachments will not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
14.6.K.2. In Zones A1-30 and A riverine areas for which no regulatory floodway is designated, encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and other development shall not be permitted in the floodway as determined in Subsection 14.6.K.3. unless a technical evaluation certified by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing development and anticipated development: 
14.6.K.2.a. will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community; and, 
14.6.K.2.b. is consistent with the technical criteria contained in Chapter 5 entitled "Hydraulic Analyses," Flood Insurance Study -Guidelines and Specifications for Study Contractors, (FEMA 37/ January 1995, as amended). 
14.6.K.3. In Zones A1-30 and A riverine areas for which no regulatory floodway is designated, the regulatory floodway is determined to be the channel of the river or other water course and the adjacent land areas to a distance of one-half the width of the floodplain as measured from the normal high water mark to the upland limit of the floodplain. 

14.6.L Enclosed Areas Below the Lowest Floor -New construction or substantial 
improvement of any structure in Zones A1-30 and A that meets the development standards of Section 14.6, including the elevation requirements of Section 14.6, paragraphs F, G, or H and is elevated on posts, columns, piers, piles, "stilts," or crawlspaces may be enclosed below the base flood elevation requirements provided all the following criteria are met or exceeded: 
14.6.L.1. Enclosed areas are not "basements" as defined in Section 14.8; 
14.6.L.2. Enclosed areas shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood water. Designs for meeting this requirement must either: 
14.6.L.2.a. be engineered and certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or, 
14.6.L.2.b. meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
14.6.L.2.b.i.  a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of the enclosed area; 
14.6.L.2.b.ii.    the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above the lowest grade; and, 
14.6.L.2.b.iii.   openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the entry and exit of flood waters automatically without any external influence or control such as human intervention, including the use of electrical and other non-automatic mechanical means; 
14.6.L.3. The enclosed area shall not be used for human habitation; and, 
14.6.L.4. The enclosed areas are usable solely for building access, parking of vehicles, or storing of articles and equipment used for maintenance of the building. 
14.6.M Bridges -New construction or substantial improvement of any bridge in Zones A1-30 and A shall be designed such that: 
14.6.M.1. when possible, the lowest horizontal member (excluding the pilings, or columns) is elevated to at least one foot above the base  flood elevation; and 
14.6.M.2. a registered professional engineer shall certify that: 
14.6.M.2.a. the structural design and methods of construction shall meet the elevation requirements of this section and the floodway standards of Section 14.6.K.; and 
14.6.M.2.b. the foundation and superstructure attached thereto is anchored to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all structural components. Water loading values used shall be those associated with the base flood. 
14.6.N Containment Walls -New construction or substantial improvement of any containment wall located within: 
14.6.N.1. Zones A1-30 and A shall: 
14.6.N.1.a. have the containment wall elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation; 
14.6.N.1.b. have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; and, 
14.6.N.1.c. be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this section.  Such certification shall be provided with the application for a Flood Hazard Development Permit, as required by Section 14.3.K. 
14.6.O Wharves, Piers and Docks -New construction or substantial improvement of wharves, piers, and docks are permitted in Zones A1-30, and A, in and over water and seaward of the mean high tide if the following requirements are met: 
14.6.O.1. wharves, piers, and docks shall comply with all applicable local, state, and federal regulations; and 
14.6.O.2. for commercial wharves, piers, and docks, a registered professional engineer shall develop or review the structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction. 


14.7 Certificate Of Compliance 
No land in a special flood hazard area shall be occupied or used and no structure, which is constructed or substantially improved shall be occupied until a Certificate of Compliance is issued by the Code Enforcement Officer subject to the following provisions: 
14.7.A. For New Construction or Substantial Improvement of any structure the applicant shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer, an Elevation Certificate completed by a Professional Land Surveyor, registered professional engineer, or architect, for compliance with Section 14.6, paragraphs F, G, or H. 
14.7.B. The applicant shall submit written notification to the Code Enforcement Officer that the development is complete and complies with the provisions of this ordinance. 
14.7.C. Within 10 working days, the Code Enforcement Officer shall: 
14.7.C.1. review the Elevation Certificate and the applicant’s written notification; and, 
14.7.C.2. upon determination that the development conforms with the provisions of this ordinance, shall issue a Certificate of Compliance. 

14.8 Review Of Subdivision And Development Proposals 
The Planning Board shall, when reviewing subdivisions and other proposed developments that require review under other federal law, state law or local ordinances or regulations and all projects on 5 or more acres, or in the case of manufactured home parks divided into two or more lots, assure that: 
14.8.A. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
14.8.B. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages. 
14.8.C. Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
14.8.D. All proposals include base flood elevations, flood boundaries, and, in a riverine floodplain, floodway data. These determinations shall be based on engineering practices recognized by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
14.8.E Any proposed development plan must include a condition of plan approval requiring that structures on any lot in the development having any portion of its land within a Special Flood Hazard Area, are to be constructed in accordance with Section 14.6 of this ordinance. Such requirement will be included in any deed, lease, purchase and sale agreement, or document transferring or expressing an intent to transfer any interest in real estate or structure, including but not limited to a time-share interest. The condition shall clearly articulate that the municipality may enforce any violation of the construction requirement and that fact shall also be included in the deed or any other document previously described. The construction requirement shall also be clearly stated on any map, plat, or plan to be signed by the Planning Board or local reviewing authority as part of the approval process. 

14.9 Appeals And Variances 
The Board of Appeals of the Town of Buxton may, upon written application of an aggrieved party, hear and decide appeals from determinations of the Code Enforcement Officer in the administration of the provisions of this Ordinance. The Board of Appeals may grant a variance from the requirements of this Ordinance consistent with state law and the following criteria: 
14.9.A. Variances shall not be granted within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
14.9.B. Variances shall be granted only upon: 
14.9.B.1. a showing of good and sufficient cause; and, 
14.9.B.2. a determination that should a flood comparable to the base flood occur, the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, public expense, or create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances; and, 
14.9.B.3. a showing that the issuance of the variance will not conflict with other state, federal or local laws or ordinances; and, 
14.9.B.4. a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in "undue hardship," which in this sub-section means: 
14.9.B.4.a. that the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance is granted; and, 
14.9.B.4.b.    that the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and not to the general conditions in the neighborhood; and, 
14.9.B.4.c. that the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the locality; and, 
14.9.B.4.d. that the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner. 
14.9.C. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
14.9.D. Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvements, or other development for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: 
14.9.D.1.other criteria of Section 14.9 and Section 14.6.K. are met; and, 
14.9.D.2. 	the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
14.9.E. Variances may be issued for the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of Historic Structures upon the determination that: 
14.9.E.1. 
the development meets the criteria of Section 14.9, paragraphs 

A.
 through D. above; and, 


14.9.E.2. the proposed repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or 
restoration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a 
Historic Structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
14.9.F. Any applicant who meets the criteria of Section 14.9, paragraphs A. through E. shall be notified by the Board of Appeals in writing over the signature of the Chairman of the Board of Appeals that: 
14.9.F.1. the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in greatly increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 per $100 of insurance coverage; 
14.9.F.2. such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property; and, 
14.9.F.3. the applicant agrees in writing that the applicant is fully aware of all the risks inherent in the use of land subject to flooding, assumes those risks and agrees to indemnify and defend the municipality against any claims filed against it that are related to the applicant's decision to use land located in a floodplain and that the applicant individually releases the municipality from any claims the applicant may have against the municipality that are related to the use of land located in a floodplain. 
14.9.G The Board of Appeals shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer a report of all variance actions, including justification for the granting of the variance and an authorization for the Code Enforcement Officer to issue a Flood Hazard Development Permit, which includes any conditions to be attached to said permit. 

14.10 Enforcement And Penalties 
14.10.A. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance pursuant to Title 30-A MRSA § 4452. 
14.10.B. The 	penalties contained in Title 30-A MRSA § 4452 shall apply to any violation of this Ordinance. 
14.10.C. In 	addition to any other actions, the Code Enforcement Officer, upon determination that a violation exists, shall submit a declaration to the Administrator of the Federal Insurance Administration requesting a denial of flood insurance.  The valid declaration shall consist of; 
14.10.C.1. 	the name of the property owner and address or legal description of the property sufficient to confirm its identity or location; 
14.10.C.2. 	a clear and unequivocal declaration that the property is in violation of a cited State or local law, regulation, or ordinance; 
14.10.C.3. 	a clear statement that the public body making the declaration has authority to do so and a citation to that authority; 
14.10.C.4. 	evidence that the property owner has been provided notice of the violation and the prospective denial of insurance; and, 
14.10.C.5. 	a clear statement that the declaration is being submitted pursuant to Section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended. 

14.11 Conflict With Other Ordinances 
This Ordinance shall not in any way impair or remove the necessity of compliance with any other applicable rule, ordinance, regulation, bylaw, permit, or provision of law. Where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of land, buildings, or structures, the provisions of this Ordinance shall control. 
9.6 Lot and Yard Requirements. 

In each district, the division of land and placement of structures shall conform to the following table: 
TABLE A. Dimensional Requirements(1) 

Lot Size (sq. ft.)  Village  Res  Rural  BC  LC  
Non Residential  80,000  120,000  200,000  80,000  80,000  
Residential Single Family  80,000(2)  120,000(2)  200,000(2)  80,000(2)  80,000(2)  
Duplex for first Dwelling Unit for each additional Dwelling Unit  80,000 40,000  120,000 60,000  200,000 100,000  n/a n/a  n/a n/a  
Multi-family for first Dwelling Unit for each additional Dwelling Unit  80,000 40,000  120,000 60,000  n/a n/a  n/a n/a  n/a n/a  
Elderly & Low Income Housing for first Dwelling Unit for each additional Dwelling Unit  80,000 20,000  120,000 20,000  200,000 20,000  n/a n/a  n/a n/a  
Buildable Area (sq ft)(2) Street Frontage(ft) Lot Width(ft) Front Yard(ft) Side Yard(ft)(3) (4) Rear Yard(ft)(4) Shore Frontage(ft)  40,000(2) 150 150 40 20 20 200  40,000(2) 200 200 40 30 30 200  60,000(2) 250 250 50 50 50 250  40,000 150 150 40 20 20 300  40,000 150 150 40 20 20 300  

(1) 
All figures are minimum requirements. 

(2) 
Per dwelling unit. 

(3) 	
side yards may be reduced to 20% of the frontage but no less than 20 feet for non-conforming lots of record. 

(4) 	
For accessory buildings, the CEO shall allow a reduction, but in no case to less than 20 feet, if the following conditions are met: 


1. 
The building is not used to house animals. 

2. 
There will remain a 40 ft. separation of buildings and structures from those on adjoining lots. 

3. 
The accessory building is no larger than 750 sq. ft. and not greater than 18 feet in height. 


9-1 	June 18, 2005 Edition 
(4) For accessory buildings on non-conforming lots of record in existence on the date of passage of this amendment, October 28, 1989, the CEO shall allow a reduction, but in no case to less than 12 feet, if the following conditions are met: 
1. 
The building is not used to house animals. 

2. 
The Fire Chief has stated in writing that the proposed structure will not cause an increased risk of fire hazard considering the proximity of neighboring structures, the construction material to be used and the proposed use of the structure and that adequate room remains elsewhere on the lot for access of emergency equipment as for fire-fighting. 

3. 
There will remain a 24 foot separation of buildings from those on adjoining lots. 

4. 
The accessory building is no larger than 750 sq. ft. and not greater than 18 feet in height. 



9.7 Height Restrictions. 
The maximum building height permitted shall be two stories or thirty feet. However, this height requirements shall not apply to farm buildings, flagpoles, chimneys, ventilators, domes, water towers, church steeples, tanks, windmill towers or other structures or building accessory features usually erected at a height greater than the main roofs of buildings provided that such structures or accessory features are not for human habitation or occupancy and further provided that any structure or accessory features higher than thirty feet is set back from all property lines a distance at least equal to its height. 

9.8 Land Use Regulations. 
The Permitted Uses and Conditional Uses for each district are shown on the following Table. Uses similar to Permitted Uses shall be Permitted Uses. Uses similar to Conditional Uses shall be Conditional Uses. Uses similar to Not Permitted Uses shall be Not Permitted Uses. 
9.8.A. All permitted uses which exist or have been issued a Certificate of Occupancy signifying that the Code Enforcement Officer has found the principal use to be in compliance with this Ordinance may also use the lot for accessory uses and may apply for building permits for accessory structures. 
9.8.B. All conditional uses which exist or have been issued a Certificate of Occupancy signifying approval by the Planning Board and compliance with conditions of approval shall apply to the Planning Board for building permits or Certificates of Occupancy for any proposed accessory use or structure. The Board shall treat such secondary applications as if the application were for a Conditional use and follow the procedures and provisions of Article 8. 
9-2 June 18, 2005 Edition 
TABLE B -LAND USE 

In the following table, the symbols have the following meanings: 
P -The use is permitted without Board review in conformance with all applicable performance standards, subject to 

issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Amended 6/18/05 
E -Conditional Use, permitted after review and approval by the Planning Board in accordance with Article 8. 
N -Use not permitted. 
* -See specific performance standards in Article 11. 

LAND USE  Ord. Ref  V  Res  Rur  S  RP  BC  LC  
Accessory Dwelling Unit*  11.23  P  P  P  N  N  N  N  
Active Outdoor Recreation*  11.19  E  E  P  P  N  N  E  
Agriculture*  11.1  P  P  P  P  E  P  P  
Amusement Centers*  11.2  E  N  N  N  N  E  E  
Animal Husbandry*  11.3  E  E  P/E1  E  E  E  E  
Auto Repair Garage (#)  E  N  E  N  N  P  E  
Auto Service Station (#)  E  N  E  N  N  P  E  
Automobile Graveyards & Junkyards (#)  N  N  N  N  N  E  N  
Bar  E  N  N  N  N  P  P  
Bed & Breakfast  P  E  P  N  N  N  N  
Breakwaters & Causeways*  11.13  N  N  N  P*  E*  N  E  
Bulk Fuel Storage (#)  N  N  N  N  N  E  N  
Bus. & Professional Offices(2)  P  N  N  N  N  P  E  
Bus. & Professional Offices(3)  E  N  N  N  N  E  E  
Campgrounds*  11.4  N  N  E  E  N  N  E  
Cemeteries  E  E  E  N  N  N  N  
Churches  E  E  E  E  N  E  N  
Cluster Development*  11.6  P  P  P  P  N  N  N  
Commercial Recreation  E  N  E  N  N  E  E  
Daycare Facility  E  N  E  N  N  E  E  
Daycare Home  E  E  E  N  N  E  E  
Duplexes  P  P  P  P  N  N  N  
Elderly & Low Income Housing *  11.22  E  E  E  N  N  N  N  
Extractive Industry*  11.7, 11.9  N  N  E  N  N  N  N  
Flea Market  N  N  P  N  N  N  N  
Forestry*  11.5,11.18  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Funeral Homes  E  E  E  N  N  E  E  
Golf Course  N  N  P  E  N  P  E  
Home Occupations*  11.10  P  P  P  P  N  P  P  
Individual Private Campsites*  11.21  P  P  P  P  P  N  E  
Kennels*  11.11  E  E  E  E  N  E  E  
Manufactured Housing Units*  11.14  P  P  P  P  N  N  N  
Manufacturing* Marinas*(#)  11.12 11.13  N N  N N  E N  N E*  N N  E N  E E  
Mechanized Outdoor Recreation*  11.19  N  N  N  N  N  E  E  
Medical Offices & Clinics  E  E  E  N  N  E  E  
Mobile Home Parks*  11.15  N  E  N  N  N  N  N  

9-3 June 18, 2005 Edition 

Table B. Land Use (continued) 
*Ref V Res Ru S RP BC LC Motels, Hotels & Inns* 11.16 E N N N N E E MotorVehicleSales N N N N N E E Multi-Family Dwellings* 11.17 E E N N N N N MunicipalUses E E E E N E E NursingHomes E E E N N NN 
P4 P4
Passive Outdoor Recreation* 11.19 P P P P P Personal Service Establishments P N N N N P E 
P* P*
Piers Shorter than 20 ft.* 11.13 N N N N E PrivateClubs E N E E N EE Public&PrivateParks P P P E E P E Public Utilities E E E E N E E Research & Testing Facilities N N E N N E E Restaurants P N E N N PE Retail Business(2) P N N N N P E Retail Business(3) E N N N N E E Schools E E E NNEN Single Family Dwellings P P P P N E E Spreading/Storage of Sludge 
&Septage* 11.24 N N P N N NN Timber Harvesting* 11.8 P P P P P P P Veterinary Clinic E N E N N E E Warehouses & Outdoor Storage N N N N N E E Wholesale Business N N N N N E E Wireless Telecommunications Facility* 11.25 N N E N N E E 
Footnotes:  
1 Permitted on three acres or more; Conditional Use on less than  
three acres.  
2 Smaller than 2,000 sq. ft. floor area.  
3 Larger than 2,000 sq. ft. floor area.  
4 Without any structures only. # Per Section 10.14.G. use may not be allowed over aquifer or recharge areas.  

9-4 June 18, 2005 Edition 

Parks and Public Lands Ordinance
Pertaining to municipal parks, fields, grounds and memorials being owned, leased or rented by the municipal within municipal boundaries (hereafter "municipal land") as follows:

 1. The possession or discharging of firearms, bows and arrows or other weapons on municipal land by persons other than law enforcement officers in the course of their duties or other than persons participating in municipal activities is prohibited.  For purposes of this paragraph, a "municipal activity" is one sponsored by the Town of Buxton or approved by the Board of Selectmen.

2. Open fires are prohibited on municipal land except in those areas designated by signs.  Where they are allowed, open fires must be confined to stoves or fireplaces furnished for that purpose.

3. Intentionally molesting, injuring or damaging, or removing anything natural, including trees and soil, anything physical, including signs, fences, monuments or structures, or anything historical, including artifacts, located or discovered on municipal property and without the approval of the Board of Selectmen is prohibited.  Public works projects are deemed to have the express approval of the Board of Selectmen and are not prohibited by this paragraph.

4. The disposing of trash and refuse anywhere other than in containers provided for the purpose is prohibited.

5. Pets are allowed in the municipal parks, fields and grounds, but they must be reasonably restrained or controlled so that they do not interfere with the activities or safety of others.  Pets are not allowed on the municipal beaches.

6. All motorized vehicle, including snowmobiles and motorcycles, and animals which are ridden or driven shall be operated, ridden or driven only on roads, ways or in parking areas on municipal property, or in areas designated for their special use.  The operation of motorized vehicles or the riding or driving of animals on sidewalks or pedestrian ways is prohibited.

7. Swimming and bathing on municipal property is prohibited except in those areas designated as bathing beaches or swimming areas.

8. Boating and water skiing within areas set aside for swimming and bathing and marked by buoys or floats is prohibited.

9. Washing cars or other vehicles or washing laundry on municipal beaches is prohibited.

10. All municipal parks, lands, grounds or beaches are closed to use between the hours of sunset and sunrise unless posted otherwise.  Activities on municipal property sponsored by the Town or approved by the Board of Selectmen are exceptions to the time limitation set forth in the preceding sentence.

11. Any violation of the provisions of this ordinance is a civil violation, and shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $250.00, to be recovered under the procedure set forth in the Maine Rules of Court for the use of the municipality.

12. Should any provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid, the decision shall not invalidate any other provision of this Ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid provision, and to this end the provisions of this Ordinance are severable.
 
Affirmative Vote, March 15, 1980, Article 60, Open Town Meeting

Town of Buxton, 185 Portland Road, Buxton, ME 04093
Phone: (207) 929-5191
TAX ACQUIRED PROPERTY ORDINANCE
Section 1: The Buxton Board of Selectmen shall have the authority to retain or to sell or
otherwise dispose of any real or personal property acquired by the Town of
Buxton through non-payment of taxes or by tax deeds.
Section 2: If the Board of Selectmen determines that the property acquired through
non-payment of taxes should not be retained, the taxpayer may redeem the
property by paying all taxes, interest and all related costs to date within sixty
(60) days from notification by the Board of Selectmen of the opportunity for
redemption.
Section 3: If the Board of Selectmen determines that there are extenuating circumstances
that prevents a taxpayer from paying all taxes, interest and all related costs to
date within the sixty (60) days from said notification, the Board of Selectmen
shall have the authority to enter into a payment plan.
Section 4: If the acquired property is not redeemed, the sale of the property shall be
advertised in an area-wide publication, with the stipulation that the Board of
Selectmen will have the right to accept or reject any and all bids.
Section 5: The Board of Selectmen shall execute a municipal quit claim deed of the
property upon receipt of sale proceeds and, where applicable, a properly
executed Bill of Sale, as appropriate to the successful person(s) whose bid was
accepted.
Section 6: The Treasurer shall annually submit a list of all property acquired through nonpayment of taxes or tax deeds to the Board of Selectmen.
Section 7: This Ordinance shall be effective upon enactment by the Town of Buxton voters
at the Town’s Annual Town Meeting held June 12, 2012.
Affirmative Vote, June 12, 2012, Article 3, Yes 701, No 268

MORATORIUM ORDINANCE
REGARDING RETAIL BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
IN THE VILLAGE (V) DISTRICT
TOWN OF BUXTON, MAINE
The TOWN OF BUXTON, Maine, hereby adopts a Moratorium Ordinance as follows:
WHEREAS, certain areas of the Town of Buxton are suddenly and unexpectedly under
threat of increased development pressure from retail business establishments; and
WHEREAS, there is a strong likelihood that the Town will continue to be subjected to this
development pressure due to the existence of undeveloped land for sale and the potential for the
purchase and conversion of existing residential structures and uses to retail business establishments
within the Town’s Village (V) District; and
WHEREAS, the existing zoning ordinance and other ordinances and regulations of the
Town, including the Town’s recently adopted Business and Commercial Zone Design Standards,
have not adequately provided for this sudden and unanticipated development pressure in the
Village (V) District; and
WHEREAS, development of retail business establishments pursuant to the existing zoning
ordinance and other ordinances and regulations of the Town could pose serious harm to the health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the Town by promulgating a pattern of sprawling commercial
development that is incompatible with the Town’s residential areas and historical village centers
and has the potential to create unduly adverse visual, traffic, and other impacts; and
WHEREAS, sprawling commercial development contributes to an increase in local costs
of public services—including to public safety, general administration, and public works—and
thereby presents a reasonably foreseeable risk of overburdening the Town’s public facilities; and
WHEREAS, the Town will need at least 180 days to develop and implement the necessary
amendments to its zoning ordinance and other ordinances and regulations of the Town to address
this development pressure; and
WHEREAS, amendments to the Town’s zoning ordinance require a public hearing by the
Planning Board and the Board of Selectmen, and then must be voted upon at a Town Meeting; and
WHEREAS, in the judgment of the Town, these facts create an emergency within the
meaning of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4356 and require this Moratorium Ordinance as immediately
necessary to prevent an overburdening of public facilities, to prevent serious public harm, and to
protect the public health, safety and welfare.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the voters of the Town of Buxton that a
moratorium is hereby imposed on all new construction of, or change of use to, retail business
establishments within the Village (V) District requiring approval pursuant to the zoning ordinance
or other ordinances or regulations of the Town; and
BE IT FURTHER ORDAINED that the Planning Board, the Board of Appeals, the Code
Enforcement Officer, and all Town agencies and employees shall neither accept nor approve any
applications, plans, permits, licenses, or fees for any structures or uses governed by this
Moratorium Ordinance for the duration of the moratorium hereby ordained; and
BE IT FURTHER ORDAINED that any provisions of the zoning ordinance or other
ordinances or regulations of the Town that are inconsistent or conflicting with the provisions of
this Moratorium Ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent that they are applicable for the
duration of the moratorium hereby ordained; and
BE IT FURTHER ORDAINED that, to the extent any provision of this Moratorium
Ordinance is deemed invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the balance of this Moratorium
Ordinance shall remain valid; and
BE IT FURTHER ORDAINED that, in view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this
Moratorium Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon approval by the voters of the Town and,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302, shall apply to the maximum extent permitted
by law and subject to the severability clause above to all proceedings, applications, and petitions
not pending (within the meaning of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302) as of November 30, 2016, and shall stand
repealed as of the earlier of the effective date of any necessary amendments to the zoning ordinance
of the Town or May 29, 2017; and
BE IT FURTHER ORDAINED that this Moratorium Ordinance may be extended by the
Town of Buxton Board of Selectmen, after notice and hearing, for additional 180-day periods in
accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4356(3).
Article Passed at Special Town Meeting on December 14, 2016

9-1 June 18, 2005 Edition
9.6 Lot and Yard Requirements.
In each district, the division of land and placement of structures shall conform to the following table:
TABLE A. Dimensional Requirements(1)
Village Res Rural BC LC
Lot Size (sq. ft.)
Non Residential 80,000 120,000 200,000 80,000 80,000
Residential
Single Family 80,000(2) 120,000
(2) 200,000(2) 80,000(2) 80,000(2)
Duplex
forfirst Dwelling
Unit 80,000 120,000 200,000 n/a n/a
for each additional
Dwelling Unit 40,000 60,000 100,000 n/a n/a
Multi-family
forfirst Dwelling
Unit 80,000 120,000 n/a n/a n/a
for each additional
Dwelling Unit 40,000 60,000 n/a n/a n/a
Elderly & Low
Income Housing
forfirst Dwelling
Unit 80,000 120,000 200,000 n/a n/a
for each additional
Dwelling Unit 20,000 20,000 20,000 n/a n/a
Buildable Area
(sq ft)(2) 40,000(2) 40,000
(2) 60,000
(2) 40,000 40,000
Street Frontage(ft) 150 200 250 150 150
Lot Width(ft) 150 200 250 150 150
Front Yard(ft) 40 40 50 40 40
Side Yard(ft)(3) (4) 20 30 50 20 20
Rear Yard(ft)(4) 20 30 50 20 20
Shore Frontage(ft) 200 200 250 300 300
(1) All figures are minimum requirements.
(2) Per dwelling unit.
(3) side yards may be reduced to 20% of the frontage but no less than 20 feet for non-conforming lots of record.
(4) For accessory buildings, the CEO shall allow a reduction, but in no case to less than 20 feet, if
the following conditions are met:
1. The building is not used to house animals.
2. There will remain a 40 ft. separation of buildings and structures from those on adjoining
lots.
3. The accessory building is no larger than 750 sq. ft. and not greater than 18 feet in height.
9-2 June 18, 2005 Edition
(4) For accessory buildings on non-conforming lots of record in existence on the date of passage of this amendment, October
28, 1989, the CEO shall allow a reduction, but in no case to less than 12 feet, if the following conditions are met:
1. The building is not used to house animals.
2. The Fire Chief has stated in writing that the proposed structure will not cause an increased
risk of fire hazard considering the proximity of neighboring structures, the construction
material to be used and the proposed use of the structure and that adequate room remains
elsewhere on the lot for access of emergency equipment as for fire-fighting.
3. There will remain a 24 foot separation of buildings from those on adjoining lots.
4. The accessory building is no larger than 750 sq. ft. and not greater than 18 feet in height.
9.7 Height Restrictions.
The maximum building height permitted shall be two stories or thirty feet. However, this height requirements shall not
apply to farm buildings, flagpoles, chimneys, ventilators, domes, water towers, church steeples, tanks, windmill towers or
other structures or building accessory features usually erected at a height greater than the main roofs of buildings provided
that such structures or accessory features are not for human habitation or occupancy and further provided that any structure or
accessory features higher than thirty feet is set back from all property lines a distance at least equal to its height.
9.8 Land Use Regulations.
The Permitted Uses and Conditional Uses for each district are shown on the following Table. Uses similar to Permitted
Uses shall be Permitted Uses. Uses similar to Conditional Uses shall be Conditional Uses. Uses similar to Not Permitted
Uses shall be Not Permitted Uses.
9.8.A. All permitted uses which exist or have been issued a Certificate of Occupancy signifying that the Code Enforcement
Officer has found the principal use to be in compliance with this Ordinance may also use the lot for accessory uses and may
apply for building permits for accessory structures.
9.8.B. All conditional uses which exist or have been issued a Certificate of Occupancy signifying approval by the
Planning Board and compliance with conditions of approval shall apply to the Planning Board for building permits or
Certificates of Occupancy for any proposed accessory use or structure. The Board shall treat such secondary applications as if
the application were for a Conditional use and follow the procedures and provisions of Article 8.
9-3 June 18, 2005 Edition
TABLE B - LAND USE
In the following table, the symbols have the following meanings:
P - The use is permitted without Board review in conformance with all applicable performance standards, subject to
issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Amended 6/18/05
E - Conditional Use, permitted after review and approval by the Planning Board in accordance with Article 8.
N - Use not permitted.
* - See specific performance standards in Article 11.
LAND USE Ord. Ref V Res Rur S RP BC LC
Accessory Dwelling Unit* 11.23 P P P N N N N
Active Outdoor Recreation* 11.19 E E P P N N E
Agriculture* 11.1 P P P P E P P
Amusement Centers* 11.2 E N N N N E E
Animal Husbandry* 11.3 E E P/E1 E E E E
Auto Repair Garage (#) E N E N N P E
Auto Service Station (#) E N E N N P E
Automobile Graveyards & Junkyards (#) N N N N N E N
Bar E N N N N P P
Bed & Breakfast P E P N N N N
Breakwaters & Causeways* 11.13 N N N P* E* N E
Bulk Fuel Storage (#) N N N N N E N
Bus. & Professional Offices(2) P N N N N P E
Bus. & Professional Offices(3) E N N N N E E
Campgrounds* 11.4 N N E E N N E
Cemeteries E E E N N N N
Churches E E E E N E N
Cluster Development* 11.6 P P P P N N N
Commercial Recreation E N E N N E E
Daycare Facility E N E N N E E
Daycare Home E E E N N E E
Duplexes P P P P N N N
Elderly & Low Income Housing * 11.22 E E E N N N N
Extractive Industry* 11.7, 11.9 N N E N N N N
Flea Market N N P N N N N
Forestry* 11.5,11.18 P P P P P P P
Funeral Homes E E E N N E E
Golf Course N N P E N P E
Home Occupations* 11.10 P P P P N P P
Individual Private Campsites* 11.21 P P P P P N E
Kennels* 11.11 E E E E N E E
Manufactured Housing Units* 11.14 P P P P N N N
Manufacturing* 11.12 N N E N N E E
Marinas*(#) 11.13 N N N E* N N E
Mechanized Outdoor Recreation* 11.19 N N N N N E E
Medical Offices & Clinics E E E N N E E
Mobile Home Parks* 11.15 N E N N N N N
9-4 June 18, 2005 Edition
Table B. Land Use (continued)
* Ref V Res Ru S RP BC LC
Motels, Hotels & Inns* 11.16 E N N N N E E
Motor Vehicle Sales N N N N N E E
Multi-Family Dwellings* 11.17 E E N N N N N
Municipal Uses E E E E N E E
Nursing Homes E E E N N N N
Passive Outdoor Recreation* 11.19 P P P P4 P4 P P
Personal Service Establishments P N N N N P E
Piers Shorter than 20 ft.* 11.13 N N N P* P* N E
Private Clubs E N E E N E E
Public & Private Parks P P P E E P E
Public Utilities E E E E N E E
Research & Testing Facilities N N E N N E E
Restaurants P N E N N P E
Retail Business(2) P N N N N P E
Retail Business(3) E N N N N E E
Schools E E E N N E N
Single Family Dwellings P P P P N E E
Spreading/Storage of Sludge
& Septage* 11.24 N N P N N N N
Timber Harvesting* 11.8 P P P P P P P
Veterinary Clinic E N E N N E E
Warehouses & Outdoor Storage N N N N N E E
Wholesale Business N N N N N E E
Wireless Telecommunications Facility* 11.25 N N E N N E E
Footnotes:
1 Permitted on three acres or more; Conditional Use on less than
three acres.
2 Smaller than 2,000 sq. ft. floor area.
3 Larger than 2,000 sq. ft. floor area.
4 Without any structures only.
# Per Section 10.14.G. use may not be allowed over aquifer or recharge areas.



